United Nations

S/PV.6123

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6123rd meeting
Monday, 11 May 2009, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Mr. Yoda
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Stagno Ugarte
Mr. Božinović
Mr. Kouchner
Mr. Ito
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Davutoğlu
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Miliband
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-33303 (E)

*0933303*

S/PV.6123

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should now like to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Russian
Federation.
First and foremost, I should like to express my
gratitude to all my colleagues who have accepted our
invitation to attend today’s meeting. My special
gratitude goes to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
other representatives who have come from their
capitals, as well as, of course, to the Secretary-General
for his personal participation in today’s meeting.
The Security Council last met in today’s format
not long ago. In December 2008, the Council held a
ministerial meeting at which it adopted resolution 1850
(2008), in which we unanimously expressed our
understanding that progress towards the establishment
of peace and stability should continue and that it
should be comprehensive, cover all negotiating tracks,
and be based on commonly accepted decisions and
principles anchored in international law.
However, an alarming negotiating vacuum has
arisen as a result of well-known causes, including the
eruption of violence, the Gaza crisis at the beginning of
the year and the elections and the extended time it took
to form a new Government in Israel.
I believe that, in the current circumstances, the
most important thing is the rapid resumption of
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. It is
of primary importance that the political process not be
relaunched from the baseline, but that it should benefit
from the available decisions of the international
community and the agreements and understandings
already achieved between the sides.
That is why one of the most pressing tasks is to
reaffirm the international legal basis for the settlement
of the Palestinian question, first and foremost on the

2

basis of the two-State principle, which will lead to an
independent, viable Palestinian Government, living
side by side in peace with Israel. Of special
importance, we believe, is the support expressed for
the Arab Peace Initiative at the recent League of Arab
States summit held in Doha. Together with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), other relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative has become an
integral part of the basis for building a new Middle
East — a Middle East in which there will be no place
for occupation or terrorism, but in which mutually
beneficial and respectful cooperation between
sovereign States and equal peoples will prevail.
It is clear that the path towards this objective will
be a difficult one. The focus of our attention should be
the situation in the region. It is essential to achieve
clear compliance by the Palestinians and Israelis with
their commitment to fighting terrorism and violence
and to avoiding any unilateral action to prejudice a
final status settlement, including the cessation of
settlement activities and ensuring freedom of
movement for the Palestinian population in the West
Bank.
A great deal will depend on the success of the
inter-Palestinian dialogue. The relevant efforts by
Egypt should, in our view, continue to enjoy the full
support of the international community. The restoration
of Palestinian unity on the basis of the platform of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and adherence to the
Arab Peace Initiative are the only keys to meeting the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and to
progress in the Middle East peace process on the basis
of the proposals arrived at by the Quartet in the context
of the United Nations.
In accordance with
the aforementioned
considerations, we have prepared a draft presidential
statement, which we propose to adopt as an outcome
document of today’s meeting. I would like to thank all
our colleagues, who have made substantial
contributions to the agreed text. We, along with the
entire international community, have the responsibility
of ensuring the viability of the peace process,
promoting its rapid resumption and ensuring that it is
acceptable to all. Work towards this goal should not be
hampered by emotions.
The next step in our common efforts will be the
Moscow conference on the Middle East. There is broad

09-33303

S/PV.6123

international consensus in favour of that forum, as
enshrined in Security Council resolutions and the
decisions of the Middle East Quartet. During the
course of the preparation of practical aspects of the
Moscow conference, we are of course taking into
account the views of the main stakeholders — the
Palestinian, Israeli, Syrian and Lebanese people. With
their support, for which we are grateful, the date and
substantive part of the Moscow forum have been
agreed. The conference stands to make a substantial
contribution to the overall settlement of the Palestinian
question and to bringing peace, security and stability to
all peoples and Governments of the Middle East.
I now resume my function as President of this
Council.
I welcome His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to this meeting, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: The Council meets at
the outset of a very important few weeks for the cause
of peace in the Middle East. In this regard, I welcome
and appreciate the participation of many distinguished
ministers in this meeting, and I appreciate the initiative
of the Russian presidency.
After the inconclusive results of last year’s
negotiations and the bloodshed in Gaza, the past three
months have witnessed almost no progress on the two
key resolutions, resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), recently adopted by this Council. I hope that
this meeting today will help provide direction and
momentum.
In the period ahead, United States President
Obama will host the Israeli and Palestinian leaders and
key regional parties in Washington, D.C. I expect the
Quartet to meet soon and to consult closely with
members of the League of Arab States. The challenge
is to begin implementing transformative changes on the
ground and to kick-start a renewed and irreversible
drive to achieve an Israeli-Palestinian agreement. The
ultimate objective remains the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region.
Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
fundamental to the well-being of both peoples, the
region and the world. This Council, the Quartet, States
in the region, the international community as a whole

09-33303

and I as Secretary-General must each play our full role.
Security Council resolutions, previous agreements and
obligations, and the Arab Peace Initiative give us the
framework we need. We should be as determined as we
are patient, as insistent as we are supportive, and as
principled as we are empathetic to the very real
concerns of both parties. The parties need confidence
that the process will address their vital interests. For
that, they need confidence that commitments made will
be commitments monitored and commitments kept.
In this regard, I believe that there is a deep crisis
of confidence among ordinary people on the ground,
and for good reason. Palestinians continue to see
unacceptable unilateral actions in East Jerusalem and
the remainder of the West Bank — house demolitions,
intensified settlement activity, settler violence and
oppressive movement restrictions due to permits,
checkpoints and the barrier, which are intimately
connected to settlements. The time has come for Israel
to fundamentally change its policies in this regard, as it
has repeatedly promised to do but has not yet done.
Action on the ground, together with a genuine
readiness to negotiate on all core issues, including
Jerusalem, borders and refugees, based on Israel’s
existing commitments, will be the true tests of Israel’s
commitment to the two-State solution.
Ordinary Israelis continue to seek reassurance
that a future Palestinian State will guarantee their right
to live in peace and security. In this respect,
indiscriminate rocket attacks that have caused loss of
life, civilian suffering and damage to property in Israel
are not only deeply unacceptable, but also totally
counterproductive, and must cease. The Palestinian
Authority must continue its efforts to consolidate
progress in developing and deploying an effective
security structure and the functioning institutions of a
future State — work that Israel must facilitate. For its
part, Israel should refrain from using excessive force
that kills and injures civilians, as it did during the
recent conflict in Gaza with such devastating
consequences. Firm and full respect for international
humanitarian law by all parties is indispensable.
The beginning of Palestinian self-empowerment
has been a key achievement of this past year’s efforts
and must not be imperilled by the financial crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority. I appeal to donors,
including in the region, to urgently meet unfulfilled
commitments, including for budget support and Gaza’s
reconstruction.

3

S/PV.6123

I remain extremely worried about the situation in
and around Gaza, with internal Palestinian divisions
and Israeli-Hamas tensions trapping the civilian
population in a vortex of hopelessness. The United
Nations continues to fully support Egypt’s efforts to
achieve reconciliation among Palestinian groups and is
ready to engage with a Government that unites Gaza
and the West Bank within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority. As an interim
measure, we would also welcome the establishment of
practical mechanisms that could help Palestinians in
Gaza focus on reconstruction, security issues and
preparations for elections.
I am convinced that the policy of continued
closure of the Gaza Strip does not weaken Israel’s
adversaries in Gaza, but does untold damage to the
fabric of civilian life. Nearly four months after the
conflict, in which 3,800 houses and two health-care
centres were destroyed, and 34,000 homes, 15 hospitals,
41 health-care centres and 282 schools sustained
varying degrees of damage, we cannot get anything
beyond food and medicine into Gaza to assist a
population that had been in the midst of a war zone.
This is completely unacceptable.
I call on Israel to respond positively to repeated
calls to allow glass, cement and building materials into
Gaza. In the aftermath of the war and given the level of
human suffering now evident on the ground, I seek the
support of all members of this Council and the Quartet
for the United Nations efforts in Gaza. We are ready to
work with local businessmen to help start action to
repair and rebuild houses, schools and clinics. I can
assure all Council members that we will continue to
ensure the full integrity of programmes and projects.
Indeed, the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) — a durable and fully respected
ceasefire, prevention of the illicit supply of weapons to
Gaza, the reopening of the crossings in accordance
with the Agreement on Movement and Access, and
progress on Palestinian reconciliation under the
legitimate Palestinian Authority — must be fulfilled.
Efforts on these elements, as well as a prisoner
exchange, remain the only way of meaningfully
altering the dynamics on the ground for the better.
Finally, let me emphasize the important regional
context. Arab countries have reaffirmed their
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative, which offers
Israel the opportunity for acceptance and security

4

within the region on the basis of land for peace. This
remains a key framework around which a
comprehensive approach to peace can and must be
built. I continue to believe strongly in the potential for
activating the regional tracks of the peace process,
alongside a rejuvenated Palestinian track, including
between Israel and Syria, on the basis of land for
peace. I support the convening of an international
conference in Moscow. I also look to Arab and regional
countries to play a positive role regarding the internal
Palestinian situation by urging all parties to turn away
from violence and weapons acquisition and towards
reunification under one Palestinian Authority
committed to the principles of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and, indeed, to the Arab Peace Initiative
itself.
Like a bicycle that falls over when left at a
standstill, the situation on the ground could easily
deteriorate unless proper direction is given and real
momentum is quickly generated. Violence and terror
will not bring the Palestinians statehood and dignity,
and settlement expansion and closure will not bring
Israel security or peace. And no two-State solution can
be reached if the situation between Gaza and southern
Israel continues on its present destructive course or if
Palestinians remain permanently divided.
I call on the parties to honour all existing
agreements and previous commitments and to pursue
an irreversible effort towards the two-State solution,
including by fully implementing commitments on the
ground. I also believe that the international
community’s credibility is at stake. We are a long way
from where we hoped to be when we embarked on a
fresh push for peace less than two years ago. However,
I take heart that there is a deep consensus about the
scale of the challenge and the importance of meeting it.
Let us move forward with confidence and resolve,
knowing that, if we rise to our responsibilities, we will
help the parties rise to theirs, too.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Michael Spindelegger,
Federal Minister for European and International Affairs
of Austria.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on the developments on the ground, and
Minister Lavrov for his initiative of bringing us
together.

09-33303

S/PV.6123

Four and a half months ago, with the tragic
violent confrontation in and around the Gaza Strip
ongoing, we met here facing an unprecedented
challenge to the Middle East peace process. The
Security Council adopted a resolution calling for an
immediate and durable ceasefire and the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Gaza. Even though a fragile
ceasefire is in place today, we have seen no further
progress at the political, security and economic levels.
The parties and the international community are thus
confronted with the urgent need to create the conditions
for relaunching a credible and comprehensive peace
process.
Our discussion is taking place at an important
moment for the future of the region. The new
Government of Israel is engaged in a strategic review
of its approach towards it neighbours and the peace
process. Palestinians have to face the challenge of
bridging their deep internal rift, agree on unification
and prepare for new elections in order to give new
democratic legitimacy to their leadership.
In this period of uncertainty and transition, the
international
community
must
shoulder
its
responsibility and engage with the parties in order to
move towards substantive negotiations for a lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict. Therefore, the
Security Council must reconfirm its steadfast support
for the peace process and its basic parameters: durable
peace and freedom from violence and terrorism based
on a two-State solution, as required by the Road Map,
with two democratic States — Israel and Palestine —
living side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders. I would like to thank the Russian
presidency for preparing a statement that will, we
hope, serve as a guideline to the parties for re-engaging
in comprehensive negotiations on all tracks.
Three months ago, at the Gaza reconstruction
conference, the international community pledged its
full support for humanitarian relief to the civilian
population and to early reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip. The Secretary-General’s report leaves no doubt
that there is an unacceptable lack of progress in
alleviating the dire living conditions in the Gaza Strip.
While Austria supports coordinated action by all
parties concerned to prevent the illegal flow of arms
and ammunition into the Gaza Strip, we urgently call
on Israel to allow for the immediate and
comprehensive supply to the civilian population of the
Gaza Strip of goods to satisfy everyday needs and the

09-33303

requirements of reconstruction. The Gaza Strip needs
fuel, cash and materials to repair schools, clinics,
sanitation networks and shelters.
With its European Union partners, Austria has
contributed funds to be disbursed by the European
Commission to socially vulnerable Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip. Under the current circumstances, that
money simply cannot be disbursed to those whom we
want to support. Innocent citizens must not be held
hostage by Israel because of the irresponsible policies
of an illegitimate political leadership in the Gaza Strip.
Let me say this very clearly: the current policies
imposed on the Gaza Strip deprive its people of their
human dignity. That is not acceptable.
Rebuilding Gaza and moving forward on the path
to peace also require rebuilding trust, including by
strengthening respect for the rule of law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. In that context, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for having
provided us with a summary of the findings of the
Board of Inquiry on a number of deeply disturbing
incidents during the Gaza crisis. As a matter of
principle, allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law must be investigated, wherever they
occur and whoever may have committed them. Austria
believes that this report also merits follow-up by the
Council.
We are concerned about the lack of political
progress in the West Bank, where Israeli roadblocks
and closure policies continue to render normal social
life and economic activities impossible. Settlement
construction and the destruction of Palestinian homes
in East Jerusalem and in the West Bank undermine any
meaningful peace talks and, in consequence, weaken
the credibility of the political process and play into the
hands of radical forces.
At the same time, we urgently call on Palestinian
political representatives to assume their responsibility
and to seriously engage in efforts to work towards
unified political leadership. In view of upcoming round
of talks in Cairo, we strongly encourage intraPalestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas, which is key not only for the future of the
peace process but also for the implementation of
reconstruction efforts in Gaza. Palestinians need a
Government that enjoys legitimacy among their own
population and is acceptable as a partner to Israel and
to the international community. Such a Government

5

S/PV.6123

needs to be fully committed to the two-State solution
and the other principles of the peace process.
In their efforts towards lasting peace in the
region, the parties have the firm support of the
international community, with the Security Council and
the Middle East Quartet as its main actors. The
international conference on the Middle East peace
process that the Russian Federation plans to convene in
Moscow in the course of this year in consultation with
the Quartet and the parties will provide the
international community with another important
occasion to demonstrate that support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Yoda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset, Mr. President, to
thank you and the delegation of the Russian Federation
for having taken the initiative to organize this meeting,
thus giving us the opportunity to consider the
important issue of the situation in the Middle East, of
which the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the main
Gordian knot. We are convinced that our deliberations,
in which Burkina Faso is pleased to take part, will be
fruitful and will contribute to the search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
Allow me, in that regard, Sir, to pay tribute to the
important role that your country plays in that joint
endeavour, which you have reaffirmed by offering to
host an international conference on the Middle East in
Moscow this year. We support that proposal, and we
have no doubt that the outcome of the planned meeting
will be commensurate with our expectations. I would
also like to welcome the presence among us of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has never spared
any efforts in helping to resolve the conflict in the
Middle East. I also congratulate him on his important
remarks this morning.
No one can deny today that the peace, security
and stability of the Middle East are an important
component — indeed that they are at the heart — of
international peace and security. Thus, it is the duty of
the international community, with the Security Council
in the lead, and in all our interests to make every effort
to ensure that calm prevails in that region.
Unfortunately, the events of recent months have
powerfully shaken the foundations of the admittedly

6

modest progress that the peace process had so
painstakingly achieved. The war in Gaza and the
attendant grave humanitarian suffering, the everincreasing violence and the threats issued by parties to
the conflict are all factors that have complicated,
indeed halted, the momentum of the ongoing dialogue
established by the Annapolis Conference.
However, by adopting resolution 1850 (2008), the
Security Council marked its resolute commitment to
the irreversibility of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiating
process started at Annapolis. For Burkina Faso, in
letter and in spirit, that resolution and the other
relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 1860
(2009), remain relevant, and we call for their full
implementation.
We would also like to reaffirm the importance, in
our view, of the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002, and we welcome the endeavours of
the Quartet. Convinced that those are today the most
appropriate political and legal frameworks for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East, we urge the parties to abide
by them and once and for all to permanently forsake
recourse to arms in order to resolutely commit in good
faith to direct talks.
Moreover, my delegation believes that those talks
must be irreversible and nurtured by a single vision:
that of a peaceful region, in the building of which an
independent, viable Palestinian State, with secure and
internationally recognized borders, living side and by
side in peace with the State of Israel, itself living in
peace with all its neighbours, will fully participate.
That, we believe, is the price to pay. We know
that the Israelis and Palestinians are capable of paying
it, having, in 2008, proved the desire to resolve their
dispute, including by maintaining ongoing contact and
by diligently pursuing their negotiations. We are thus
convinced that, this time again, they can overcome the
present circumstances and renew the thread of
dialogue, which the whole international community
urges with all its heart.
That involves a first step, perhaps the most
difficult, but certainly the most indispensable: that of
establishing a genuine climate of trust by adopting the
necessary measures, namely an end to extremist
rhetoric by all sides; a halt to Israel’s construction of
the separation wall and to its settlement policies; the
lifting of the Gaza blockade; and guarantees of

09-33303

S/PV.6123

humanitarian access. It also means Hamas ceasing its
rocket fire and other forms of violence on Israeli
territory.
Furthermore, in order to optimize their
participation in the talks and to draw the maximum
benefit from them, it is essential and urgent that the
Palestinians achieve their unity. That is why we are
particularly grateful to Egypt for its commitment and
its untiring efforts to help the Palestinian brethren
achieve reconciliation, and we call on the international
community to support these initiatives.
While emphasizing the need for medium- and
long-term solutions to the conflict, we cannot ignore
the current situation of the people of Gaza, for whom
the most urgent issues today are resolving the
humanitarian crisis and carrying out reconstruction.
The pledging conference held in Sharm el-Sheikh on
2 March 2009 enabled the donor community to become
involved in those crucial issues. We hope that promises
will be translated into concrete action. Likewise,
humanitarian aid and construction materials should be
able to reach Gaza unimpeded. Similar efforts should
be made throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Clearly, the challenges to be met in the Middle
East are still great and the expectations even greater.
Indeed, with the exception of the hopes aroused by
Lebanon, including the improvement in SyrianLebanese relations, the Middle East, unfortunately,
remains in the grip of many tensions and the option of
political coexistence between Israel and its Arab
neighbours has yet to be put to the test. Nevertheless,
we remain convinced that the aspiration to peace and
security for them and for future generations will
prevail over bellicose behaviour and the mindset of
confrontation.
Because the stability of the entire region remains
dependent on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is
essential to devote unflagging attention to it. In
addition, the countries in the region and beyond must
continue diplomatic initiatives in support of the parties’
efforts. In that respect, the Security Council has a
primary role to play, including by finding ways to
ensure compliance with the many decisions that it has
adopted since this conflict was included among the
priority issues on its agenda. Its credibility and that of
the United Nations system as a whole are at stake.

09-33303

Finally, the solution of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East is unthinkable without
the determination of the parties themselves. We
therefore invite them to show greater political will and
a heightened sense of their responsibilities.
In conclusion, we should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having submitted to the Council a
draft presidential statement that we support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): First, I would like to
thank the Russian Federation and Minister Lavrov for
convening this timely meeting, which has provided us
with the opportunity to exchange views on recent
developments in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
statement regarding the current situation on the ground.
The dynamism of events and the pace of
developments in the Middle East require the
international community to be alert and active at all
times. Despite all the frustrating problems in the
region, we believe that there is no room for pessimism.
On the contrary, recent diplomatic activities and the
determination of the international community to attain
the ultimate objective of establishing peace and
stability in the region have raised our hopes for the
future.
As the problems in the region have become
interrelated, it is no longer feasible to address them in
isolation. We therefore need a comprehensive approach
and believe that the peace process should be
reinvigorated on all tracks without further delay.
The Palestinian problem and the Arab-Israeli
conflict are at the top of our agenda. The rift among
Palestinians has to come to an end. Palestinian groups
have to find common ground so as to tackle
outstanding issues, thus leading to a national unity
Government and paving the way for the holding of
presidential
and
legislative
elections.
The
establishment of a strong Palestinian Administration
with popular support is essential. Turkey hopes that
national reconciliation talks between Palestinian
groups will succeed, and we continue to support
Egypt’s efforts to that end.
We need to engage every Palestinian group that
has the support of the Palestinian people and to ensure

7

S/PV.6123

that they all adhere to the principles of peace. In that
context, we welcome the cessation of the launching of
rockets as a positive and encouraging sign.
We hope that the new Government in Israel will
adopt a policy that will restore hopes for the peace
process and renew commitment to the two-State
solution. On the other hand, we are concerned by
certain policies that could seriously hamper peace
efforts. Among them are Jewish settlement activities,
restrictions on the movement of Palestinian people and
goods, and actions and measures that could alter the
character and status of Jerusalem and further isolate
East Jerusalem from the rest of the Palestinian
territory. All of these run counter to the parties’
obligations under the Road Map, as well as to the spirit
of Annapolis, and should be stopped. I would also like
to emphasize that the Arab Peace Initiative provides a
very sound basis for peace between Arab States and
Israel, and that Israel should give the Initiative the
attention that it deserves.
The presidential statement that we are going to
adopt at the end of this meeting could have been more
inclusive and precise. Nevertheless, we will join the
consensus. However, I would like to clarify our
interpretation and understanding of the text before us.
First, it must be emphasized that the objective of
comprehensive peace can be achieved only through the
reinvigoration of the peace process on all its tracks.
Secondly, we cannot turn a blind eye to the
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories,
particularly in Gaza. In that context, it is good to refer
to resolution 1860 (2009), but that is not enough. It is
incumbent on us to call for the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and to address the humanitarian
situation in Gaza through the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout the
region.
One priority of Turkish foreign policy towards
the region is to keep open the channels of dialogue
with all parties and to pursue an active policy of
engagement. We welcome the fact that a growing
number of countries have come to realize the merits of
that policy and have adopted similar approaches.
We are committed to continuing to contribute to
efforts aimed at a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on the vision of a
region in which two democratic States, Israel and

8

Palestine, live side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders.
If hopes for peace are exhausted, that will only
lead to further suffering of the peoples in the region
and provide a fertile breeding ground for extremism
and terrorism, which constitute a grave threat to all of
us. From that perspective, it is my earnest hope that we
will all be engaged in active diplomatic activities in the
coming days. In that context, I look forward to the
convening of an international conference on the Middle
East peace process in Moscow in 2009.
Before concluding, I wish to emphasize the fact
that the Israelis and the Palestinians are destined to live
and work together. They can choose either to remain
enemies and suffer together or to become good
neighbours and friends and prosper together. It is high
time that the right choice be made.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Bernard Kouchner,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Lavrov, as well as
the Secretary-General for his encouraging words, and
to tell members that we are not satisfied by the
progress made. That progress has been insufficient,
despite the efforts of many of the countries represented
around this table.
Almost four months ago to the day, our countries
met here to adopt an appeal for a lasting ceasefire in
Gaza. Since then, the most difficult phase of the
conflict has ended. I believe that our appeal and our
efforts in New York contributed to that. However, most
of the objectives set out in resolution 1860 (2009), to
which all preceding speakers have referred, have not
yet been attained, and we are far from attaining them.
First, the situation on the ground in Gaza remains
extremely worrisome; that is a euphemism.
Humanitarian workers and aid have barely entered the
Gaza Strip. For the most part, the blockade is still in
place. Reconstruction is impossible, or nearly
impossible. Checkpoints should be opened in a lasting
way for all goods; we have all requested that. There is
also no lasting ceasefire, and rocket launches, though
episodic, continue. Our compatriot Gilad Shalit and the
Palestinian prisoners have not yet been released.
It is essential that Palestinians speak with a single
voice. Inter-Palestinian reconciliation efforts under the

09-33303

S/PV.6123

authority of President Abbas, in compliance with the
principles that guide the peace process, must be
successful. My country wishes once again to back the
work of Egypt on this issue.
Finally — and this is the main objective of our
meeting and the aspect that I would like to develop
today — we have to again be in a position to turn to the
future in order to achieve peace. The year 2008 started
with hope, with a return to inter-Palestinian
negotiations on the final status. Ultimately, it was not
possible to keep to the timeline for the completion of
those negotiations agreed upon in Annapolis, but
resolution 1850 (2008) very clearly recalled the
irreversibility of this process. We do not have to refer
to it by the name of Annapolis.
The military operations in Gaza brutally
interrupted the thread of negotiations. Must we
therefore conclude that the time is not right to relaunch
the peace process? No, no and no. If there is a message
that France intends to share with the Council today, it
is, on the contrary, the sense of urgency that should
drive us — urgency because of the veritable ticking
bomb that is the situation in Gaza Strip, urgency
because of the critical financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority, urgency because of the growing
weariness of both the people of Palestine and the
people of Israel, and finally, urgency because we must
not lose track of the Palestinian elections planned for
January 2010.
For us, the window of opportunity, as we say, is
now one that is calculated in terms of months, not in
years. Thus, we must step up our efforts to facilitate
resumption of political negotiations that would lead to
a comprehensive peace. For us, the existence and the
security of Israel are not negotiable. However, we are
just as firmly committed to achieving the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people, and in our view,
only the creation of a sovereign Palestinian State will
make it possible to combine these two objectives.
To be successful, peace must be moved forward
by the leaders. Our friends have said that. However, the
greatest attention must be paid to the second element.
It is just as necessary that the peoples believe in the
possibility of peace. They now no longer believe in it.
Immediate measures in the field are necessary to create
the right conditions for negotiations.
The continuation of Israeli settlement undermines
on a daily basis the credibility of efforts aimed at a

09-33303

lasting solution by creating fait accomplis on the
ground and insisting on splitting the West Bank into
two parts and totally isolating East Jerusalem. As
President Sarkozy stated when he spoke before the
Knesset in June 2008, “There can be no peace without
the immediate and complete cessation of settlement
activities”. The Government of Israel must hear this
message — this friendly message: continuing
settlement is one of the main obstacles in the field to
peace and eventually poses a threat to the security of
Israel. The presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of our meeting would be stronger, in my view, if it
took into account this essential issue.
France, of course, calls upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to combat terrorism.
The actions of Salam Fayyad, former Prime Minister,
in this area deserve tribute. Terrorism and attacks in all
their forms, as well as the trafficking of weapons into
Gaza, are all unacceptable and must come to an end.
A comprehensive regional approach is also
needed through work, inter alia, on the Lebanese and
Syrian tracks of the peace process. We cherish the hope
that indirect negotiations between Syria and Israel may
resume and that the question of the village of Gashar
and Sheba’a Farms may be settled between Israel and
the Government of Lebanon, under the aegis of the
United Nations.
Beyond that, the whole region that must become
involved in seeking peace. That is why we so greatly
value the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative —2002! We are so
far from that now — which takes into account seven
interdependencies. We must think about the measures
of trust and the acts necessary by one party or another
to achieve the objectives set by that initiative.
To prepare for the future and for peace is also to
accept working on the past, without fear. We cannot
ignore today allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law noted since the Gaza crisis. France
backed the establishment by the Secretary-General of
the Board of Inquiry on attacks against United Nations
premises in Gaza. I have also indicated that France
would back any investigation as long as it is impartial,
independent and covers all violations of international
humanitarian law regardless of who the victims are, be
they Palestinian or Israeli civilians. In the light of the
conclusions of the Board of Inquiry which have just
been communicated to us, we will have to consider this
issue in the next few days.

9

S/PV.6123

My final message is that stronger commitment by
the international community is needed. Only such a
commitment can guarantee that serious peace
negotiations will resume and rapidly succeed. Only
such a commitment provides the parties with assurance
that the terms of an agreement will effectively be
complied with, thanks to the direct contributions of
third countries in the form of manpower, financial
resources and guarantees. I know that meetings will be
completed at the end of this month, which completion
we await with impatience.
France and the European Union have on
numerous occasions voiced their readiness to support
and facilitate and, as necessary, to participate in
negotiations and ponder the guarantees that a possible
agreement might require. I note with much hope the
intentions
declared
by
the
new
American
Administration. I wish to say to it here that we will be
ready to work with the United States for a new
dynamic, but it can wait no longer.
I said at the start that the matter is urgent need
and, in that context, with all the arguments that I tried
to emphasize, we bring our full support to the plan to
organize a new international conference on the Middle
East this year, as proposed by the Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency The Right Honourable
Mr. David Miliband, M.P., Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes this debate, and we thank
the Russian Federation for its initiative in opening it.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his very strong
words today.
This meeting comes just a week before the start
of an intensive series of visits to Washington, as the
new United States Administration fulfils its
commitment to offer the leadership necessary to
address both the insecurity of Israelis and the
statelessness of the Palestinians. Today, our duty is not
just to state national positions. It is to unite our
commitment in word and deed to support the
development of a new plan for peace.
After 61 years of temporary truce and bloody
wars, it can sometimes seem inevitable that the conflict
in the Middle East will continue for at least a few more

10

years and that the best we can hope for is that it does
not get too much worse. But that logic is not only
faulty; it is dangerous. Conflict can erupt again at any
time.
The Gaza war showed how close to the surface
conflict is in the occupied Palestinian Territories.
Resolution 1860 (2009) was a hard-fought achievement
that laid the basis for an end to the Gaza conflict in
January. But there is, as many speakers have already
said, overwhelming evidence that it is has not been
fully implemented. More work remains to be done to
reopen the crossings, to get humanitarian aid in and to
bring an end to arms smuggling. It is relevant to our
deliberations that the only people who gain from this
failure are those committed to violence. There are also
other outstanding issues arising from the Gaza war,
including the Secretary-General’s Board of Inquiry
report on attacks on United Nations premises. We look
to the Israeli Government to investigate each of these
incidents in the light of the Inquiry’s findings.
The West Bank, meanwhile, is in economic
limbo. The Palestinian Authority is short of funds,
Israeli settlement building continues, with demolitions
and settlements in East Jerusalem particularly
dangerous for peace. Meanwhile, rockets continue to
land in Israeli towns, the rearmament of Hizbollah is in
contravention of resolution 1559 (2004), and Iran
exploits the misery of Palestinians to advance its own
goals. That is why the Secretary-General was right in
his remarks this morning to refer to a crisis of
confidence.
President Obama has said that the status quo is
unsustainable. We need to take that seriously.
Destructive forces in the Middle East have derived
strength from the perceived inaction or failed
initiatives of the international community. Without a
decisive drive for peace, there will be a drift towards
more war.
The Council is not short of consensus about a
solution. We share the passion and conviction of our
French colleagues in setting this out. The broad shape
has been clear for some time: a comprehensive peace,
based on two States, agreed borders based on those of
1967, Jerusalem as the capital for both States, and a
just settlement for refugees. As His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey has explained,
all this is a catalyst for a resolution of other issues
dividing Israel from its neighbours.

09-33303

S/PV.6123

Nor is there much argument about the short-term
measures that would give life to hope among the
people in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
Palestinians want to see a freeze on all settlement
activity, both in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as
per Road Map commitments, and the opening of
crossings into Gaza not only for humanitarian aid, but
also for reconstruction supplies and the movement of
people and trade, as per resolution 1860 (2009). They
also want to see the Palestinian Authority properly
funded by all of its donors. The United Kingdom
believes that they are right to want these things.
Israelis want to see an end to the threat of terror
and the release of Gilad Shalit. Again, they are right to
want these things. What has been missing is shared and
sustained political will to overcome the obstacles, and
now is the time to find it — too late for too many, but
urgent nonetheless.
In this context, the creation of a new Israeli
Government takes on added significance. Prime
Minister Netanyahu leads a Government born of the
democratic process. The United Kingdom welcomes
his public commitments, restated today, to political,
economic and security tracks. Progress on each one is
vital, needs to be delineated and requires support.
Meanwhile, Israel has a willing partner for
negotiations in President Abbas. The Palestinians need
a Government. If the Egyptian-sponsored talks on
Palestinian reconciliation are not to reach a conclusion,
then we look forward to a new Government being
formed with a clear commitment to the peaceful
advance of the interests of the Palestinian people, as
resolution 1850 (2008) envisaged, and above all a
determination to improve their daily lives in advance
of Palestinian elections. This, too, needs support.
But, Israelis and Palestinians cannot deliver this
deal on their own. Israelis need peace with the whole
Arab world, as well as cooperation with the
Palestinians. Palestinians need support from the Arab
world as well as compromise from Israel. This is the
23-State solution that we need, and is embodied in the
Arab Peace Initiative, which is finally getting the
recognition that it deserves. We applaud the vision and
commitment of its principal author, King Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia. We welcome the determination and fresh
thinking of King Abdullah of Jordan to advance its
goals.

09-33303

The Arab Peace Initiative is in fact an Arab
deposit that needs to be matched. The United Kingdom
has been proud to play its part alongside other
European countries, not just in arguing for a regional
resolution to all outstanding issues, but also in
supporting the economic and security strategies of the
Palestinian Authority. There is no issue that will
motivate Europeans more than the chance to support a
drive for peace in the Middle East. The European
deposit with all partners is an unyielding commitment
to be a force for practical help — money, training,
people, commitment — to all parties as they seek to
prepare for and then implement a final deal.
There is also a Russian deposit — its
commitment to work for an international conference to
support a peace plan and your role in the E3+3 and in
this Council in ensuring that Iran abides by its
commitments to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Since we last met in January, we have been in
what for us has been a holding pattern. This has been
understandable, but this, too, is a euphemism. For
people of the region, it has been lost time, and anyone
who thinks that a stable holding pattern can continue
indefinitely is gravely mistaken. The people of the
region do not need a new process; they need the
confidence that comes from a plan, with the timelines
and commitment to make it a reality. Our message to
Israelis, Palestinians and the region must be clear and
undivided. We support peace and we expect peace. The
challenges ahead are indeed great. Bold decisions will
be needed on all sides, but the consequences of
inaction will be even more severe.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to discuss an issue about which almost everything has
already been said. Few situations have attracted as
much attention, led to so many meetings, mobilized so
many actors and generated as much disappointment
and frustration as the situation in the Middle East. We
are definitely facing a graveyard of lost opportunities
in a region of the world that is saturated with history.
However, we must not hesitate; on the contrary, we
must continue to press forward. To that end, we trust
that the debate to which the Russian Federation has
invited us will produced added value.

11

S/PV.6123

My country believes that the international
community must insist that the parties most directly
concerned negotiate and accept from the outset that a
final and definitive solution will not give them
everything they hope for or claim, or even what they
believe to be fair. The time has come to relinquish rigid
positions based on the past — a past that no longer
exists for either party, because the greatest injustice is
that which has continued for more than six decades. We
have lived through six decades of misunderstandings,
confrontations,
regression
and
disenchantment,
occasionally interrupted by interludes or some progress
that have led us to believe that peace was still possible.
It has been six decades of intolerance and violence on
both sides that have deprived both peoples of the right
to live free of fear.
We all know that there are many obstacles on the
path to peace; some seem insurmountable and cannot
be overcome. But we cannot gloss over the fact that the
behaviour of either party can affect the behaviour of
the other, although it cannot justify it. Certainly, Costa
Rica does not ignore the mutual interdependence
among all of the fundamental elements of a final status
agreement. Each obstacle and element deserves our full
attention, but first and foremost the attention of the
parties most directly involved: Israel and Palestine.
Costa Rica is convinced that the only possible
peace is one that is agreed between the parties, with the
international community strongly behind them and
watching over the success of the negotiations.
However, the international community must be
committed to a solution, and not consider it an
opportunity to gain diplomatic points, renew past
lustre, or possibly derive some personal profit or even
hold a letter of credit that might be redeemed in some
future game of chess.
While we are all betting on the success of the
Quartet, my country believes that it is time to
recognize that the Road Map is fatally skewed. It is a
Road Map to nowhere. It is an itinerary with stages and
stops, but no clear goal or destination. For that reason,
Costa Rica believes that the entire Road Map process
should be addressed from another perspective — in
other words, start from the perspective of the final
stage. The parameters and outlines of a definitive
solution must be crafted and made known from the
outset with total clarity. The destination should be
recognized as a guarantee for the necessary
intermediate and temporary agreements that will

12

promote definitive solution and make the process
irreversible. All must be committed to the final goal.
Otherwise, the Quartet will continue, to go in circles
without any sense of direction.
Similarly, given that in the immediate and not-soimmediate neighbourhood there are so many actors
wishing to obstruct the process, there is no reason to
require that final negotiations resolve issues that are
difficult but not fundamental and that have an impact
on the process while not capable of resolving it. Such
false logic has given those who thrive on intolerance
and violence too many opportunities to sabotage the
peace.
The frameworks of step-by-step negotiations
have been a snare in which hope has often been
trapped. That is why it is doubly important that the
outlines of a final outcome be known in advance. Costa
Rica understood this when on 5 February 2008 it
recognized the State of Palestine, thus paying a
historical debt, in particular because it was among the
33 countries that voted in favour of the partition
resolution (General Assembly resolution 181 (II)). It is
time for the international community — starting with
those 33 countries, several of which are represented in
this Chamber — to recognize the existence of two
States and to support a final, peaceful solution to a
situation that has already generated far too much
intolerance and violence and which urgently requires
closure in keeping with the best interests of the parties.
With such a bold gesture, we would strengthen
the democratic Government of President Abbas and
would place it in a position of greater symmetry vis-àvis other parties to the conflict. In that way, on behalf
of the Palestinian people and along with Israel, it would
be in a position to chart the path towards a future free
from violence for its people and for the entire region.
Such a political gesture could become a symbol with
the power to shape reality.
It is time to call the fundamental elements of the
conflict by their proper names, and to support the
parties in reaching lasting, concrete, verifiable and
final agreements. That is the spirit of past efforts that
we must retrieve. We must turn our attention to the
parties concerned and their regional neighbours, who
are the ones suffering the most from the consequences
of the conflict. The more involved the parties
concerned are in defining the elements of peace

09-33303

S/PV.6123

initiatives, the greater their commitment to speedy and
effective implementation.
That is a lesson that we in Central America can
vouch for. Like the Israelis and the Palestinians, we
had to undergo suffering to understand that the solution
lay within ourselves and that, in the final analysis, it
takes more courage to agree than to reject. In the
meantime, we must immediately allow and facilitate
unobstructed, continuous and timely access for
humanitarian assistance to the population of the
occupied Palestinian territories. Similarly, we must
reverse the growth of illegal settlements, in conformity
with agreements reached, avoiding any measure that
would alter the demographic character of the occupied
territories or cause deterioration in the living
conditions of the Palestinians.
Also, Palestine must strengthen measures to
combat violence, extremism and terrorism and must
exercise control over its own territory.
In our view, two actors are indispensable in
following up the process: the United States —
particularly now, with a new Administration that
believes in the audacity of hope and that has been
linked to or associated with all efforts to find a
solution — and the moderate Arab countries that are
neighbours of the parties. Some of these countries have
learned from the errors of the past and can become
solid partners for peace. The two countries that have
signed peace agreement with Israel — Egypt and
Jordan — as well as Saudi Arabia, have a great deal to
contribute. That is why Costa Rica considers that the
Arab Peace Initiative is an important contribution in
that regard.
Let me comment briefly on the draft presidential
statement on which we have been working. We will be
flexible in order not to prevent its adoption, but let me
note that we would have preferred clearer and more
resolute emphasis on and support for the Arab Peace
Initiative, and a recognition of the Initiative for what it
is: in Mr. Miliband’s words, a “deposit that needs to be
matched” (supra). We would also have preferred more
precise direction for the work of the Quartet and we
would have preferred to somewhat reorder the
paragraphs. But we are satisfied at the acceptance of
our request for the elimination of any reference to a
preparatory process for Palestine to acquire full
statehood: as I have said, my country already
recognizes the State of Palestine.

09-33303

The time has come to start with the ultimate goal
of two independent States living side by side in peace
and security. The time has come to put an end to the
cruel irony that the only democratic Arab State is living
under the oppression of foreign occupation. The time
has come to put an end to a situation that, if
unresolved, will only encourage extremists and that has
strengthened, among others, the deniers in Tehran.
We will never stop saying that in the Middle East
there can be no final victory of one over the other.
Peace is the fruit of endeavours by moderate voices
that accept the coexistence, side by side, of two
independent States living in peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Obama’s Cabinet.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report.
As much as I very much like Ambassador
Churkin, it is an honour to have you, Foreign Minister
Lavrov, in the Chair today. We thank you for
convening this important meeting of the Security
Council, and we welcome especially Russia’s initiative
to craft a constructive statement by the Council
President, to be released today, which the United States
is pleased to support.
This meeting of the Council underscores the
priority that the international community places on
achieving a secure, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. That must include a two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security. The
United States has already revitalized its efforts to make
real that vision of a comprehensive peace between
Israel and its Arab neighbours, and we will continue to
pursue it vigorously in the months ahead.
President Obama is personally committed to this
goal, and he continues to lead directly on this issue. As
the President noted in his recent address to the Turkish
parliament, the parties have also committed themselves
to those goals, in the Road Map and at Annapolis. Our
interest lies not in a lengthy, drawn-out process, but in
real results. We must not tarry. Lasting progress can be
made if we lift our sights and look to a future of peace:
to a Middle East in which Israel lives in peace and

13

S/PV.6123

security alongside its Arab neighbours; to a region in
which the fruits of peace are cherished by all.
As President Obama has noted, terrorism and
rocket fire aimed at innocent Israelis are simply
intolerable. And a future without hope and opportunity
for the Palestinians is intolerable as well. Towards that
end, my Government’s distinguished and determined
Special Envoy for the Middle East, Senator George
Mitchell, recently completed his third trip to the
region. He is working intensively with our Israeli and
Arab partners, as well as our friends throughout the
international community, towards a very clear purpose:
to help create the conditions for a peaceful resolution
to the conflict and for the establishment of an
independent, viable Palestinian State.
In addition to moving forward with the parties,
his work is also designed to prevent any new outbreak
of violence, which could further destabilize the region,
hinder our collective efforts and claim more innocent
civilian lives. To further advance this cause, President
Obama will be meeting with key regional leaders over
the course of the next several weeks. We very much
look forward to those constructive talks, and we look
forward to discussing ways in which the international
community can support these efforts with our Quartet
partners and other friends and allies. The Quartet
remains the most effective instrument for advancing
the international community’s engagement in the effort
to bring lasting peace to the Middle East.
As we move to create a climate for meaningful
negotiations, all parties must meet their obligations
under the Road Map. The Palestinian Authority must
combat terrorism and incitement directed at Israel. The
United States and its partners have provided funding
and training for a reformed Palestinian security force,
which has recently provided impressive demonstrations
of its professionalism and effectiveness.
For its part, Israel must halt settlement activity
and dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.
Israel must also allow the Palestinians freedom of
movement, increased security responsibilities and
access to economic opportunities.
All States in the region must now consider steps
that they can take to create an atmosphere that will
help foster successful negotiations. That is one reason
why we intend to integrate the Arab Peace Initiative
into our own approach. In this spirit we welcome the
remarks made by King Abdullah of Jordan during his

14

productive recent visit to Washington. As he noted, the
United States cannot be left to do all the heavy lifting
by itself, and other countries, including Jordan, should
do all that they can to shore up our common efforts.
We must also work together to support fully the
Palestinian Authority as it continues its efforts to
improve the lives of ordinary Palestinians throughout
the West Bank and Gaza. It is doing so through nonpartisan, transparent programmes. Indeed, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund have
endorsed the Authority’s budgetary and financial
controls in accounting for the $1.7 billion it received
from all donors in 2008. The international community
must continue to support the legitimate Palestinian
leadership. States in the region have a particular
responsibility.
President Abbas, Prime Minister Fayyad and the
Palestinian Authority must be able to demonstrate to
the Palestinian people that negotiations, not terrorism
and violence, are the path to an independent and viable
Palestinian State.
In this context, let me turn to the Quartet
principles: renouncing violence, recognizing Israel, and
respecting past obligations. The United States hopes
that all United Nations Members, especially Arab
States, will recognize what these principles represent.
They are the essential building blocks of a future
Palestinian State. Palestinian reconciliation on terms
that do not uphold the Quartet principles would serve
only to delay the day when the Palestinians’ legitimate
aspirations for statehood become real.
My Government also values Egypt’s leadership in
the region and its support for peace. All United Nations
Member States, including those in the region, must
work together to ensure the end of the illicit smuggling
of arms and ammunition into Gaza, lest Hamas restock
its arsenal and spark further conflict. We strongly
support reopening Gaza’s border crossings in a
controlled, sustained and continuous manner with an
appropriate monitoring regime involving international
and Palestinian Authority participation. That can be
achieved through dialogue focused on meeting pressing
humanitarian needs. It will not happen through terrorist
intimidation and violence.
Separately, we also look forward to the upcoming
elections in Lebanon, which must be free, fair and
unmarred by violence, intimidation and outside
influence. We need to continue to support the full

09-33303

S/PV.6123

implementation of Security Council resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006) in order to protect Lebanon’s
hard-won sovereignty and independence. We must
continue to insist on an end to weapons-smuggling and
on the disarmament of all militias in Lebanon,
including Hezbollah.
It should be the role of all of us to help the parties
move forward in pursuit of peace and to do nothing to
hinder their efforts. We must look beyond the smoke of
war and avoid the easy temptations of recrimination
and rancour. Together we must focus on a shared vision
of peace and security. The stakes are high. Our actions
will help determine what kind of future the children of
the Middle East will inherit — whether they will be
able to look ahead to a hopeful, prosperous future, or
whether they will be forced to endure round after
dismal round of bloodshed, crisis, instability and terror.
In the past, visionary leaders such as Anwar
al-Sadat, Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein of Jordan
bravely and selflessly devoted themselves to the cause
of peace. The question for our generation is simple and
stark: whether history will consign us to the ranks of
those who let hatred and grievance linger, or whether
history will honour us with a place in the camp of the
peacemakers. The United States has made its choice.
We ask you all to stand with us. Together, let us stand
for lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Shintaro Ito, State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Ito (Japan): On behalf of the Government of
Japan, I extend our deepest appreciation to the
Government of the Russian Federation for organizing
this important meeting. I would also like to express our
gratitude for the work of the Secretary-General and the
Quartet to date.
The Middle East peace process is at a critical
juncture, with new political developments on many
fronts. Japan believes that the Security Council should
continue to play a constructive role in the Middle East
peace process.
We sincerely hope that the new Israeli
Government will strive for the realization of a Middle
East peace based on the two-State solution. We
strongly call on the Israeli Government to fulfil its
obligations under the Road Map and Security Council
resolution 1850 (2008). Japan expects that the

09-33303

Government of Israel will strive to achieve a peace in
the Middle East by overcoming the current obstacles in
cooperation with the international community.
Improving the humanitarian conditions in Gaza is
a top priority for all of us. From that perspective, it is
necessary to keep the crossings open continuously. At
the same time, we condemn the sporadic rocket attacks
on Israel, which undermine not only the security of
Israeli citizens but also the efforts for the
reconstruction of Gaza and the peace process. Here
again, I call on the parties to fulfil their obligations
under Council resolution 1860 (2009).
To realize a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace, it is also indispensable for the Arab States to
play a more active role. The Arab Peace Initiative can
serve as a solid foundation for a comprehensive Middle
East peace.
At the International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
in which I participated, Japan pledged $200 million in
assistance to the Palestinians. Japan is supporting the
efforts of the Palestinians under the Palestinian
Authority led by President Abbas to build a viable
national economy through the “Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity” initiative and other projects, in order to
realize the establishment of a Palestinian State
comprising the West Bank and Gaza.
Japan also has been actively engaged in the
Middle East peace process through its diplomatic
efforts. Foreign Minister Nakasone visited the region
last week. In Egypt he reiterated our unchanged
support for Egyptian efforts for the realization of peace
based on the two-State solution. Mr. Tatsuo Arima, our
Special Envoy for the Middle East, also visited Israel
and the Palestinian territories last week to assist in
reinvigorating the peace process.
Last November, a historic series of high-level
meetings of the General Assembly was held here in
New York, with the attendance of leaders from around
the world, including those of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, as well as our Special Envoy, Mr. Koumura.
At the meeting, the leaders stressed that peace could
only be cultivated through dialogue and tolerance. In
that regard, I wish to stress the importance of a
balanced approach in pursuing peace. There are many
factors underlying conflicts, such as poverty and
despair. Resorting to force will not be the ultimate
solution to these problems. We need to help ensure a

15

S/PV.6123

decent standard of living for those in dire situations
and work to achieve economic prosperity and improve
the quality of education. Values such as pluralism,
multiculturalism, tolerance and moderation are
required in order to achieve peace. They can be
developed through dialogue among civilizations. I
believe that our efforts to that end will benefit
generations to come.
Over the course of our history, Japan has always
aspired to accommodate differences and learn to
coexist with others. Differences should not lead to
mutual estrangement, but rather should serve as a
catalyst for enriching a society. We believe with
conviction that the ultimate goal of diplomacy is to
create a global society in which people of different
cultures, religions and ideologies can live together in
peace.
We hope to be a reliable partner of the parties to
the Middle East peace process. Japan believes it has a
constructive role to play in the achievement of peace
and prosperity in the region. We will do whatever we
can in the form of financial as well as intellectual
contributions. We will maintain our commitment to the
two-State solution, which will make it possible for
Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side in peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Davor Božinović, State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Croatia.
Mr. Božinović (Croatia): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his statement and
expressing my country’s appreciation for the personal
efforts he has invested in helping to advance the
Middle East peace process. Let me also express our
gratitude to Foreign Minister Lavrov and his delegation
for organizing this timely debate, which focuses our
attention on the need to reinvigorate diplomatic action
on reaching a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
In many of its aspects, the Arab-Israeli conflict
remains the defining conflict of our time. Tension and
turbulence in the region often reverberate globally.
Conversely, the dynamics on the international scene
have not always been conducive to achieving a
solution. We deem this to be an opportune moment that
provides the right context and momentum, which
should be harnessed to achieve a final and lasting
peace.

16

At the heart of this lies the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process. While respecting its essentially bilateral
nature, we also recognize that unwavering international
support to the process and to the parties’ efforts is
critical in creating the political context for successful
negotiations.
We should also not lose sight of the regional
dimension of the process. For its part, Croatia values
the efforts of responsible regional partners towards
securing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, including the Arab Peace Initiative. We
recognize and commend the role played by the United
States in this regard and are encouraged by the early
and principled engagement of President Obama’s
Administration with regional actors, including with
both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Today’s meeting comes at a critical time when all
efforts should be channelled into preserving this
momentum and creating an environment that would
allow the parties to continue to build on the progress
achieved, guided by the principles and mutual
understanding reflected in resolution 1850 (2008),
which the Council adopted last December.
Last year, we witnessed the evolution of a
comprehensive, direct and results-oriented IsraeliPalestinian negotiating process within the framework
set out at Annapolis. There was also the opening of
important regional tracks between Israel and Syria and
between Syria and Lebanon. Despite the recent
impasse, we cannot afford to lose the momentum that
has been achieved. We therefore welcome the Russian
initiative to provide new impetus for a comprehensive
peace process, on both the Israeli-Palestinian and the
Syrian-Lebanese tracks, primarily through preparations
for the Moscow conference.
For Croatia, resolution 1850 (2008) remains an
important benchmark. It emphasizes the irreversibility
of the peace talks and the need to advance the process
under the Annapolis guiding principles, as well as the
need to intensify efforts to foster mutual recognition
and peaceful coexistence in the region. I would like to
reiterate here our belief in the ongoing peace process
based on a regional approach and on a two-State
solution — a democratic and peaceful Palestine living
side by side with a democratic and secure Israel — and
in the need to advance the momentum towards just,
lasting and comprehensive peace for the Middle East.

09-33303

S/PV.6123

It is important that the parties continue to engage
in direct and substantive negotiations at all levels and
that they receive our full support along that journey.
We recognize the challenges that the parties face on
that journey, even more so now in the wake of the
recent conflict in Gaza and the sensitive period of
political transition. We welcome the opportunity that
the formation of the new Israeli Government can bring
in providing for the resumption and consolidation of
the peace talks.
We also understand that the dynamics in Gaza
cannot be separated from the broader picture and the
efforts towards achieving a comprehensive peace. Gaza
remains in dire and urgent need of humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance. Despite encouraging donor
responses in the aftermath of the crisis, we are mindful
that reconstruction and the long-term recovery and
development of Gaza depend principally on a stable
and secure environment, which in turn remains critical
for the sustained opening of Gaza crossings, as
requested in resolution 1860 (2009).
Moreover, the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), which includes putting an end to arms
smuggling and the capacity of Hamas and other
militant groups to launch attacks against Israel, is
critical for attaining a durable ceasefire. In that regard,
let me reiterate our appreciation for international and
regional efforts, notably those of Egypt.
The aftermath of the crisis in Gaza has
highlighted the significance of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. We support efforts to that end and
would support a Palestinian Government that
renounces violence and respects previous agreements
and obligations, as well as the Quartet principles.
As the political and diplomatic processes remain
inextricably linked with the situation on the ground, we
hope to see tangible changes in accordance with the
obligations to which both parties committed
themselves under the Road Map, which were
reaffirmed at Annapolis. We also hope that both parties
will refrain from all measures that risk prejudging the
outcome of negotiations or eroding trust and
confidence.
Furthermore, we understand that development
and peace are mutually reinforcing and that economic
development is an essential part of a lasting solution.
Here too, sustained international engagement remains
critical, both to stimulate Palestinian economic renewal

09-33303

and for the reform processes, notably in the sphere of
security and the rule of law. The ability of the
Palestinian Authority to build credible institutions and
a security infrastructure that is willing and able to
combat terrorism and anarchy remains an essential
element of Palestinian State-building and a legitimate
expectation on the Israeli side.
We understand, through personal experience from
our region, that the current period is beset by
challenges for both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides.
This makes it all the more important that the
international community, including this Council and
the active Quartet, continue to encourage the parties to
persist in their efforts towards achieving the shared
goals of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace for the
Middle East, with two States, a democratic and
peaceful Palestine living side by side with a democratic
and secure Israel.
Before finishing, my delegation would also like
to thank the Russian delegation for preparing the draft
presidential statement that we are about to adopt and
other Council delegations for the constructive position
and flexibility shown in bringing this consensus text
together.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Le Luong Minh,
Permanent Representative and Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Government of Viet Nam, I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Government of
the Russian Federation for taking the initiative of
organizing this important debate of the Council. We
welcome the presence of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and thank him for his statement.
This debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, is taking place at a
critical juncture, when recent positive developments
are being overshadowed by continued insecurity,
instability and increasing tensions in the region. We are
heartened by the increasing international consensus
rejecting violence in support of a peaceful solution; the
positive outcome of the International Conference in
Support of the Palestinian Economy for the
Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, in early March 2009; and the continued
undertakings to translate such a positive outcome into
concrete actions in support of the National Early

17

S/PV.6123

Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza presented
by the Palestinian Government.

Security Council, and
determine the culprits.

These positive developments, however, cannot
overshadow the extent and scope of challenges facing
the international community. We note with great
concern that, more than three months since the
temporary ceasefire was announced, Israeli military
incursions into the occupied Palestinian territory and
rocket attacks against populated areas in Israel
continue to take place. While Palestinian civilians in
Gaza are struggling to cope with the numerous
hardships and difficulties caused by the 22-month
siege, tensions in the West Bank continue to escalate as
a result of Israel’s expansion of illegal settlements and
construction of the separation wall.

Intra-Palestinian unity is an important factor for
making the Middle East peace process sustainable.
Continuing our support for the Palestinian National
Authority, we hope that all Palestinian parties will soon
reconcile and establish a national unity Government.

Repeated cycles of violence and counter-violence
over the years demonstrate more clearly than ever that
a lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
must be a comprehensive one that takes into account
the legitimate interests and rights of all the parties
concerned. We support the collective efforts of the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries in search of a two-State solution
based on internationally recognized guidelines such as
the Road Map, the Annapolis outcome, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including the
recent resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). Viet
Nam is ready to join efforts to reactivate and move
forward the Middle East peace process.
The recent tragic events in Gaza have caused the
loss of many innocent lives, including those of women
and children, and created and prolonged a humanitarian
crisis, making the living conditions of the Palestinian
people there more and more difficult. We urge all the
parties concerned to lift all restrictions, create every
condition necessary to facilitate humanitarian relief
operations, and abide by international humanitarian
and human rights law. We commend United Nations
agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and other humanitarian organizations for their bravery
in rendering emergency and humanitarian assistance to
Gazans. While reaffirming Viet Nam’s position that
any attack against diplomatic and United Nations
premises and personnel is unacceptable, we take note
of the report of the Board of Inquiry, prepared at the
request of the Secretary-General and the appeal of the

18

support

investigations

to

We are pleased to note the relative calm and
stability prevailing in Lebanon since the signing of the
Doha agreement a year ago. We hope that the
parliamentary elections scheduled for 7 June 2009 will
be held in optimal conditions of security, transparency
and fairness. We reaffirm our support for a solution
achieved through dialogue and cooperation on the basis
of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. We would also like to
reaffirm our support for the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
Finally, we welcome the proposal of Russia to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East peace process in Moscow later this year. We thank
the Russian delegation for introducing the draft
presidential statement, which, with flexibility and a
spirit of cooperation, we are ready to support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for the report he has given us
on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, for having
convened this important ministerial meeting on the
Middle East in a timely fashion, bearing in mind the
current political dynamics in the key States in the
region. I welcome the presence of the ministers, deputy
ministers and permanent representatives who are here
with us today.
Mexico believes that the establishment of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders on the basis of Security Council
resolutions, is the only solution for lasting prosperity
and peace between Israelis and Palestinians and more
generally in the Middle East. In that spirit and
conviction, Mexico has participated in international

09-33303

S/PV.6123

efforts for peace, in particular the Annapolis
conference, which seemed promising in its time in
terms of making progress in this process. We will
continue to actively support such initiatives, which will
make it possible to arrive at a definitive settlement of
the peace process in the Middle East.
Mexico also supports the efforts of the Quartet to
create conditions favourable to relaunching the peace
process and Security Council initiatives to ensure the
implementation of its relevant resolutions on the basis
of a consensus position. The delegation of Mexico
would like to express its resolute willingness to work
with the Russian Federation and the international
community to promote the exchange of creative ideas
on crafting new strategies that will make it possible to
overcome obstacles and achieve progress in the peace
process with all the urgency required by the situation.
Despite recent efforts, the situation in the Middle
East remains critical. We see trends running counter to
the peace process and to a lasting solution to the
conflicts in the region; these are a cause of concern for
my delegation. We can affirm that the necessary
political conditions for a long-term understanding are
lacking at this juncture.
In Gaza and southern Israel, despite the unilateral
cessation of hostilities, outbreaks of violence in the
field are still being reported and rocket attacks and the
consequent reprisals and incursions by the Israeli
armed forces in the Gaza Strip have continued. The
difficulty of access for humanitarian aid and the severe
restrictions on the supply of building materials, fuel
and cash in Gaza have caused living conditions to
significantly and continuously deteriorate, further
generating a feeling of frustration and injustice that
considerably affects the aspirations of the populations
of the region and the international community as a
whole.
In the West Bank, there are also reports of clashes
between Palestinians and Israeli settlers, incursions of
the Israeli armed forces and terrorist attacks on the
Israeli civilian population living in the surrounding
areas. Similarly, restrictions on the free movement of
people who live in that area remain, and the demolition
and settlement policy in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank continues.
My delegation again condemns all acts of
violence, especially those directed against the civilian
population, and urges all actors to comply with the

09-33303

provisions of international humanitarian law at all
times.
We thank the Secretary-General for his executive
summary to the Security Council on the report of the
Board of Inquiry on the attacks on United Nations
installations during the recent conflict in Gaza. My
delegation hopes that in due course the report will be
examined in detail by the Security Council itself.
We note that, in the present circumstances, the
peace process not only may remain stagnant, but even
runs the risk of reverting to the status quo ante, which
would be unacceptable. The Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority must show the necessary will
to resume negotiations as soon as possible and to put
an end to the spiral of tension and violence that has
characterized this region of the world during the past
months.
Also, without question, the support of the
neighbouring States and of the entire international
community is necessary to overcome this obstacle to
the peace process. To that end, the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), must be
implemented without reservation.
My delegation is concerned that the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East have not been fully implemented. The
maintenance of international peace and security is the
fundamental purpose of the United Nations, and
Member States have agreed to respect and ensure
respect for decisions aimed at achieving that objective,
in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the United
Nations Charter.
Similarly, both parties will have to comply with
all the main elements of the Road Map and to avoid
undertaking actions that undermine trust and affect the
negotiations process. In that regard, we particularly
regret that the colonization, demolition and settlement
activities continue in the Palestinian territories, since
they infringe on the principles of the Road Map and
threaten the peace process as a whole.
It is also essential that the efforts towards
achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation, fostered with
the support of the Government of Egypt, continue.
Only the creation of a united, democratic Palestinian
Government committed to the peace process, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, can

19

S/PV.6123

lay the foundations for a peace process leading to a
final solution to the conflict.
It is important to underscore the need for the
support of international community in achieving
tangible progress in the peace process. To that end, we
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Quartet, in
particular by United States President Barack Obama, to
direct the parties to resume dialogue. We trust that the
convening of an international conference in Moscow
will, when it takes place, help to re-establish the bases
for dialogue and negotiation.
We also welcome the commitment reaffirmed by
King Abdullah II of Jordan in favour of a “57-State
solution”, thus demonstrating that peace can be
achieved only through a joint effort. It also confirms
the central position that the Arab Peace Initiative must
hold in that process. We also recall the relevance of
fulfilling the commitments made during the Sharm
el-Sheikh conference last March, which are
fundamental to the reconstruction of Gaza and the
normalization of the lives of its inhabitants.
As the delegation of Mexico has repeatedly
suggested, reconstruction and access for humanitarian
aid will be possible only through the establishment of a
monitoring mechanism that guarantees a lasting
ceasefire, the opening of the border crossings and
control of the illicit arms trade.
In parallel, it is essential that efforts towards
achieving regional peace continue. We invite Israel and
Syria to resume their indirect talks, which had been
under the auspices of Turkey, and we call on Israel,
Lebanon and Syria to fully comply with the provisions
of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006). The normalization of relations among those
neighbouring countries and withdrawal from the
occupied territories will have a positive impact on the
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
In the current context, the most substantial
momentum that can be leant to the peace process must
come from the actors directly involved in it. To that
end, we urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
hold a constructive dialogue without preconditions, on
the basis of previous international agreements and
obligations. We hope that in the coming weeks the
political conditions to achieve that goal will be
established.

20

The Security Council will have to ensure that
both parties follow the guidelines of the Road Map,
whose end objective is the establishment of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for adoption of the presidential
statement drafted by the Russian Federation, which is
an extremely timely and appropriate contribution
towards promoting dialogue and negotiation to
establish long-term regional peace. Mexico is ready to
support and to actively participate in any initiative
leading to the lasting settlement of one of the main
conflicts on today’s agenda, one that has an impact on
international peace, security and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Ruganda (Uganda): My delegation
welcomes you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General
and the Ministers present here to this debate on the
Middle East. We thank you for organizing this debate
at this time and at this level. It is a clear testimony to
the commitment of the Security Council and of the
international community to the ongoing efforts towards
the resolution of the Middle East conflicts and towards
ensuring lasting peace and security in the region.
We also welcome the Secretary-General and
thank him for his briefing on the overall situation in
the Middle East, the progress made so far, the
challenges and what more needs to be done. Uganda
commends the efforts and initiatives of the Quartet,
Egypt, the Arab League and other actors in that regard.
We are convinced that a durable solution to the
Middle East conflict can be achieved only through
negotiations and agreement among the parties
concerned. We continue to support all the parties in the
Middle East in their efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace based on the vision of a region in which two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace within secure and recognized borders, as
envisaged in resolution 1860 (2009). We call upon both
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority to
remain committed to the irreversibility of the peace
process, based on previous agreements and obligations.
With regard to the situation in Gaza, my
delegation is encouraged by the reduction in the

09-33303

S/PV.6123

number of incidents since the most recent briefing on
this subject. We welcome the summary report of the
Secretary-General and the Board of Inquiry. However,
we are concerned at the fact that the situation remains
fragile. There is still no permanent ceasefire, there
remain incidents of violence, and the levels of
humanitarian assistance reaching Gaza are below what
is urgently required. There is an urgent need for a
durable and fully respected ceasefire, for an end to
arms smuggling and for the reopening of crossing
points, as envisioned in resolution 1860 (2009).
We reiterate our commendation of Egypt and
other parties for the role that they continue to play in
facilitating the ceasefire talks between Israel and
Palestine. We are also concerned that the divisions
among Palestinian groups persist, and we call upon
them to resolve their differences through dialogue and
to reconcile and forge a common front.
We note with concern that, while $4.5 billion
were pledged in March this year during the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian
Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, the provision
of immediately needed materials for construction has
not been possible, owing mainly to the blockade. We
therefore call upon all parties concerned to ensure that
those pledges are honoured and used for Gaza
reconstruction programmes.
The situation in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory also raises concern. We note from
the briefing that there has been a significant rise in
settler activities both in the West Bank and in East
Jerusalem. We therefore call for an end to all settler
activities.

Finally, Uganda wishes to thank the Russian
delegation for the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda fully supports.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of China.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
am greatly honoured to attend this Security Council
meeting on the Middle East as Special Envoy to
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi. I wish to thank the
Government of the Russian Federation for this
initiative and you personally, Mr. President, for
presiding over today’s meeting. My thanks go also to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the
current situation in the Middle East.
Resolution 1860 (2009), adopted by the Security
Council in January this year, is the result of arduous
efforts by all parties. It brought about the IsraeliPalestinian ceasefire and created conditions for a
resumption of the Middle East peace process.
Regrettably, however, the resolution has not been
implemented comprehensively or effectively. Israel
should open the border crossings to Gaza in order to
facilitate reconstruction efforts and improve access to
Gaza for humanitarian supplies in order to ease the
humanitarian crisis there. Israel should also put an end
to its ongoing construction of settlements in the West
Bank. Palestine should strengthen its internal unity and
reconciliation process. The parties concerned must
avoid the use of force, prevent civilian casualties and
ensure the implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).

With regard to Lebanon, Uganda welcomes the
improvement in the political and security situations.
We commend the steps taken to improve relations
between Lebanon and Syria, including the
establishment of diplomatic relations. My delegation
also welcomes the commitment of the Lebanese
leadership to free and fair parliamentary elections,
scheduled for 7 June.

Political negotiation is the only path towards a
lasting peace in the Middle East; the use of force will
not achieve it. To the contrary, the cycle of violence
will only exacerbate hatred and confrontation. The
situation in the Middle East is now at a very critical
stage. We hope that the parties concerned will hold
firm in their determination to resolve the issue through
political negotiations and refrain from any action that
could undermine mutual trust and reconciliation in
order to create conditions for a resumption of
negotiations.

We urgently need to give new impetus to the
search for a solution to the conflict in the Middle East.
In that regard, Uganda fully supports the proposal by
the Russian Federation to convene, in consultation with
the Quartet and other parties, an international
conference on the Middle East peace process in
Moscow this year.

At the core of the Middle East issue is the
Palestinian question. The ultimate solution to the
Palestinian question is the realization of the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace. The parties concerned should continue to act in
the spirit enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions and adhere to the principle of land for

09-33303

21

S/PV.6123

peace and the two-State solution. They should press for
the early achievement of reconciliation between Israel
and Palestine, the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, and peaceful coexistence between
Arabs and Jews. We hope that both Israel and Palestine
will bear in mind the fundamental interests of their
peoples and make the right choice.
The achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East depends on the
resolution of all relevant issues in the region. The
negotiations between Syria and Israel and between
Lebanon and Israel are important components of the
Middle East peace process. They should be promoted
as part of a holistic approach. At the same time, other
volatile issues in the region should also be
appropriately addressed in order to create an external
environment favourable to the peace process.
The Middle East process cannot succeed without
the assistance and support of the international
community, which should continue to support the
development of Palestine and immediately fulfil its
commitment to reconstruction in Gaza. The parties
concerned should uphold justice and strengthen
mediation while, at the same time, considering the
establishment of a broadly representative, balanced and
effective multilateral mechanism to provide oversight
and support for the Middle East peace process.
China supports the efforts of the Quartet. We
welcome any initiative that will contribute to the
Middle East peace process. We support Russia’s
proposal to hold an international conference on the
Middle East in Moscow.
China always attaches great importance to the
issue of the Middle East and is committed to promoting
the peace process there. Chinese leaders have worked
vigorously to promote peace and negotiations in the
region through frequent communications with leaders
of the countries concerned.
Two weeks ago, Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Yang Jiechi visited Egypt, Palestine, Israel and
Syria, where he had in-depth exchanges of views of the
leaders of those countries and with the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States on the Middle
East peace process. He put forward China’s proposals
on how to promote the Middle East peace process and
provided further assistance to Palestine for its
reconstruction efforts.

22

China will continue to work with the rest of the
international community for the early and appropriate
settlement of the Middle East issue and will play a
constructive role in the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to
express my gratitude to you for your initiative to hold
this meeting of the Security Council at the level of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs to discuss the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his presence among us and for his statement.
The problem referred to as “the Middle East
issue” started over 60 years ago, and yet, despite the
passage of those 60 years, it has not grown old. It is
still as urgent, complicated and severe as if it were
only 60 months or 60 days old.
At the centre of the so-called Middle East
problem is the Palestinian people, who were evicted
from their land, rendered homeless and scattered
throughout the world. Those among the Palestinian
people who remain in Palestine have seen their rights
denied, their homes demolished, their identity
destroyed and their farms uprooted and razed, and
thousands of them are now held in Israeli prisons. And
now, at a time when the resistance of the Palestinian
people against this occupation, this violence, this
expulsion, this destruction and this imprisonment is
being criminalized, we find on the opposite side, in
Israel, an increased push towards extremism and the
denial of the rights of others, as well as a growing
spirit of hatred towards Palestinians and the entire Arab
people.
Today, we face a new Government in Israel,
whose diplomacy is led by a man who does not even
bother to hide his hatred for Arabs and who had once
called for the destruction of Egypt’s Aswan High Dam
and for the expulsion of the Palestinians from
Palestine.
At a time when some people describe the
Government elected by all Palestinians as an extremist
Government, when some countries have put that
Government on a list of terrorist governments, and
when the resistance movement in Lebanon is described

09-33303

S/PV.6123

as terrorist, we do not hear anybody describing as
extremist or terrorist Israeli Governments that launch
wars, kill, destroy, uproot and raze farmlands and build
a racist separation wall.
Since the Oslo Accords, the Palestinians, through
the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority, have been moving step by step in
negotiations and peace talks with the Israelis. They
have been moving from one international forum to
another in the name of peace and in pursuit of a
resolution of the Palestinian question. But what has the
end result been?
On the Israeli side, we have an increase in the
construction of settlements and the destruction of
Palestinian homes, and today, in Jerusalem alone, more
than 60,000 Palestinians face the destruction of their
homes and who will be rendered homeless.
Excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque continue today,
with the goal of destroying and completely removing
the mosque. Israel also plans to construct an
underground railway near the mosque.
The Arab Peace Initiative, which is now six years
old, has been completely ignored by the Israelis. They
want to take everything: they want the land, security
and peace, and they offer nothing in return. The Israelis
reject the return of Palestinian refugees to their
homeland; they refuse to give up weapons of mass
destruction, which they continue to accumulate in their
arsenals; they refuse to withdraw from the Golan; they
reject a Palestinian State, which, in fact, is impossible
to establish because Israel has taken the land and water
sources, destroyed the infrastructure and imprisoned
the Palestinian people.
There are now more than 11,000 Palestinians in
Israeli jails, and we hear no discussion of their
suffering or of the importance of releasing them. In the
West Bank alone, there are more than 600 Israeli
checkpoints, which make the daily lives of Palestinians
an ongoing, continuous torture.
At the end of last year and early this year, Israel
launched a comprehensive war against the Gaza Strip.
The international conscience agrees that Israel’s
actions constituted war crimes which affected all
segments of the civilian population. Thousands were
killed or wounded, and internationally banned weapons
were used. While we express our appreciation for the
Board of Inquiry and the fact-finding mission
concerning the Israeli aggression against Gaza, and

09-33303

specifically against United Nations facilities in Gaza,
my delegation has also prepared a draft resolution to
establish an impartial investigating committee to hold
Israeli officials accountable and bring them to justice.
We also look forward to the report of the independent
fact-finding mission that was set up by the Human
Rights Council to investigate all Israeli crimes in Gaza
during the aggression.
Today, we need to raise the voice of right and the
voice of courage. Humanity has entered the twentyfirst century. We need a voice that calls for the
renunciation of violence and war and the killing of man
by his fellow man. We must all confront and stand up
to all forms of racism.
Muslims, Jews and Christians lived together in
Al-Andalus — Audalusia — for many centuries. They
lived in unprecedented brotherhood, and together they
produced a civilization that laid the groundwork for a
historic human renaissance that helped to take
humanity from the darkness of the Middle Ages to the
enlightenment and progress of recent centuries.
We therefore say today that we need to reproduce
the Al-Andalus experience, which we believe we are
capable of doing. That civilization was built on
coexistence, tolerance and acceptance of the other.
With full appreciation for the initiatives,
resolutions and plans seeking to resolve what we call
the Middle East question, and based on a spirit of
coexistence, our brother and leader Muammar
Al-Qadhafi has published in the White Book his vision
for a true solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. That
vision includes the creation of a democratic State in
Palestine where everyone lives equally, without
discrimination based on religion or race. In that State,
violence, confrontation and denial of the other would
end. My country has confidence in the ability of the
international community and of noble humanity to
realize that dream, just as the dream of coexistence was
realized in South Africa.
The White Book, written by our leader Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, contains a chapter entitled “Isratine”,
describing a time when everybody in Palestine —
Arabs and Jews — shall share equally in the land,
water, freedom, and even the name of the State, as
happened when African Tanganyika and Arab-origin
Zanzibar were merged into one State called Tanzania.

23

S/PV.6123

In conclusion, although we do not agree with
much of the content of the draft presidential statement
submitted to us because it does not adequately address
the issues of Israeli settlements, the occupation of the
Golan Heights, the situation in Gaza and the Sheba’a
Farms, in appreciation of the good intentions and
positive attitude demonstrated in the preparation of the
draft presidential statement, in recognition of my
country’s relationship with Russia and in order to
preserve the unity and consensus of the Council, we
will not object to the presidential statement.
The President (spoke in Russian): After
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council stressed the urgency
of reaching comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. Vigorous diplomatic action is needed to
attain the goal set by the international
community — lasting peace in the region, based
on an enduring commitment to mutual
recognition, freedom from violence, incitement
and terror, and the two-State solution, building
upon previous agreements and obligations.
“In this context, the Security Council recalls
all its previous resolutions on the Middle East, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003), 1850 (2008), 1860
(2009), and the Madrid principles, and the
Council notes the importance of the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
“The Security Council encourages the
Quartet’s ongoing work to support the parties in
their efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
“The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations built upon previous agreements and

obligations. The Council reiterates its call for
renewed and urgent efforts by the parties and the
international
community
to
achieve
a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on the vision of a region
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
live side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders.
“The Security Council further calls upon the
parties to fulfil their obligations under the
Performance-Based Road Map, refraining from
any steps that could undermine confidence or
prejudice the outcome of negotiations on all core
issues.
“The Security Council calls on all States
and international organizations to support the
Palestinian Government that is committed to the
Quartet principles and the Arab Peace Initiative
and respects the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, and the Council
encourages tangible steps towards intraPalestinian reconciliation, including in support of
Egypt’s efforts, on this basis. It calls for
assistance to help develop the Palestinian
economy, to maximize the resources available to
the Palestinian Authority and to build Palestinian
institutions.
“The Security Council supports the proposal
of the Russian Federation to convene, in
consultation with the Quartet and the parties, an
international conference on the Middle East peace
process in Moscow in 2009.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/14.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

24

09-33303
