United Nations

S/PV.4744

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4744

th meeting
Monday, 28 April 2003, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aguilar Zinser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Mexico)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Chen Xu
Mrs. D’Achon
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (S/2003/449)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-33636 (E)

*0333636*

S/PV.4744

report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor.

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Timor-Leste and Head of Mission.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste

I now give the floor to Mr. Sharma.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (S/2003/449)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Fiji, Indonesia,
Japan, New Zealand, Portugal and Timor-Leste in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil),
Mr. Savua (Fiji), Mr. Percaya ((Indonesia),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. MacKay (New
Zealand) and Mr. de Santa Clara Gomes
(Portugal) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Timor-Leste and Head of Mission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Sharma to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/449, which contains the special

2

Mr. Sharma: It is indeed a great pleasure to
participate, under your chairmanship, Sir, in this open
periodical debate on the progress of the mandate given
to the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). My previous statement before the
Council was made six months after the accession to
independent statehood of Timor-Leste and the current
report covers almost a year since independence. My
statement today is being made shortly before the
Council will deliberate the adoption of a draft
resolution extending the mandate of UNMISET for a
final year.
With the passage of time, the experience of any
newly independent nation exhibits features in the
continuum of national experience, with emerging
potentialities. In respect of the evolving situation over
the first year of Timor-Leste, I wish to remark first of
all on developments to which a re-evaluated response
was required by the Council in the security-related
mandate of UNMISET.
I would like to begin by expressing our
appreciation for the Security Council's recognition of
the pivotal requirement of international support for the
stability of Timor-Leste, as reflected in its adoption of
resolution 1473 (2003). The strengthening of the police
force through a recast strategy involving accretion of
capacity and mobility, reinforced training and
augmentation of professionalism according to the
highest policing standards, on the one hand, and a more
gradual drawdown of the peacekeeping forces, on the
other, are of critical importance. They will be of
enormous assistance as we seek to address the
emergent threats identified in the Secretary-General's
special report: the risk of civil disorder and the
criminal and politically motivated violence in rural
areas, which appears to be part of a strategy by the
perpetrators to try to instigate numerous such incidents
simultaneously across the entire territory of the country
in order to encourage a perception of a crisis in
governance and instil a fear of returning social
disorder.

S/PV.4744

A surge in violence at this time could potentially
generate a demoralizing psychological apprehension in
the population of a recrudescence of violence and of
the rending of the social fabric still fresh in memory
and experienced in the searing national turmoil only a
few years ago. This factor of traumatic national
experience will diminish in potency through the
passage of time, but the initial years of the State are
critical in firmly entrenching the confidence both of the
Government and of the people that the political,
administrative and security order in the State, on which
all steady social and economic advance depends,
cannot be shaken or challenged. The slower drawdown
of the UNMISET military component would contribute
to reducing the threat posed by such groups, while also
ensuring that the police forces have adequate time to
develop. The revised drawdown schedule is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General before the
Council.
UNMISET has noted the emphasis widely placed
by members of the Council and other Member States
on the institutional strengthening of the police and has
initiated and supported actions by the Government of
Timor-Leste in this direction, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other development partners. These efforts will build in
particular on the foundation provided by the report of
the joint assessment mission on policing requirements.
The recommendations of the joint assessment mission
will be reflected in the comprehensive road map under
preparation for institutional strengthening and their
implementation will be overseen by a committee on
institutional strengthening of the police, chaired by the
Minister of the Interior. This process was further
supported by discussions during a major international
workshop with the highest-level participation, which
has just concluded.
We have been mindful to learn the appropriate
lessons from the civic riots in Dili, the instance of
armed attacks in the district of Ermera and subsequent
instances of armed banditry in other districts. These
first instances of security threats to the State have
provided additional impetus for recasting, planning and
augmenting readiness to make such challenges difficult
to mount in the future. That there will be other
instances of attempted assaults on the fabric of law and
order is a reasonable surmise. However, Timor-Leste is
now on a path where it can be quick to respond
effectively to such situations and work towards

eventually dismantling such threats through appropriate
security, political and economic measures, which
would progressively show positive results.
The process of handing over policing functions to
the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) continues,
with some adjustments, and responsibility for policing
more than half of the districts in the country's territory
is now in the hands of PNTL. We are strengthening our
presence as advisors in all districts and headquarters to
ensure a process of smooth transition until all
responsibility is transferred by mid-2004. With the
cluster of improvements initiated, it is expected that the
State will be better equipped with the essential means
necessary to ensure stability in the time to come, even
though reviewing and enhancing security capacity and
responsibility in the light of requirements is admittedly
a continuing and evolving process.
In the development of beneficial external
relations of Timor-Leste, the growing and constructive
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has
been a great asset. High-level visits have been
exchanged that have given political direction and
substance to the positively evolving relationship and
the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste will be making his
first official visit to Indonesia in early June. Through
the forward-looking meeting of the Joint Commission,
both countries have resolved upon cooperation in a
variety of areas. Both countries are also striving to
meet the target for delineation of the land border by 30
June, but it will require substantial effort on both sides
to achieve that target date. Some financial and
technical support is needed to complete the joint
actions required by the deadline and eventually also for
carrying out demarcation of the international boundary.
The process of handing over border oversight and
control services from the peacekeeping force to the
Border Patrol Unit of the Timor-Leste Police has
commenced.
I wish to acknowledge here the encouragement
which I have received through the reception accorded
to me at the highest political levels in Jakarta. It
continues to be our endeavour to play as helpful a role
as we can to both sides in advancing the bilateral
relationship in transitional matters, as we have been
mandated to do, over the duration of UNMISET.
Despite efforts deployed by both countries and
the international community, around 30,000 refugees
remain in West Timor. Voluntary resettlement in other

3

S/PV.4744

parts of Indonesia continues to be the policy of
Indonesia. The return of refugees to Timor-Leste has
virtually ceased since last December after the
announcement of the cessation clause by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), though a significant decline in returns had
been perceptible even in October and November. It is
encouraging to note that, while some former adherents
of the militias have again been involved in criminal
activities in Timor-Leste, the Government of Indonesia
has stated its commitment to assist in neutralizing
those elements.
The task of developing a professional, dedicated
and responsive public administration from ground level
is no less a challenge for the new State. The Council
had mandated UNMISET to prepare the groundwork
for the structure of a national administration over two
years, and halfway through the process we can report
that progress is satisfactory, given the scope of
capacity-building support that could be provided,
limited to providing international advisers to 100
stability posts. The uneven situation in respect of
counterparts that could be provided, given the
undeveloped skills inherited by Timorese society, has
been another constraining feature.
It is clear, however, that within the 15 sectors
where we provide support, there are areas where the
necessity of continued mentoring and online assistance
will remain on account of the depth of expertise
necessary, the extent and scope of practical and
conceptual knowledge to be transferred and the critical
nature of some crucial sectors. In the period following
the departure of UNMISET, it has to be ensured that
the functioning of those critical sectors is not
jeopardized. We have initiated the process of
identifying the areas where continuing supportiveness
will be required, together with the reasons for it. That
assessment will be shared with the Council and other
partners so that appropriate successor arrangements
may be taken in hand in good time.
The role of UNDP, which is crucial in advocating
the need for further capacity-building support and
filling, in parallel, more than 200 development posts,
will continue to be central. UNMISET has been
particular in keeping the civilian support programme
under constant review, in close consultation with the
Government, for lessons that are progressively learnt
and improvements that can be effected.

4

The Serious Crimes Unit was set up under the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the judicial handling of cases of
egregious crimes surrounding the popular consultation
of 1999. The Unit had to resolve many challenges in
the start-up phase, and efforts need to be made
continuously in facilitating the work of the Special
Panels for Serious Crimes at the Dili District Court,
which has been made responsible for trying those cases
in the areas of investigation, prosecution, trial, defence
and support services to the Court. Subsequent to the
judgements, we must anticipate the appeals phase. The
process, although slower than earlier envisaged when
the constraints were not clear, is now under way.
In respect to the 10 priority cases of crimes
against humanity and the five cases of widespread
patterns of serious violations of human rights, progress
as of the end of April 2003 has been as follows:
Investigations have been completed in nine out of the
ten priority cases. Eight additional major cases of
crimes against humanity have been fully investigated
and indicted so far. Trials are proceeding in those cases
where the accused are in Timor-Leste, and two cases —
Los Palos and Lolotae — have been judged at the first
instance. In many other cases the trials may not even
commence due to the absence of defendants, a large
proportion of whom remain outside of Timor-Leste.
The role of UNMISET has been to provide
substantive, administrative and technical support to the
process so that the infrastructure required for the trials
is available. In order to assist in the investigation and
indictment phase, and in the subsequent trials,
UNMISET has provided the Prosecutor General of
Timor-Leste with an international Deputy Prosecutor
General, who heads the Serious Crimes Unit composed
of prosecutors and investigators. UNMISET has also
provided the services of judges for the panels and
public defenders for the trials. Along with areas, such
as public administration and policing, which will
continue to require support after UNMISET withdraws,
the mandate to bring to justice the perpetrators of
serious crimes committed in 1999 is another area which
will require deliberation as to the appropriate postUNMISET arrangement, as it is certain that the judicial
process cannot be completed within the period of
UNMISET’s mandate, which is until mid-2004.
The economic situation of Timor-Leste is slow to
improve given the comprehensive legacy of
underdevelopment inherited by the newly independent

S/PV.4744

State. The path of development and fulfilment of
economic and social needs will be long and arduous,
and in the foreseeable future the country will have to
manage the political and economic pressures created by
depressed economic and social indicators and, in
particular, joblessness. The indicators of poverty for
Timor-Leste enumerated in the UNDP Human
Development Report of 2002 include an infant
mortality rate of 80 in every 1,000 live births; an adult
literacy rate of 43 per cent — with 46 per cent of the
population having never attended school — resulting in
a large inexperienced and unskilled work force; more
than two out of five people living on 55 cents a day or
less; a life expectancy of only 57 years; and a per
capita gross domestic product of less than $500, with a
total gross domestic product of $380 million.
The majority of the East Timorese people still
practise subsistence agriculture, with extremely
rudimentary means of production. The economy needs
a focus on agriculture based on greater diversity and
quantity of production, encouragement to small
industries, creation of professional services and
opportunities for self-employment as the basis of the
Timorese economy. The Government recognizes that,
as a small and not heavily populated country,
Timor-Leste should enable greater participation of
beneficiaries in the process of development.
Timor-Leste seeks self-sufficiency as an objective
to be achieved in the medium term. The existence of
the means for doing so is encouraging. In my last
statement to the Council I stated the favourable
conditions possessed by Timor-Leste in terms of its
affluent and dynamic neighbourhood and its reserves of
natural resources that could be turned to advantage for
the country's economic upturn.
The ratification, after a protracted process, of the
Timor Sea Treaty between Timor-Leste and Australia,
enabling the exploitation of an offshore oil and gas
field, has been an important development for the public
finances of Timor-Leste. Prospects for further revenues
will be enhanced through cooperation between the two
countries on another identified field. In respect of the
five metallic ores and three types of industrial clays
that have been surveyed and that are believed to exist
in commercial quantities, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) has
prepared a comprehensive report, which was presented
to the Government by the ESCAP Executive Secretary
earlier in the year. The fisheries and tourism potential

also remains to be exploited. The Government is aware
that in order to attract investor interest the basic laws
and guidelines required have to be put in place quickly.
Timor-Leste has also formally applied for recognition
as a least developed country. Concessions granted to
such countries by other countries could potentially
attract some investors.
Development strategies towards fulfilment of the
goals in the comprehensive National Development Plan
are being pursued with the participation of bilateral
partners and institutions. The national exercise of
identifying policy priorities on the basis of popular
consultation has evinced close compatibility with the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. The
Government is committed to registering advances in
key social indicators. A signal contribution is being
made in assisting the development process by UNDP
and the United Nations agencies, and that relationship
will, of course, continue after UNMISET’s departure in
mid-2004.
The role being played by other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes is truly commendable
and will contribute to a smooth transition to a
traditional development assistance framework after the
completion of UNMISET’s mandate. The decision to
appoint the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as Resident Representative of the
UNDP and Resident Coordinator of United Nations
agencies has demonstrated its value in practice, and I
should like to acknowledge here the important
contribution
made
by
the
Deputy
Special
Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. UNMISET
itself has encouraged initiatives through the creation of
a science park and science education in cooperation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, through business promotion and
the development of small enterprises in cooperation
with the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, and through focused pilot projects of
direct economic and social benefit in identified rural
areas with the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. I also wish to acknowledge their support and
responsiveness.
The Council can take satisfaction in the
contribution its decisions have made to consolidating
and buttressing the new nation of Timor-Leste, now a
Member of the United Nations. The Council has before
it the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/449),
which provides information on the current situation in

5

S/PV.4744

some detail. Experience shows that nation-building is
the result of unremitting effort and belief in political
values that a country’s leadership and citizens can
bring to bear to the task; partners can play only a
supportive role. The United Nations has played that
role well. The Council must, in due course, take a view
on the optimal form that the Organization’s association
with Timor-Leste should take after UNMISET has
concluded, in the context of intrinsic requirements. The
engagement of the international community in peacebuilding and institution-building will need to continue.
As UNMISET downsizes in preparation for its ultimate
withdrawal, we will be reviewing possible options
through which those continuing needs can be met.
Timor-Leste should proceed on its chosen path
with faith and persistence, reflecting the central
importance of an ethos of governance based on the rule
of law — the judiciary must move swiftly to win public
confidence — personal freedoms and universal
principles of human rights. The United Nations will
continue to be an ally on that journey.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sharma for the information that he shared with the
Security Council this afternoon, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his report.
I now give the floor to Council members. In
doing so, I should like to recommend that statements
be limited to five minutes so that we can hold this
afternoon’s meeting within the planned time frame as
easily as possible.
Ms. Menédez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sharma for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2003/449).
The progress made by Timor-Leste with the
support of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) during its first year is
immense and encouraging. The foundations have been
laid for the development of a State that is democratic,
independent, respectful of human rights and integrated
into the region and that maintains good relations with
Indonesia. However, a long road remains ahead, and
the international community’s assistance continues to
be essential.
Timor-Leste’s public institutions must be
strengthened, and a culture of responsible management
must be developed. The administration, including the
judicial authority, must consist of apolitical and

6

professional officials, chosen in a transparent way on
the basis of their merits. The UNMISET Civilian
Support Group has a fundamental role.
Spain welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to human rights, which has
taken shape in the ratification of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and other fundamental
international treaties in that area. In addition, we salute
the establishment of the Office of the Provedor for
Human Rights and Justice, and we hope that it will
begin to function as soon as possible.
The continued progress in bilateral relations with
Indonesia is very encouraging. Both States, with
international help, must make all the necessary efforts
to comply with their commitment to reaching an
agreement on border demarcation before 30 June, as
well as to establishing a flexible border regime and
facilitating communications for the residents of the
Oecussi enclave.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste will
improve over the long term with the prosecution in
both countries of those charged with having committed
serious crimes in 1999. In that connection, we
acknowledge the important step taken by Indonesia in
bringing the perpetrators of those violations before the
ad hoc Human Rights Tribunal. However, we are
disappointed at the way in which the trials are
proceeding. Therefore, we urge the Indonesian
Government to improve those judicial processes in a
transparent way in order to ensure that justice is done.
At the same time, the reconciliation process in TimorLeste must be completed. The Serious Crimes Unit and
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation, both assisted by UNMISET, have
fundamental roles to play.
Furthermore, we hope that the treaties recently
signed with Australia on energy and maritime
resources help to foster the much-needed economic
development of Timor-Leste. Through the European
Union and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), we shall continue to support
programmes aimed at, inter alia, reducing poverty and
rehabilitating basic infrastructures. In addition, Spain
has included Timor-Leste in its international
cooperation plan, within the framework of assistance
provided to non-governmental organizations that carry
out development assistance plans in Timor-Leste.

S/PV.4744

Resolution 1473 (2003), which we recently
adopted unanimously, envisages an adjustment of
UNMISET’s police and military components. The
National Police of Timor-Leste must prepare itself to
meet its new challenges with professionalism,
responsibility and effectiveness. With regard to the
military component, we support the revised strategy
proposed by the Secretary-General.

areas that will require bilateral support. We also value
the work that has made it possible for the National
Police of Timor-Leste to have 2,530 officers present in
6 of the country’s 13 districts. However, we understand
that the National Police must continue its preparation
in order to take up more difficult threats to security,
especially with respect to civil disturbances and the
handling of the resurgence of armed groups.

In conclusion, I wish to express my country’s
support for the renewal of UNMISET’s mandate for
one more year, until May 2004, so that it can
successfully complete work that has gone well thus far.

We reiterate that resolution 1473 (2003) is a great
contribution in terms of training for the police,
especially when it comes to human rights, the rule of
law, the development of rapid deployment groups and
the maintenance of a greater presence in the districts.
There is no doubt that all this will lead to greater
professionalism, effectiveness and responsibility for
the police force in that country.

Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on the excellent
way in which you have conducted our work during this
month. I would like to express the gratitude of the
delegation of Chile for having convened this meeting
to
consider
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2003/449), dated 21 April, on the situation in
Timor-Leste. We would also like to thank our friend,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.
Last March the Security Council held a public
meeting to comment on the Secretary-General’s special
report, which mentioned serious civil disturbances and
subsequent acts of violence that affected the security
situation in that country. On that occasion, adjustments
were proposed to downsize the presence of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and they were supported by the Council
members through the adoption of resolution 1473
(2003), of 4 April. The resolution supports the proposal
for the adjustment of the downsizing of the police
component, welcomes a revised schedule for the
downsizing of the military component and calls for a
detailed military strategy for the revised schedule.
We also share the view concerning the specific
security situation, and that the solution of those
immediate problems must be seen within a broad
framework in a long-term process that would make it
possible to fully establish a viable, independent State.
We now acknowledge UNMISET’s dedicated
efforts in complying with its mandate in Timor-Leste.
In particular, we note the work done by the Civilian
Support Group, which has trained public servants and
has broadly supported the administration of this new
country. In this context, we urge them to continue
working on developing a strategic plan to identify the

Likewise, after reviewing the military strategies
set out in the report, we feel that they are relevant and
realistic and will make it possible to achieve concrete
progress within the framework of the country’s
security. In this context, we urge UNMISET to
continue to firmly support Falintil-FDTL in order to
help it overcome its current limitations — that is, its
reduced numbers, the lack of presence in the western
sectors of the territory and the need to improve its
mobility by air and by land, among others.
We greatly value the assistance provided by
UNMISET in the area of human rights. We also value
the assistance given through the Serious Crimes Unit in
seeking to clear up the crimes committed in 1999. That
has led to the submission of 60 charges against 247
people. However, we know that the development of this
judicial process will require more external assistance in
order to complete the process. In this respect, we
would like to point out that it is indispensable that
Indonesia’s cooperation be improved in order to
prosecute the accused. We urge the parties to continue
working closely and in a true spirit of cooperation.
Our own experience as a country has taught us
that only with truth and justice will it be possible to
continue building together and to overcome the
difficulties of the past. Likewise, we acknowledge the
need to improve the operation of the judicial system in
Timor-Leste, and we welcome the valuable
contribution made by UNMISET in this area.
The integration efforts by the Government of
Timor-Leste with the States in the region are very
positive. We note its recent joining of the Movement of

7

S/PV.4744

Non-Aligned Countries, as well as its admission into
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific last 30 April. We greatly appreciate the
agreements on oil resources signed with Australia in
March and the beginning of this month. This is
particularly important, because we know that in order
to achieve true stability Timor-Leste requires economic
development, which will enable it to overcome poverty,
generate jobs, improve the population’s well-being and
achieve greater socio-economic success.
We share the view that, although very important
progress has been made, the assistance of the
international community is crucial in order to take up
yet-unresolved complex problems. In this context, we
agree that it is advisable to extend UNMISET’s
mandate for another year — that is, until 20 May 2004.
That mandate should be established with clear and
specific tasks in order to ensure a proper and stable
transition for the well-being of the people of TimorLeste.
Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste and to his team. We would also like to
express our gratitude and appreciation for the efforts
made by the Government of Timor-Leste, led by
President Xanana Gusmão and the valuable support
provided by countries of the region to this country,
which is taking its first steps as an independent nation.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to thank Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Timor-Leste and head of mission, for
introducing the report under consideration and for the
useful information he has given us.
My delegation, in agreeing to the establishment
of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), had clearly pointed out that developments
in the situation and experience in the field would be
highly instructive for us regarding possible additional
action by the international community. Consideration
of the special report of the Secretary-General of 10
March allowed us to voice our concern regarding the
difficulties and threats which continue to block
security, stability and the development of Timor-Leste.
The adoption of resolution 1473 (2003) and the
submission of the report under consideration thus are
results of the Council’s concern and willingness to take

8

specific measures to avoid jeopardizing gains that have
been achieved barely one year after independence.
In considering the report before us, my delegation
is still concerned about the difficulties linked to the
strengthening of political, administrative, security and
judicial institutions. However, we appreciate the efforts
made by the authorities to ensure a broad diversity of
views in political debate, as well as in the promotion of
administration and justice in the service of all.
We are gratified by positive developments in the
relationship between Timor-Leste and its neighbours,
in particular Indonesia, and urge them to give pride of
place to dialogue and cooperation for peace, security
and the stability of the region. We encourage the
authorities of Timor-Leste to pursue their initiatives at
integration in international, regional and subregional
organizations and institutions. Moreover, we hail the
commendable contribution of the United Nations to
carrying out the objectives set down in the plan for the
implementation of UNMISET’s mandate, and we
appreciate consultations that have taken place with the
Government, the population of Timor-Leste and the
donors to work for the implementation of these goals.
We are encouraged by the fact that the strategic
plan described in paragraph 16 of the report is being
elaborated; we hope that it will make it possible
effectively to facilitate the progressive replacement of
civil advisers with nationals.
My delegation notes that implementation of
Programme I, on stability, democracy and justice,
continues to be hampered by several factors the
resolution of which requires bilateral and multilateral
assistance. We support the creation of the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice and proposals
aimed at strengthening justice.
In addition, we believe that Programme II, on
internal security and law enforcement, requires more
thorough training of the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to enable it better to shoulder the various
responsibilities assigned to it. We welcome the actions
undertaken by the Government in cooperation with the
United Nations and the donor community to strengthen
the institutional capacity of the PNTL.
My delegation welcomes the support that the
military component of UNMISET is continuing to
provide for the strengthening of the external security
and the territorial integrity of Timor-Leste, under

S/PV.4744

Programme III, on external security and border control.
We share the observations and recommendations of the
Secretary-General on this issue, in particular his
assessment that international military capability will be
essential in the coming months to promote security in
the area of the Tactical Coordination Line and to
provide a short-term response to the threats posed by
armed groups.
With respect to the role of the United Nations, my
delegation deplores the slow pace of economic activity,
which has been hindered mainly by the continued
reduction of the international presence and by the still
relatively unpredictable security situation. We
encourage the continuation of actions by UNMISET,
the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations, the World Bank and Member States, in
cooperation with civil society and the private sector, to
strengthen economic activity.
In order to meet the numerous challenges
intrinsic to laying the foundations of a viable State in
Timor-Leste, the commitment of the international
community
is
completely
indispensable
in
complementing the efforts made by the people of
Timor-Leste themselves. We especially call on donors
to support the fundamental sectors, including those of
defence, police, administration and justice. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the establishment of peace,
security and stability, which are fundamental to a
country’s sustainable development.
My delegation hopes that the General Assembly
will consider positively the revised draft budget of
UNMISET for the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004,
which will be submitted to the Assembly during its
fifty-eighth session.
My delegation supports the observations and
recommendations made by the Secretary-General and
the proposal to renew UNMISET’s mandate for an
additional year ending 20 May 2004 so that actions
begun can be successfully completed.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to renew
its full support for the efforts made by UNMISET,
under the dynamic leadership of Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, for the strengthening of internal stability and
the development of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his 21 April report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2003/449) and thank his

Special Representative for that country, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, whom I welcome here at the Council table. I
thank him for his work at the head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).
After reading the Secretary-General’s report, we
are more convinced than ever that the Council must
remain engaged in the situation in Timor-Leste.
Bulgaria agrees with the report’s conclusion that in
adopting resolution 1473 (2003), the Council showed
that it was determined to provide the support required
for the long-term success of Timor-Leste.
My delegation hopes that modifications to
UNMISET’s withdrawal strategy will ensure a more
effective and more rapid training of the National Police
of East Timor. However, we must point out that the
stability and security of East Timor must be considered
within a broader context. The establishment of an
effective judicial system, the development of local
legislation in accordance with international human
rights standards, the judicial process for serious crimes
committed in 1999, the establishment of a nonpoliticized administration and the reintegration into
society of former combatants are among the necessary
priorities enabling the strengthening of State
institutions, stability and democratic development in
the young country.
Bulgaria fully appreciates the efforts of President
Xanana Gusmão to promote a national dialogue and to
set up commissions to identify former combatants and
to integrate them into the society of Timor-Leste.
Bulgaria also welcomes the Government of
Timor-Leste’s ratification of six core international
human rights treaties and four optional protocols.
Bulgaria supports the appeal of the Secretary-General
to States in whose territory are found individuals
accused of committing serious crimes in Timor-Leste
in 1999 to help bring those individuals to justice as
quickly as possible.
We call upon the Governments of Indonesia and
Timor-Leste to spare no efforts to support the work of
the technical group for demarcation and regulation of
the border, as bilateral relations between the two
neighbouring countries are of great importance for the
future of the young State of Timor-Leste.
The bilateral and multilateral support of the
international community is, of course, crucial to the

9

S/PV.4744

economic and social development of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Sharma has spoken in an interesting way of the
economic prospects for Timor-Leste and of the
importance of the continued commitment of the
international community. UNMISET and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) have an
important role to play in developing a strategic plan
outlining the areas in which bilateral assistance is
essential. As I said earlier, Bulgaria is currently
preparing a programme to assist the nascent armed
forces of Timor-Leste with military equipment.
To conclude, I would like to say that my
delegation
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the mandate of UNMISET be
renewed. I call the attention of Council members to the
importance of continued commitment from the
international community and the donor community to
this young country with a nascent democracy.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Cameroon would like to thank and
congratulate the Secretary-General for his report of 21
April 2003 on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2003/449).
My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma and is grateful for
the clear, concise and thorough briefing that he has
given the Council on the situation in Timor-Leste.
We are closely following the developments taking
place in that young State, which despite some
setbacks — some of which were serious — remains an
example of success for United Nations action in the
areas of peacekeeping, security and post-conflict
management. It is gratifying to note that, after the
events that took place in Dili and the Ermera District in
December and January 2002, which gave us cause to
fear the worst, the situation has returned to normality.
Given the events described in the report before
us, political and administrative problems, internal and
external security and the reconstruction and financing
of the economy are all issues that require the vigilance,
commitment and support of the United Nations and the
international community.
By declaring 2003 as the Year of Administrative
Restructuring and Justice, the Government of
Timor-Leste has clearly charted the course the
followed. The strengthening of human and institutional
capacity, particularly in the area of administration and

10

justice, is the most urgent challenge facing the
Timorese authorities.
Minister Ramos-Horta was fully justified last
week in deploring the chronic lack of resources for
financing employment and essential public services. He
forcefully emphasized that unemployment and a weak
administrative and judicial infrastructure were at the
root of the main problems currently faced by
Timor-Leste.
It is clear that the sharp decline in the civilian
component of UNMISET has further highlighted the
institutional and personnel needs of the country. The
Government’s recruitment and training campaign must
therefore be encouraged. In this regard the
Administration should be called on to demonstrate its
transparency and objectivity with a view to ensuring
that it retains the apolitical character that is so
necessary.
The lack of resources and the weakness of the
judicial structure, which is very inadequately staffed —
inadequate in terms of quantity and quality — are
cause for real concern in a country in which the
citizens need to be reassured on issues of justice. The
report states that that drastic lack of personnel has been
reflected in delays in the administration of justice,
prolonged periods of pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding, with all the problems that they involve.
I would like to echo the concerns expressed by
human rights organizations with regard to the
management of the file of serious crimes perpetrated in
1999, in both Timor-Leste and Indonesia. It is
imperative that both countries strengthen their
cooperation on this issue with a view to resolving it, as
it is of great importance for the citizens of Timor-Leste
as well as for the international community.
The Special Representative and head of
UNMISET, and his office in Jakarta, should make
further efforts in particular to induce Indonesia to send
more positive signals in two important areas: the
extradition to Timor-Leste of persons against whom
there are charges, and the expansion, at the national
level, of the field of action of the relevant ad hoc
tribunal. Furthermore, the Security Council should
begin to give some thought to how to ensure follow-up
of this very important issue when UNMISET’s mandate
ends next year.

S/PV.4744

With regard to internal and external security, my
country reiterates its support for the approach of
UNMISET and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations enshrined by the Council in resolution 1473
(2003).
We therefore subscribe to all of the report’s
proposals in this area, and we would like in particular
to encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue to cooperate with Indonesia with a view to
better discharging its new security responsibilities in
the area of the Tactical Coordination Line.
The political and institutional stability of TimorLeste will depend upon the rapid economic and social
development of the country. Combating poverty must
therefore be the highest priority, not only for the
Government of Timor-Leste but for the United Nations
and the international community. To that end, the socalled Transition Support Programme should be better
supported by the donor community.
Certain recent developments are cause for
optimism. One such is the ratification of the Timor Sea
Treaty, which opens the way for the exploitation of gas
and oil, guaranteeing significant revenue for TimorLeste, which should serve as an impetus for economic
growth. This is also true of the implementation, with
the support of the United Nations Development
Programme, of the Recovery, Employment and
Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants
and
Communities in Timor-Leste (RESPECT), which is
designed to ensure the reintegration of former
combatants, as well as to provide assistance for
vulnerable segments of the population.
While the real political, economic and social
difficulties facing this young democracy cannot be
hidden, there are good reasons for optimism regarding
its future, as long as the United Nations, the financial
institutions and bilateral partners continue to step up
their support for the country. Cameroon therefore
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the mandate of UNMISET be renewed for one
year.
I should like in conclusion to express my
country’s appreciation for all the elements of
UNMISET and to the head of the Mission, Ambassador
Sharma, for the outstanding work that they, together
with the young Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
have accomplished since 20 May 2002. They have been
able to mobilize their many relationships and contacts

in the international economic and financial field in the
service of the people of that country.
Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his report, as well as Ambassador Sharma, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.
The general situation in East Timor is
encouraging. Under the leadership of the Government
of Timor-Leste, and with the active support of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), the people of Timor-Leste have, since
independence, been pursuing the task of nationbuilding in all its aspects in a steady and orderly
manner. The administrative and judicial systems are
gradually moving towards institutionalization. The
national defence force and the National Police have
been intensifying their preparations for fulfilling their
responsibilities for defending national peace and
stability.
Timor-Leste is integrating itself into the
international community. It has continued to develop
its relations with Indonesia and other countries in the
region.
We are pleased to see what has been achieved by
the Timorese Government and people. However, given
the situation in the country, we cannot let our guard
down. Not long ago, following a series of armed and
violent incidents, the security situation deteriorated,
giving rise to concern on the part of the international
community and of the Security Council. For that
reason, the Council adopted resolution 1473 (2003) and
adjusted UNMISET’s downsizing plan.
As the Secretary-General
paragraph 64 of his report,

pointed

out

in

“By adopting resolution 1473 (2003), the
Security Council showed that it remains
determined to provide the support required for the
long-term success of Timor-Leste.”
We have noted the considerable efforts deployed
by UNMISET in helping Timor-Leste to enhance its
public administration capacities and to finalize the
establishment of its judicial system. It has made
progress in dealing with the threat posed by armed
groups and has gradually created conditions for the
national defence force and National Police to take over
fully defence and policing matters.

11

S/PV.4744

The Chinese delegation commends UNMISET
and Ambassador Sharma for their achievements in
helping the Government to carry out its work. We
endorse the Secretary-General’s recommendation,
contained in his report, to extend UNMISET’s
mandate.
Timor-Leste continues to confront various
difficulties and challenges in its endeavours to ensure
national security and stability and in promoting
economic and social development. We endorse the
Secretary-General’s observation that nation-building
efforts in Timor-Leste will require the assistance of the
international community, in particular the donor
countries, the United Nations system and international
financial institutions.
China will, as always, lend its strong support to
the Timorese people in their efforts to maintain
national stability and to build their country, and will
continue to support the work of Ambassador Sharma
and of UNMISET. China will continue to provide
assistance to the extent of its capabilities.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
would like at the outset to thank you for convening this
meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2003/449), as well as the briefing presented to us
this afternoon by our good friend Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma. I should like to reiterate our full
confidence in the outstanding work he is doing; I am
sure that this is what Timor-Leste and its people
deserve.
We welcome the significant progress achieved in
several areas as regards the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1473 (2003). I wish to join previous
speakers in expressing appreciation for the positive
changes that have taken place, particularly in the field
of security.
We are particularly pleased at the progress made
in the field of public administration, in the functioning
of Timor-Leste’s justice system, in the conduct of
investigations of serious crimes and in the role of the
National Police. We wish to express our appreciation
for the crucial role played by the advisers in the
UNMISET Civilian Support Group in transferring
knowledge and skills to Timor-Leste counterparts,

12

which are important in providing support for the
process of achieving stability in Timor-Leste.
We would like to underline the continuing efforts
of the Timorese Government to improve the situation
with regard to peace and stability in the country by
engaging in a broad political debate throughout all
sectors of Timorese society. The communities
themselves have a critical responsibility in this regard.
Resolution 1473 (2003), adopted by the Security
Council on 4 April 2003, requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide a detailed military strategy for the
revised schedule for the downsizing of the military
component of UNMISET. My delegation takes note of
the specific measures for the adjustment strategy
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report. We
believe that such a strategy provides an appropriate
baseline for the full and effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1473 (2003).
We support the continuing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, namely in the
following areas: the provision of additional training
capacities in key areas such as public administration
and justice; the strengthening of human rights and the
rule of law; and a monitoring and advisory presence in
districts where policing authority has been handed over
to the Timor-Leste Police Force.
It is important that UNMISET, in order to deal
with the limitations of Timor-Leste’s police
capabilities, address the recent security incidents,
which made clear the fact that law enforcement will
continue to be a real challenge for the country which
will require vigorous and sustained efforts.
My delegation supports the extension of
UNMISET’s mandate for a further year, until 20 May
2004, and, in this context, we deem extremely
important the additional commitment that the
international community needs to make towards TimorLeste. This is vital if we want to safeguard the great
political and human investment made so far in this
country in the context of this peace process, which we
can consider a joint success story for the people of
Timor-Leste and the international community.
We join the appeal by the Secretary-General for
bilateral support to supplement the efforts of
UNMISET in order to guarantee a sustainable and
efficient administration and a viable economy. The
relevant agencies of the United Nations must therefore

S/PV.4744

closely coordinate their efforts with those of the
international community of donors in order to
consolidate peace in Timor-Leste.

General’s recommendation that the mandate of
UNMISET be extended for a further year, until 20 May
2004.

In conclusion, we welcome the increasing
cooperation between the authorities of Timor-Leste and
of Indonesia. This spirit of cooperation between both
countries was demonstrated by the discussions on
border demarcation and in investigations of serious
crimes. We encourage Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
develop friendly and neighbourly relations, in order to
strengthen security in the region.

The developments in the political situation in
Timor-Leste, as described in the report, reflect
developments at all levels, in particular those in its
relationship with Indonesia, which is based on the
political commitment of the two parties. It deserves our
support and admiration. We hope that these positive
developments will continue, leading to the settlement
of all outstanding issues between the two parties.

Finally, we reiterate our confidence and
friendship to the Government and to the fraternal
people of Timor-Leste.

Finally, I should like to reiterate the importance
of providing the financial resources necessary to ensure
the economic and political development of
Timor-Leste. Such resources will be based on the
generosity of the donors. We believe that the country
status report on the Millennium Development Goals
that Timor-Leste is to submit to the United Nations
during its celebration of independence in May will
allow the international community and the donor
community to continue to help that country consolidate
progress and development.

Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to thank the SecretaryGeneral most sincerely for having submitted his report
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET).
We welcome Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNMISET. We thank him for having introduced and
exhaustively summarized the report. We also welcome
the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste to the
United Nations.
The essential role of the international community
in ensuring independence and peace in Timor-Leste
makes the Security Council’s responsibility a dual and
particularly onerous one. The efforts to consolidate
Timor-Leste’s independence demonstrate that those
made to ensure security, development and progress
there, despite all the obstacles, are indeed succeeding.
The Secretary-General’s report of 3 March
highlighted those obstacles, in particular a series of
incidents affecting security that were most alarming
and which led to adjustments to the downsizing plan
for UNMISET to allow the Mission to accomplish its
mandated tasks within this changed environment. The
Security Council assumed its responsibilities in
unanimously adopting resolution 1473 (2003), by
which it established measures to adjust the downsizing
of the Mission’s police component and supported a
revised schedule for the downsizing of the military
component. In so doing, the Council showed its resolve
to continue to provide all necessary assistance for the
success and long-term development of Timor-Leste.
My delegation therefore supports the Secretary-

Mrs. D’Achon (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, for
introducing the Secretary-General’s report.
The report is encouraging. It takes note of
progress achieved by the Timor-Leste authorities in
their gradual assumption of police and military
competencies. It also emphasizes the positive
developments in Timor-Leste’s political institutions
and context, as well as the noticeable improvement in
its relations with Indonesia. This is clearly to be
welcomed. My delegation hopes that the United
Nations will continue to support the efforts of those
two countries to stabilize their relationship, inter alia,
in cooperating on investigations into the crimes
perpetrated in 1999.
The remaining challenges, however, are
numerous. The strengthening of the capacities of the
police, as emphasized by Ambassador Sharma, is a
priority for the future, as it will determine the enduring
stability of Timor-Leste. The training of security
groups in villages seems in this respect to be an
interesting initiative. The police and the army will,
inter alia, have to learn to work together. Finally, the

13

S/PV.4744

judicial sector remains insufficiently developed, thus
hampering the administration of justice.
Regarding the Secretary-General’s recommendations,
my delegation supports the military strategy and the
schedule for a reasonable downsizing of troops
presented in the report, as well as an extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) for a further year.
The report provides clarifications regarding the
geographical deployment of police and military
personnel. I should like to ask the Special
Representative, however, for further clarifications with
respect to the specific division of competencies in
internal security. I would ask him in particular to
define the conditions for the Government of
Timor-Leste’s conscription for its peacekeeping force
in the maintenance of order.
In conclusion, I wish to look to the future. The
agreed timetable provides for a withdrawal of
UNMISET in May 2004. As we approach that date, the
issue of the modalities of the international
community’s involvement beyond the Mission’s
mandate will impose itself with increasing urgency. If
we wish to ensure Timor-Leste’s development, it is
obvious that bilateral and multilateral donors, as well
as the actors of the United Nations system, will have to
remain present in some form or another and work
together. As the Secretary-General says in his report,
reflection on this subject is already under way. That
seems to us to be both useful and necessary in better
coordinating the efforts of all those playing a role in
the field.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to welcome
Ambassador Sharma to the Council and thank him for
his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Timor-Leste.
While we are happy to note significant progress
made by Timor-Leste in certain key areas, we should
also remain mindful of the serious challenges involved.
This year did not begin very auspiciously for
Timor-Leste, marred as it was by a series of
disturbances. However, we are glad to note that the
situation has improved since then. The internal security
situation, as the Secretary-General’s report indicates, is
but one of many problems which that newly
independent country currently faces.

14

In our view, the biggest challenge before
Timor-Leste is its economic future. The SecretaryGeneral’s report points out that “Timor-Leste remains
the poorest country in South-east Asia” (S/2003/449,
para. 52). It therefore needs continued and sustained
assistance from the international community to
promote economic development.
Pakistan welcomes the signing of the Timor Sea
Treaty and the International Unitisation Agreement on
the Greater Sunrise field, which will allow Timor-Leste
to take advantage of significant oil and gas revenues.
We also welcome Timor-Leste’s admission, last Friday,
to the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific as another step in the right direction.
Nevertheless, much more help is needed immediately
to allow this country, at least economically, to stand on
its own feet.
International assistance is required also in the
area of security. We are concerned to learn, through the
Secretary-General’s report, that to date Timor-Leste
has not been able to make further enhancements to
defence and security through bilateral arrangements.
Similarly, the report also mentions shortfalls and
resource constraints on matters relating to the internal
security and justice sectors. The international
community must step in to fill the gap.
The Security Council took the correct decision
earlier this month when it unanimously adopted
resolution 1473 (2003). Through that resolution, the
drawdown of UNMISET was frozen and the necessary
adjustments to its composition were made. That
enabled UNMISET to appropriately address the
internal security challenges prevailing at the time as
well as to build the capacity of the National Police of
Timor-Leste to effectively respond to such situations.
We hope the Council can maintain this kind of political
flexibility and operational decisiveness in the future.
Needless to say, Pakistan fully supports the extension
of the mandate of UNMISET for another 12-month
period. As Pakistan has often repeated, there must be
no exit in any peacekeeping mission without
completing the task.
Pakistan believes that the development of close
and friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is of utmost importance. Indeed, this is in the
interest of both countries and the region as a whole. We
welcome in this regard the commitment by the
Government of Timor-Leste to work with the

S/PV.4744

Indonesian authorities on various issues, especially
border security and control matters. We call on both
sides to work together to resolve any outstanding
problems, including transitional justice issues, and to
strengthen regional cooperation. Such cooperation can
be an example for other regions as well.
A lot has been achieved in Timor-Leste but still
more work is required to consolidate the gains made
thus far. The United Nations and the international
community must continue to utilize all necessary
means in that regard. Indeed, Timor-Leste is a success
story for the United Nations for more than one reason.
It is also an example of how the principle of selfdetermination was successfully implemented by the
United Nations. There are other parts of the world,
especially Jammu and Kashmir, that await the exercise
of the right of self-determination promised to them by
the Security Council.
Mr. Komizin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for
his briefing on the most recent events in Timor-Leste
and also for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/449), which objectively
considers the work done by the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) during the
reporting period in implementing its mandate, and
which accurately describes the problems of the
establishment of statehood for Timor-Leste.
We share concern regarding a certain
exacerbation of the security situation in Timor-Leste.
The serious civil disorder provoked by extremists in
Dili last December and the recent stepping up of
diversionary activities of armed groups and former
militia members are extremely alarming. In this
situation, UNMISET personnel and the Timor-Leste
authorities must intensify their joint efforts to
neutralize such threats. It is our hope that the revised
programme and timetable approved by the Security
Council for the drawdown of the police and military
components of the Mission will enable the Mission,
before the transfer of full responsibility for the
maintenance of security to the national army and
police, to more effectively provide conditions that
would rule out destabilization of the young State and
the undermining of its independence.
Extremely important for the establishment of a
viable, independent State is the establishment and the

strengthening of a national army and the National
Police of Timor-Leste. Here we welcome UNMISET’s
efforts to prepare and train the military and police
forces of the country. We also welcome the expansion
of the area of responsibility of the army and police
forces now being formed in Timor-Leste. This is taking
place according to schedule and without serious
complications. We take note of the progress of the
establishment of a Timor-Leste State administration. A
good deal of credit must go to the UNMISET Civilian
Support Group, as its staff members are undertaking
significant efforts to share knowledge and experience
with their Timorese colleagues and are giving effective
assistance to the Government in ensuring the
functioning of ministries and agencies.
Assistance for the social and economic
development of Timor-Leste from multilateral and
bilateral donors is vital for the long-term stability of
the country. Here, the Russian Federation emphasizes
the need for the intensified donor support for the
Government of Timor-Leste in its efforts to achieve the
fundamental objectives of the National Development
Plan.
We welcome the positive changes in the
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia,
particularly regarding the important question of
demarcation and regulation of the common border. The
establishment and maintenance of good-neighbourly,
mutually beneficial relations with neighbouring
countries is a prerequisite for the successful
establishment and development of the young State of
Timor-Leste. We support the extension of the
UNMISET mandate for one more year, until 20 May
2004.
In conclusion, we would like to wish the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, and all the personnel of UNMISET further
success in implementing their mandate.
Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sharma, for his report. The United States
is pleased that the predicted increase in violence in
Timor-Leste has not materialized. We applaud the
helpful role played by Indonesia. We encourage
Timor-Leste and Indonesia to finalize their border by
the targeted date.
We strongly support the adjustments to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)

15

S/PV.4744

approved by the Security Council, including
strengthening the capacity of the Timor-Leste police
force. The liquidation task force, under Special
Representative Sharma, demonstrates good planning.
We support the final 12-month extension for
UNMISET.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I should like to join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Timor-Leste
(S/2003/449) and to thank Ambassador Sharma and his
staff for the excellent work that they have done thus
far. I should also like to pay tribute to the people of
Timor-Leste and their representatives for their
continuous successful endeavours as they build up their
young democracy.
Germany appreciates the increased stabilization
of the security environment in Timor-Leste. In that
regard, we welcome the downsizing of the personnel of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1473 (2003), and the strengthening of the
National Police, as well as the idea of a common
border patrol between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.
Planning a gradual transfer of policing authority
to the Timor-Leste police force, as envisaged in
resolution 1473 (2003), remains one of our main
targets in paving the way for a democratic Timor-Leste,
independent of international assistance. Germany
therefore welcomes the handing over of routine police
tasks to the Timorese police as well as the
enhancement of its capabilities to deal with crowd
control and with the challenges potentially posed by
armed groups. We encourage the parties to continue the
process of smooth but steady transfer of
responsibilities. The internationally formed police
unit — as envisaged by resolution 1473 (2003) — will
be used to address urgent needs alongside the
competences already gained by the police of TimorLeste so that the police force has adequate time to
develop.
We also support the actors involved in
strengthening the country’s political and administrative
institutions in order to proceed with the establishment
of a viable independent State. In that regard, we should
like to point to the importance of an adequate judicial
system, and we urge focus on that issue in order to
guarantee free and fair trials and to promote the rule of
law as an essential element of the new democracy.

16

Having listened attentively to the Special
Representative, I believe that the major task clearly
remains the country’s economic and social
development. Every possible effort is needed to
achieve an upturn in the economy in order to promote
the population’s economic and social well-being — an
important prerequisite for the future political stability
of the country. Here, the continued assistance of the
international community remains essential.
To accomplish these remaining tasks, we
therefore fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
proposal to extend UNMISET’s mandate for another
year. We shall continue to promote further bilateral
support alongside and after the Mission's contribution.
The story of Timor-Leste is our common success story
and therefore deserves our common support.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Our thanks to
Mr. Sharma, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and his team for all their work.
Timor-Leste’s international environment is
important to its future, and the United Kingdom
encourages Indonesia and Timor-Leste to continue
working together towards agreement on border
delineation by the 30 June 2003 deadline. That target
has been described by Ambassador Sharma as
“challenging”.
The economic and social prospects of the country
are also clearly crucial. Timor-Leste’s economic future
looks brighter with the ratification of the Timor Sea
Treaty and its potential revenue streams. But no less
important is the development of the quality of
government in Timor-Leste itself.
We salute the progress made so far by the
Government of Timor-Leste, but I should like to focus
my remarks on the justice and police and security
sectors. We welcome the publication of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) report on
the justice sector. We see a pressing need to identify
priorities for future UNDP assistance to the judicial
system and to decide on next steps in preparation of the
three- to five-year technical assistance programme. So
we look forward to early finalization of the justice
sector support programme, and we would welcome
Special Representative Sharma’s giving us an
indication of its expected completion date.
With regard to the police, we welcome Timorese
ownership of the process of developing the country’s

S/PV.4744

police force and the role of Prime Minister Alkatiri and
of other senior ministers at the police workshop this
month. We hope that a resolution of all outstanding
issues can be achieved at the next workshop, in June.
We encourage full implementation of the
recommendations in the joint assessment mission
report, and we urge careful consideration of the
sustainability of the Timorese rapid deployment group
and of other specialist police groups, given the finite
budget available.
We
support
the
Secretary-General's
recommendation of increased cooperation between the
Timorese police and defence forces, and we encourage
the adoption of clear definitions of responsibility for
both organizations. We believe that the formation of
unofficial village-based security groups could seriously
undermine, rather than help, the security situation. We
urge that they be disbanded.
The United Kingdom believes that there is now a
need to focus UNMISET policing efforts on capacitybuilding in the Timorese police — a point made by
earlier speakers — and we believe that donors must
remain receptive to long-term support of the policing
sector. My Government is ready to do its part in that
respect.
The United Kingdom supports the proposed
revised military strategy and the extension of
UNMISET’s mandate for 12 months. It will be
important for UNMISET to keep up the momentum so
that the Mission may indeed conclude successfully in
2004.
Finally, the United Kingdom recognizes that,
even after UNMISET has concluded its mandate, the
international donor community will have to provide
much support to Timor-Leste. The United Kingdom
will play its part in that and urges other donors to do
likewise. There must be no hiatus in the progress being
made with the international community’s support in
Timor-Leste when UNMISET closes. So we very much
agree with Special Representative Sharma that the
Council must begin to think through with UNMISET
the next stage in Timor-Leste's development so that the
transition is smooth. We look forward to Ambassador
Sharma's promised report and proposals to the Security
Council on those issues.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
take the floor in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.
My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Sharma,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, and the Secretary-General himself for the
information provided to the Security Council and for
the report before us (S/2003/449). The report relates
the positive development of the situation in TimorLeste but also reminds the international community and
the Council that we must remain attentive to
developments in the situation on the ground.
On 4 April, Mexico supported the adoption of
resolution 1473 (2003), which calls for an adjustment
of the downsizing of the military and police
components of UNMISET and reaffirms the Security
Council’s commitment to continue supporting security
and stability efforts in Timor-Leste.
United Nations reconstruction efforts in TimorLeste provide us with valuable lessons and make it
possible to draw conclusions and experiences that
could be used in other situations requiring the building
of a new State or support for rebuilding institutions.
As we have seen in the case of Timor-Leste, the
international community’s determination to support the
building of a State is not sufficient if it is not
accompanied by the necessary internal commitment on
the part of all political forces and sectors of society.
For this reason, the Government of Mexico welcomes
the initiative undertaken on 25 January by President
Gusmão to carry out a national dialogue with the
various political forces in the country. We believe that
it is only through dialogue and understanding that we
can lay solid foundations for a true democratic and
inclusive society in Timor-Leste. Likewise, friendly
and good-neighbourly relations are paramount.
Globalization and interdependence mean that a
country’s development is closely linked to that of its
neighbours. Thus, Mexico welcomes and supports the
efforts made by Indonesia and by Australia to achieve
border demarcation and regulation agreements,
including commercial operations.
The Government of Mexico would like to express
its gratitude to Mr. Sharma and to his team for the
progress made thus far in discharging the mandate
entrusted to them. This has led to the development of
the ability of the Government and people of

17

S/PV.4744

Timor-Leste to manage their own destiny. It is
necessary to continue to work to remove shortcomings
and to strengthen national capabilities. United Nations
participation in this process is essential. The strategic
plan that is being developed by the Government of
Timor-Leste and by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is a step in that direction.
Additional efforts will be required to strengthen
the justice system. A greater number of trained judges
and greater access to courts for the entire population
are steps that could be taken to improve the situation in
the immediate future. Reconciliation and peace depend
to a large degree on a transparent and effective justice
system.
Timor-Leste also requires continual strengthening
of its institutional processes. Thus, Mexico joins in the
Secretary-General’s appeal to the international donor
community to continue supporting programmes for
strengthening the National Police and the judicial
system.
As for internal security, the report reflects, as did
resolution 1473 (2003), the importance of developing
national capabilities and proper preparation for the
defence forces and for the National Police. Mexico
stresses the importance of training police in the area of
human rights. In building a State, the population’s
confidence in law enforcement institutions is vital. The
promulgation of a code of conduct for the police has
thus been an important measure in that direction.

our gratitude to the civilian, military and police
components of UNMISET, who have done excellent
work in Timor-Leste. I would ask Ambassador Sharma
to convey Mexico’s greetings and its appreciation for
the work that his team has carried out.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker is the representative of TimorLeste. I welcome him and give him the floor.
Mr.
Guterres
(Timor-Leste):
Sir,
my
Government congratulates you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We thank
you and the other members of the Council for
convening this open meeting and for the opportunity to
speak today.
My delegation acknowledges the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, whose leadership and advice
have been invaluable at every level.
Timor-Leste would like to commend the
Secretary-General on his comprehensive report
(S/2003/449) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET). We thank him for his
continued commitment to ensuring that the intent and
goals of the relevant Security Council resolutions are
accomplished.

As for external security and border control,
proper coordination between the United Nations forces
and the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia is
crucial. We urge both countries to continue
strengthening their cooperation in those areas.

Timor-Leste continues to appreciate the wisdom
that Security Council members showed in having
resolution 1410 (2002) provide for a constant
reassessment of security needs. Accordingly, we thank
all members for their unanimous decision last month on
resolution 1473 (2003), which adjusted the downsizing
schedule.

On previous occasions, Mexico has referred to
the importance of assisting with the economic and
social development of Timor-Leste, as a fundamental
element of peace-building. My country therefore views
as highly positive the report’s information on the work
of United Nations agencies and programmes for
infrastructure rehabilitation and national development.

The violence of December of last year and the
terrorist activities in the border area in January of this
year created some fears about future security. However,
the firm and transparent response by the United
Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste has
provided reassurance and has reasserted confidence and
stability.

With a view to reaffirming its commitment to
Timor-Leste, Mexico supports the proposal of the
Secretary-General to extend the UNMISET mandate
for another year, until 20 May 2004.

The mission of UNMISET has been and
continues to be effective. Much progress has been
made in the capacity-building of the Timorese police
and military. In that regard, we would like to say at the
outset that Timor-Leste fully endorses the SecretaryGeneral's present recommendation that the mandate of

On behalf of the Government and people of
Mexico, I would like to join the others in expressing

18

S/PV.4744

UNMISET be extended for a further year, until 20 May
2004.
We continue to strive for responsible governance
and the furtherance of democratic institutions and
traditions of pluralism that are necessary for a secure
and stable democracy. On 16 April 2003, Timor-Leste
deposited with the Secretary-General its instruments of
accession to seven multilateral treaties or protocols
relating to human rights. Our Parliament has also
ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons plus other treaties concerning weapons of
mass destruction, the instruments of ratification of all
of which will be deposited in the coming days.
The recent appointment of the President of the
Appeals Court by President Gusmão was a step
forward in the strengthening of our justice sector. The
Government is fully committed to building a robust and
independent judiciary. However, this sector continues
to require support from the international community.
The work of the Serious Crimes Unit continues
without any interference from other institutions. The
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
continues its work and expects to complete its duties
next year.
The Government recognizes that a stable political
and social environment cannot be sustained without
addressing the basic needs of our people. In less than a
year, the Government, with help from the international
community, has had to address decisively many
challenges in the sectors of human development,
natural resources and the environment, infrastructure
and private sector development, defence and security,
and regional development and poverty reduction.
We have inherited a country with a per capita
income of less than $400, an infant mortality rate of 80
to 145 per 1,000 live births, a maternal mortality rate
of 400 to 800 per 100,000 live births, and a 20 per cent
unemployment rate. It is a country in which 80 per cent
of infrastructure was destroyed in September 1999.
While the development of human resources is a
great investment for the medium and long terms,
efforts are also being made in the areas of agriculture,
fisheries and tourism. The majority of the Timorese
live in rural areas.
The agriculture sector represents approximately
21 per cent of the gross domestic product. It employs
approximately 74 per cent of the labour force, but it

has the lowest productivity rate in the region. The
Ministry of Agriculture, with the help of various
countries, has focused its attention on improving the
irrigation system and providing help in reducing food
insecurity, which affects 20 per cent of the rural
population, and has taken the initial steps to create
conditions for the transition from subsistence to exportand industry-oriented agriculture and fisheries.
Timor-Leste shares the Secretary-General’s
appeal for full support from the international
community. As his report has emphasized, the role of
bilateral contributions and other assistance will
continue to be of great importance. For example,
Timor-Leste deems crucial the provision of the full
number of 228 development advisers. It is critical that
the pace of capacity-building be maintained.
As noted in the report, Falintil-FDTL is indeed
making steady progress. By the end of this year, two
infantry battalions will be operational. But the
provision of decent infrastructure to those battalions
remains to be fully achieved, and further bilateral
cooperation in those areas continues to be most
welcome.
In addition to focusing on our internal
development, we are committed to engagements with
our neighbours and the international community. We
hope that Timor-Leste will soon be admitted to the
Association of South-East Asian Nations as an
observer. Our relations with Indonesia and Australia
are encouraging. We recently signed the Timor Sea
Treaty with Australia, which will bring economic
benefits to our people. Discussions on recognized
international borders at sea and on land will continue.
We have had significant progress with Indonesia, and
we look forward to completing negotiations by 30 June
of this year. We expect that the next official visit by
Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri to Indonesia will bring
new impetus to our cooperation.
We will continue to establish diplomatic relations
with countries of the United Nations family. We hope
that our recent inclusion in the United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific will bring a new dynamism to economic
cooperation. As our bilateral and multilateral relations
continue to develop, we appeal to the donor community
to remain engaged in furthering the building of our
nascent democracy.

19

S/PV.4744

On 16 April 2003, Timor-Leste deposited with
the Secretary-General ratifications of seven multilateral
treaties and protocols relating to human rights.
We appreciate the prudence the Council has
shown in dealing with the Timor-Leste situation, and
we would like to say once again that Timor-Leste fully
endorses the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the mandate of UNMISET be extended for a further
year, to 20 May 2004.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): I had hoped to make the
shortest intervention this afternoon, but I am afraid that
not even I can match the superb succinctness of the
intervention of our American colleague. Nevertheless,
Australia very much welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (S/2003/449). We are delighted to have
among us again today our friend and colleague
Ambassador Sharma. We thank him and his team
sincerely.
The international community continues to hold
high expectations of UNMISET. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report shows, significant progress has been
made towards discharging the United Nations mandate
in East Timor. But it is equally clear that a good deal of
important work lies ahead. How the Mission achieves
its remaining goals will go a long way to defining the
success of the United Nations in the historic task of
supporting East Timor’s emergence as a nation.
The Secretary-General’s report is highly timely.
We have reached a critical stage in the life of the
United Nations Mission and in the United Nations role
in East Timor. Now more than ever, the United Nations
needs to focus on what the Mission will leave behind in
terms of solid and sustainable indigenous capacity in
civil administration, law and justice and defence and
security. We therefore strongly support the extension of
the mandate for a further 12 months. That additional
time will facilitate the Mission achieving its stated
objectives and intent.
In policing, a good deal of essential and basic
foundational work remains to be done. We have had
much discussion of this, but I think it requires further
comment today. Australia is pleased that the Mission is

20

redoubling its efforts to accelerate the development of
East Timor’s institutions of law enforcement. It is
crucial that commitments made on paper are translated
into solid and lasting progress on the ground. The
Security Council’s 4 April amendments to the
UNMISET drawdown plan should help provide a
secure backdrop for a renewed effort coordinated by
the United Nations in this crucial area, and Australia
stands ready to assist. A concerted effort in police force
development from now until the end of the Mission
will be essential to the ultimate success of the United
Nations in East Timor.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by saying that it is a
great pleasure to see you presiding over the Security
Council. I thank you for convening this open meeting
to examine the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(S/2003/449), covering its activities since the last
report, dated 6 November 2002.
First, Portugal would like to extend its support to
the important efforts of the United Nations in TimorLeste under the already well-tested leadership of its
Special Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma. This is
particularly noteworthy as political developments in
Timor-Leste during the reporting period have been
more complex than was initially foreseen.
Last month, the Council had to consider a special
report of the Secretary-General relating a change of
environment in Timor-Leste as a result of a disturbing
series of security-related incidents, some of them of a
terrorist nature, which took place in the last months of
2002 and the early months of 2003. At the time, the
Secretary-General asked the Council to reconsider the
proposed downsizing plan for UNMISET, while
keeping the envisioned handover date of May 2004.
Consequently, the Council approved resolution 1473
(2003), which endorsed proposals for the adjustment of
the downsizing of UNMISET’s police component,
supported a revised schedule for the downsizing of the
Mission’s military component and requested a detailed
military strategy for the revised schedule.
Portugal welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, and it is pleased to note that, in

S/PV.4744

spite of the problems to which I referred, much has
been achieved in the year that has elapsed since the
establishment of UNMISET and that the Timorese
public administration and police force are assuming
increasing levels of responsibility.
Also to be highly commended is the steady and
significant positive development in the relationship of
Timor-Leste and its neighbour Indonesia, particularly
regarding the determination of their joint border, as
well as the progress on agreements between Australia
and Timor-Leste concerning petroleum resources. One
must not understate the importance that both a stable
relationship with its neighbour States and prompt
access to such natural resources have in paving the way
for the solid and sustainable economic development of
the newborn country.
Portugal would also like to note UNMISET’s
efforts and the progress achieved with regard to the
investigation and indictment of those responsible for
crimes that took place in 1999. However, it is with
concern that we note that the report expects the judicial
process dealing with serious crimes still to be
incomplete by June 2004 and that a strong political
commitment is essential, as the majority of those
accused remain outside Timor-Leste — including
nearly 90 per cent of those accused of crimes against
humanity. We support the Secretary-General in urging
the Governments of countries where those accused may
be located to make every effort to ensure that such
persons are brought to justice.
Finally, much remains to be done, and continued
assistance by the international community will be
crucial to enable Timor-Leste to face with success the
serious political, practical and security challenges that
lie ahead. Portugal will, as in the past, remain
committed to the consolidation and development of
Timor-Leste and to United Nations efforts to that
effect.
I am confident that the Security Council will not
hesitate to extend the mandate of UNMISET for a
further year, until 20 May 2004.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open

meeting. I also thank Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2003/449) provides a detailed description of the
situation in Timor-Leste a year after its independence.
The Government of Japan is pleased to note that much
has been achieved during the past year in the fields of
public administration, internal security and TimorLeste’s relationship with Indonesia, including bordercontrol issues. However, various political and security
challenges remain to be overcome. We share the
Secretary-General’s observation that further bilateral
assistance in such areas as public administration, the
judiciary, the police and national security will be
necessary even after UNMISET has concluded its
activities.
In this connection, recent incidents, such as riots
and armed attacks, are a source of great concern for all
of us. The Government of Japan welcomed Security
Council resolution 1473 (2003), which was adopted to
address this situation, and supports the revised
strategies outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. It also supports the extension of UNMISET’s
mandate for one more year, until 20 May 2004, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. The Japanese
Government intends to take the necessary steps to
enable its engineer group to continue contributing to
the successful completion of the mandates of
UNMISET, as well as to Timor-Leste’s nation-building
efforts, in line with the modified downsizing schedule.
As stressed in the resolution, improving the
overall capabilities of the National Police of TimorLeste is a key priority. We are encouraged to note that
the workshop on capacity-building of the police, for
which Japan was pleased to provide funding, was
successfully held last week. We hope that it will
contribute to implementing the recommendations of the
joint assessment mission on policing.
Just one week ago, Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Ms. RamosHorta, visited Japan and met with Foreign Minister
Kawaguchi. On that occasion, Mr. Ramos-Horta
emphasized that security in Timor-Leste cannot be
maintained solely by training and strengthening the
police force, and that it is also necessary to invite
investment and create job opportunities. We could not

21

S/PV.4744

agree with him more strongly. Japan has been playing a
major role in providing assistance for building a selfsustainable nation of Timor-Leste. We have been
steadily implementing our pledge of assistance of up to
$60 million over the period of three years after
independence, with a focus on peace-building, as well
as on reconstruction in three key areas: agriculture,
infrastructure and human resource development. Above
all, human resource development is of particular
importance because it is the very basis of nationbuilding. With the aim of enhancing national stability,
which is a prerequisite for development, we have
already allocated $8 million for improving health
conditions and reducing poverty, as well as for
providing employment opportunities for ex-combatants
through the Recovery, Employment and Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants and Communities in
Timor-Leste (RESPECT). The Government of Japan
has also recently decided to extend an additional
$470,000 for the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation to facilitate national reconciliation in
Timor-Leste.
Mindful of the challenges that remain in TimorLeste, I wish to re-emphasize the importance for the
leadership of Timor-Leste of being united in leading
the country; for the people of Timor-Leste of
participating in the nation-building effort as a matter of
their own responsibility, and for the international
community of continuing to extend its support. For its
part, the Government of Japan will spare no effort to
extend as much assistance as it can for the
consolidation of peace in Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste. We would also
like to welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma.
We often refer to Timor-Leste as a United
Nations success story in general, and as a success story
for this body in particular. Almost a year has gone by
since the Council celebrated, in this Chamber, the

22

independence of that country, and almost eight months
have passed since Timor-Leste joined the Organization.
However, the fact that this has been a success
story does not mean that everything has gone as
planned, nor that the role of the United Nations in the
country is over. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) make this clear.
The report indicates that progress has been achieved as
well as important initiatives taken by the Government
of Timor-Leste in the promotion of transparency and in
the responsible management of public affairs, as well
as in the promotion of human rights. As the report
indicates, the support of the international community
for these initiatives will be key if they are to be
successful.
Many other objectives remain to be achieved for
which the continued support of the international
community will also be necessary. The report lists the
tremendous difficulties in terms of economic and social
development which are yet to be tackled and also
indicates major challenges in the area of administrative
and judicial training, and in particular in the area of the
maintenance of security.
As we saw at the end of last year and at the
beginning of this one, Timor-Leste still faces serious
threat to law and order. The Council shows its ability to
react by adopting, on 4 April last, resolution 1473
(2003), which postponed the downsizing of the military
component of UNMISET to the planned end of the
Mission.
We welcome the wise decision to accede to the
request of the Secretary-General, which will allow
more time to establish and train the Timorese forces to
exercise the fundamental activities of guaranteeing
public security and ensuring the territorial integrity of
the country. We therefore support an extension of
UNMISET’s mandate to May 2004.
The importance of the current efforts of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste goes beyond the reality
of that small country. The results that have been
achieved show the effectiveness of coordinated actions
at the multilateral level and the international
community’s ability to act through this body. The
incidents of December 2002 and January 2003 served,
however, as a reminder of the temporary nature of
incomplete solutions. Resolution 1473 (2003) was a
proper and immediate reaction to the situation, and it

S/PV.4744

seems to have led to the necessary adjustments for a
short-term solution.
The continued support of the international
community, in order to make it possible to conclude the
training process in Timor-Leste, will be crucial if we
want this success story to continue.
Brazil, to the extent possible, will continue to
support the efforts of the United Nations and of the
Government of Timor-Leste on the path to building its
institutions, in order to foster the economic and social
development of the country and of its people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of New Zealand. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and the steady progress in implementing
UNMISET's
mandate.
We
also
congratulate
Timor-Leste on its engagement with the international
system, the setting up of a Government administration
in such a short time-frame, and its commitment to
upholding the ideals of human rights and democracy.
The Secretary-General's report says, however,
that a number of challenges remain. Ongoing efforts
will need to be made and attention paid to developing
capable
security
forces,
progressing
border
demarcation, fostering participatory democracy and
open government, developing a strong judicial system,
and bringing to justice those responsible for human
rights violations in the territory in 1999.
New Zealand commends the responsiveness of
the Security Council to security developments on the
ground in Timor-Leste and the adoption of resolution
1473 (2003), providing for an adjustment in the
timetable for downsizing the military and police
components of UNMISET. It is clear that the recent
security-related incidents were beyond the ability of
the domestic police force, and in this respect we
particularly welcome the measures in the resolution
aimed at supporting and strengthening the police sector
in Timor-Leste.
We also endorse the Secretary-General's appeal
for donors to consider targeted support to the police
sector. We acknowledge that this is a sector which will
require ongoing assistance even after the end of the

UNMISET mandate. New Zealand, at its recently held
bilateral assistance talks with the Timorese
Government, pledged that it would focus part of its
bilateral assistance programme on police development
through agreed multilateral and bilateral projects,
especially in the areas of community policing and
civilian support.
A functioning judicial system is clearly important
for social and political stability. The SecretaryGeneral's report notes that problems still remain in the
justice sector. New Zealand is particularly concerned
that Timor-Leste establish a functioning Court of
Appeal as soon as possible. The recent appointment of
the President of the Court of Appeal is a welcome
development in this respect. New Zealand is also
concerned about the large numbers of prisoners held on
remand, including a significant number whose warrants
for their incarceration have expired.
New Zealand congratulates the Timor-Leste
Government on its initiative to develop a more open
system of government, with its series of visits to the
districts by Members of Parliament and officials to
promote discussion of Government policy and to
receive feedback. As regards addressing the grievances
of former combatants and veterans, we welcome the
work of the two Commissions established by the
President's Office to identify veterans who served from
1975-1979 and 1980-1999. We hope that the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) “Recovery,
Employment and Stability Programme for ExCombatants and Communities in Timor-Leste” will
draw, and build upon, the work already undertaken by
the commissions.
New Zealand also welcomes the work of the
United Nations Serious Crimes Unit in Timor-Leste
and notes the recent series of indictments issued by the
Unit for crimes against humanity. We hope that all the
parties involved will take the steps necessary to bring
the individuals involved to trial. We are closely
watching the separate ad hoc tribunal process in Jakarta
and reiterate comments made previously that this
process must meet international standards of justice.
Finally, we agree with the report's assessment
that, while progress has been steady, much remains to
be done. Continued support from the international
community will be vital to enable Timor-Leste to
address the political, economic and security challenges
that lie ahead. The United Nations also plays a vital

23

S/PV.4744

support role in this. New Zealand commends the
leadership of Special Representative Sharma in
implementing UNMISET's mandate and endorses its
renewal for a further 12 months. I should like also to
thank Mr. Sharma for his introduction of the report
here today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Fiji. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Savua (Fiji): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council on this important
issue. Through you, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for the cooperation that
his Government has lent to the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). We also
acknowledge
the
Secretary-General’s
report,
introduced by Mr. Karmalesh Sharma, on the progress
of transition of responsibilities in Timor-Leste, but for
some remaining areas of challenge, and on the detailed
military strategy for downsizing the Mission, as
requested in resolution 1473 (2003).
Of the remaining challenges, the one of particular
concern to Fiji is the reported increased activities in
recent months of armed groups and former militia
elements that are intent on destabilizing the country.
With this in mind, the Secretary-General’s call for
international military capability is strongly endorsed by
Fiji and we stand ready to boost our present
commitment within our military capability in this area
in order to assist in the timely and peaceful exit of
UNMISET.
We
can
expect
optimism
when
the
implementation of the Security Council mandate is
reaching milestones. Reality also requires the
Organization to periodically revisit its goalposts. We
have to be cautious and hope that the accelerated pace
of positive developments in all sectors of Timor-Leste
will be synonymous with sustained peace and stability
for the country and that the planned drawdown of the
military security personnel will not be a window of
opportunity for destabilizing elements to re-establish
their interests in Timor-Leste.
We are mindful of the need for caution with
respect to the fragility of any peace-building exercise.
Timor-Leste is no exception. It is also a situation that
has produced results, which are benefits that the
Timorese people deserve and which flow from the

24

investment of the international community. In TimorLeste, we are engaged in a careful balancing of
securing a peaceful setting within which training for
the local police and defence forces can be
accomplished, alongside other public-sector transitions.
In doing so, we are concerned to leave all the decisionmaking to the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
In this connection, we recall the SecretaryGeneral’s own caution, expressed in paragraph 35 of
his special report, on the need to execute downsizing
that is sensitive to the Government’s desire to assume
responsibility for security issues in a feasible way and
that does not jeopardize its stability. Our primary
concern here is not to compromise the confidence,
capacity and capability of Timor-Leste’s fledgling
military and security forces with a rushed time line and
anticipated operational demands. In this, however, we
support the proposal to strengthen the role of the
civilian police in the capacity-building exercise of the
Timor-Leste National Police. We believe that, while the
military can deter further acts of violence, it is the
police that establish the foundations of long-term
peace, stability and law abidance for nations and their
peoples.
We would close, therefore, by endorsing the
Secretary-General’s request to this Council in
paragraph 64 of his report to extend the mandate of
UNMISET for a further year, until 20 May 2004. In so
doing, we look forward to the consultation process with
the troop-contributing countries on the options that are
being developed for the operations of and interactions
between each military organization, as the SecretaryGeneral undertakes in his report.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Permit me to express
the gratitude of my delegation to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. Like previous speakers before
us, my delegation also welcomes the presence of
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General and for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council.
As indicated in the report, we are pleased to learn
of the progress achieved in Timor-Leste. Indeed,
Timor-Leste has taken significant steps forward in
solidifying its position at the regional and global

S/PV.4744

levels, notably as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. In this
regard, my Government stands ready to work together
with the Government of Timor-Leste.
It is also gratifying to record that our bilateral
relations are steadily flourishing, thus serving our
common interests in many spheres, including border
demarcation. Indonesia has embraced Timor-Leste as
part of many regional forums and initiatives. There is
no doubt that Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to be
steadfast in building stronger relations between them as
two friendly neighbouring countries. Our common
history has taught us that arriving at a stable and
mutually beneficial relationship should be based upon a
forward-looking attitude.
The phase, the substance and the priorities of our
relations, however, should be fully determined by us as
two sovereign States. The international community and
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) should be fully appreciative and
supportive of this principle. After all, when
UNMISET’s planned mandate ends in May 2004, the
two countries, as eternal neighbours, have no
alternative but to strengthen their bilateral relations. In
doing so, we will eliminate the need for any third party
to influence the nature and course of our interaction.
Timor-Leste has been widely considered a
success story for the international community. Much of
the credit should go to the perseverance of the East
Timorese themselves and other dedicated international
personalities. One cannot forget, however, that the nonexistence of favourable cooperation and an
unwillingness to be reconciled make it difficult for
other peacekeeping operations to emulate this success.
Rather than supporting the distinctive and laudable
situation between our two nations, some quarters tend
to disregard it and even attempt to inflict other agendas
on us that would surely disrupt our shared vision.
As the first anniversary of Timor-Leste’s
independence approaches, it is high time for the
international community to permit a more progressive
transfer of operational responsibilities to the East
Timorese. UNMISET, to be faithful to its name and
mandate, is to provide assistance to a sovereign entity,
as stipulated in resolution 1410 (2002). We believe that
UNMISET, as a true peacekeeping mission, will

honour its exit strategy and not reluctantly surrender it
on the basis of a careful assessment on the ground.
My delegation cannot but note with concern
prejudices expressed in the report on certain issues, in
particular concerning security at the border and justice.
My Government’s position and strong commitment in
these endeavours need no reiteration.
In view of the efforts of both Indonesia and
Timor-Leste to develop good and friendly relations, the
steadily growing relationship between the two
countries is far too important to allow any issue that
might arise to disrupt this relationship. As our bilateral
relations continue to flourish at all levels, we call on
the international community, as well as the United
Nations, to support them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Sharma to respond to comments
and questions raised.
Mr. Sharma: I promise not to test the patience of
representatives too much, but many observations have
been made and I would indeed like to make comments
on at least some of them.
To begin with, I wish to thank all delegations for
the views, points of emphasis, assessments and advice
which they have given on the work of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I can assure them that I have taken very
careful note of them and that I and my colleagues will
profit from them.
I also wish to thank delegations for their
expressions of support and appreciation for
UNMISET’s work. They are a great encouragement to
me and to my many colleagues, who are responsible for
any useful contribution that we may have been able to
make. Here, I wish to express my deep appreciation for
the committed and sterling support that I have
consistently received from all of my colleagues. After
every appearance before the Council, I brief the entire
staff and membership of UNMISET collectively, and I
will personally convey to them the dominant
sentiments expressed in the Security Council and its
expectations of us. I can assure the Council that we
will continue to strive to the utmost to try to fulfil its
mandate to the best of our capacity.
I also wish to place on record the supportiveness
and accessibility that I have always received from the
leaders of Timor-Leste, for which I remain deeply

25

S/PV.4744

grateful. In addition, I wish to assure individual
delegations that we stand ready to provide any
information or clarification on UNMISET’s work that
they may require, now or in the future.
Of the many observations that were made, I
should particularly like to recall those that emphasized
the need to strengthen public institutions. That is a
central preoccupation of ours. I should also like to
endorse the observations concerning the need for the
international community’s continued assistance. An
emphasis on human rights is obviously central to our
work, and we fully support that. We will always work
in the light of the highest international norms in the
field of human rights, which the Government of
Timor-Leste intends to observe. Lastly, the emphasis
on the rule of law as a core element of the new
democracy and the need to preserve and promote it are
things of which we are extremely mindful, as is the
Government.
Many points were covered in the statements by
delegates, and I should like to throw some light on four
or five of them.
First are the many observations on the judicial
system. In November 2002, the Government of TimorLeste and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) conducted a joint mission to assess the
judicial system. Those bodies are now in the process of
preparing projects to strengthen the capacity of the
judicial system.
It is true that, in many respects, the courts
continue to function in a haphazard manner and are in
great need of assistance. It was observed here that
illegal detention of persons on expired detention
warrants has been an unfortunate practice. Similarly,
the courts have failed to hear cases in a timely and
efficient manner, and that is a major concern. While
there is a lack of personnel — which hinders
efficiency — officers of the court have also been
perceived as needing to display the required
understanding of the roles of judges, prosecutors and
public defenders. That is a particular concern, since
legislation adopted by Parliament in the future will be
tested through litigation before the courts. I should
emphasize that the leaders of Timor-Leste are well
aware of the need to do this urgently, and we are in
close interaction with them on this matter. They have
an avowed commitment to democracy and the rule of
law, and they have said so on a number of occasions.

26

However, it is clear that internal will and discipline,
provision of personnel and significant bilateral and
multilateral assistance will all be required to improve
the functioning of the justice sector, both alongside and
after UNMISET. It is expected that the finalized justice
sector programme will be ready by the end of June this
year.
There was a related question concerning the
Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal was established
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) but had been largely nonfunctional since December 2001. UNMISET thus
found a non-functional Court of Appeal and made the
greatest possible efforts to locate and employ suitable
judges who would serve as judges on the Court of
Appeal. In February this year, the four original
members of the Superior Council of the Magistracy
recommended to the President of Timor-Leste that one
of those judges, Mr. Claudio Ximenes, be appointed
President of the Court of Appeal. In March, the
President of the Republic issued a decree appointing
Mr. Ximenes to that position. There was a question as
to whether the Parliament needed to ratify that, and the
decree was sent to Parliament. Parliament decided by a
vote last Tuesday that its ratification was not required.
Therefore, the President of the Court of Appeal is now
expected to be sworn in over the course of the week.
There were comments and encouragement by
many delegations urging that the target date of 30 June
to agree on a line constituting the border be met. I wish
to state that, at the Joint Border Committee’s most
recent meeting, in December, both sides agreed on a
work plan that envisaged a meeting in January to
compare border lines drawn from satellite imagery
unilaterally by each side and the start of the field work
in February. That meeting was held in March, having
been delayed. Both sides adopted a new work plan, in
accordance with which joint field work was to start in
April. At a meeting held in Jakarta in April, both sides
agreed to start the field work on 5 May. In order to
meet the target date, strong commitment by both
countries is needed, and further delays should, of
course, be avoided.
Timor-Leste will require technical and financial
support to make its contribution — particularly for the
field surveys — and UNMISET is trying to be as
helpful as it can in that respect. Meeting the target date
does not, of course, depend only on accomplishing the
joint survey work. We are sure that both sides are

S/PV.4744

mindful of the requirement to continue negotiating in
good faith, on the basis of the 1904 treaty agreed upon
by both sides as the legal basis for the international
boundary. The developments so far have been
extremely promising, as noted by many delegates, and
we hope that the process will continue in the same
spirit.

command the trust and confidence of the community it
polices. Improvements in the delivery of justice,
particularly in this Year of Administrative
Restructuring and Justice in Timor-Leste announced by
the Prime Minister, are critical if the police force is to
grow into the social and professional role expected of
it. The Government realizes that very well.

Some delegations asked about the operational
readiness of the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to take over internal security challenges after
the United Nations peacekeeping force (UNPKF) and
the United Nations police (UNPOL) have left. Many
challenges do indeed lie ahead, particularly in relation
to the level of readiness that the PNTL will have
achieved by around this time next year.

There was a reference to the workshop which was
concluded just a couple of days ago. It was indeed a
very successful workshop. It succeeded in making the
development of the PNTL a participatory process. It
attracted high-level, active participation from the
Timor-Leste leadership; from ambassadors and other
representatives from several countries, including those
based in Jakarta; from senior officers and the rank and
file of the PNTL; and from representatives of various
sectors of society in Timor-Leste. It promoted a sense
of ownership among all stakeholders in this critical
process. It also demonstrated the Government’s
commitment to making the PNTL a professional and
accountable force equal to the challenges before it. As
President Gusmão said at the workshop, the police
must appear in the eyes of society to be the guardians
of order.

The police force has to be ready to meet internal
security threats in the future. In essence, there are four
main challenges. First and foremost is that of working
towards the creation of an impartial, non-partisan,
apolitical, efficient and accountable police force. That
will require a mix of legislation, regulations and
training.
The second challenge is that of appropriate
provisioning of the Border Patrol Unit, to which some
delegations have referred. The Government, UNMISET
and troop-contributing countries, through the donation
of their facilities to the PNTL, are trying to address this
issue.
The third relates to the creation of the rapid
deployment groups. The following elements need to be
considered in depth: their size, composition and
physical location; their standard operating procedures
and the training to be given to them; and the supply of
appropriate armaments and other equipment.
Finally, the training and development of rapid
intervention units to deal with urban disorder would be
facilitated through the stationing of an internationally
formed unit approved by the Council, as this would
provide the rapid intervention units more time to
develop and consolidate. We hope to achieve that end
successful as well.
However, development of the police can take
place effectively only against a backdrop of general
respect for the rule of law. An honest, efficient and
accountable police force but one which, for instance, is
forced to accept illegal detentions due to problems in
the judiciary or in the correctional system cannot

It has been decided that another workshop will be
held very shortly — at the end of May or in early
June — in which the role of the various wings of the
police that are being created will be further discussed,
because there was not enough time to go into this in the
required detail. This in itself is an indication of the
success of the workshop: that it is mindful of the need
to complete the work it started.
There were questions about situations on the
ground at the present time. The recent attacks by the
armed groups were on an exceptional scale. In my
statement I mentioned that even if numerically,
compared to many other regions in the world, they may
have looked not all that serious, the requirement is to
look at them in the context of the immediate past from
which the nation is emerging and of the future
challenges which an extrapolation of incidents of this
type could pose to the country. Then we can evaluate
these developments in the context required. Those
attacks involved heavily armed personnel. They were
well equipped, and their level of tactical training and
awareness made their tracking and apprehension a
challenging task, even for capable forces.

27

S/PV.4744

These occurrences do not lend themselves to easy
distinctions between external and internal threats. They
lie in a grey area between the two. But what is certain
is that they need to be dealt with by military forces in
the immediate term, and probably largely by
augmented Timorese forces in the long term. Neither
have the civil disturbances we have seen been
apolitical. The riots in Dili appeared to have included
the careful targeting of property, which would
undermine confidence in the Government.
At this nascent stage of the country’s
development, any perception of a possible return to
violence and disorder would exacerbate the sense of
insecurity in the population and must therefore be
effectively combated. I am most grateful to the Council
for having strengthened our hand so that we will be
able to do what is needed.
I should add that, following these incidents, the
Government has encouraged the formation of villagebased security groups to assist the police and the
peacekeeping force in looking out for infiltrators. Since
January, high-ranking Government officials have often
spoken about the importance of the population being
the eyes and ears of the police and bringing
information or suspicious people directly to the
authorities. Such civic-education messages are
understandable in a country where there is not a police
presence in each village. The wounds of 1999 are still
fresh,
and
there
remains
considerable
and
understandable fear in the community about the

28

possibility of a resurgence of violence in the country.
But civilian security groups are nothing new in
Timor-Leste; indeed, such groups are common
throughout the region. And even without Government
direction from above, it is probable that Timorese in
rough urban neighbourhoods and in isolated, largely
unpoliced, villages will form their own security groups.
However, there are grounds for concern that some
of those groups could take vigilance to the point of
vigilantism. That is of considerable concern not least
because of the possible undermining effect it could
have on the PNTL, which must remain at the centre of
international efforts to establish the rule of law.
UNMISET has been in discussion with the Government
on this issue, and the Government is fully cognizant of
it as well. To date, there is little evidence to suggest
that these groups are incorporated into wider structures
that could be used for political purposes, but that
possibility also needs to be monitored.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador
Karmalesh
Sharma,
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Timor-Leste and Head of Mission, for his responses
and clarifications, and I wish him good luck as he
continues his task.
There are no further speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.
