a dispute according to the provisions of the respective Treaties?"
In the event of an affirmative reply to question III:
"IV. Would a Treaty Commission composed of
a representative of one party and a third member
appointed by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations constitute a Commission, within the meaning of the relevant Treaty articles, competent to
make a definitive and binding decision in settlement of a dispute?"
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the International Court of Justice the relevant exchanges of diplomatic correspondence
communicated to the Secretary-General for circulation to the Members of the United Nations and
the records of the General Assembly proceedings
on this question;
5. Decides to retain on the agenda of the fifth
regular session of the General Assembly the question of the observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania, with a view to ensuring that the charges
are appropriately examined and dealt with.

235th plenary meeting
22 October 1949.

295 (IV). Re-establishment of the Interim Committee of the General
Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report 5 submitted to
it by the Interim Committee of the General Assembly on the changes in the Committee's constitution, its duration or its terms of reference which
are considered desirable in the light of experience,
Affirming that, for the effective performance
of the duties specifically conferred upon the General Assembly by the Charter in relation to matters concerning the maintenance of international
peace and security ( Articles 11 and 35), the promotion of international co-operation in the political field (Article 13), and the peaceful adjustment
of any situation likely to impair the general welfare or friendly relations among nations ( Article
14), it is necessary to continue the Interim Committee for the purpose of considering such matters and reporting with conclusions to the General Assembly,
Recognizing fully the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for prompt and effective
action for the maintenance of international peace
and security ( Article 24),

assist the General Assembly in the performanct
of its functions by discharging the following
duties:
(a) To consider and report with conclusions
to the General Assembly on such matters as may
he referred to the Committee by or under the
authority of the General Assembly;
( b) To consider and report with conclusions
to the General Assembly on any dispute or any
situation which, in virtue of Articles 11 (paragraph 2), 14 or 35 of the Charter, has been
proposed for inclusion in the agenda of the General Assembly by any Member of the United
Nations, or by any non-member State under
Articles 11 ( paragraph 2) or 35, or has been
brought before the General Assembly by the
Security Council, provided the Committee previously determines the matter to be both important and requiring preliminary study. Such determination shall be made by a majority of twothirds of the members present and voting, unless
the matter is one referred to the General Assembly by the Security Council, in which case a
simple majority will suffice;
(c) To c·onsider systematically, using the recommendations and studies of the Interim Committee contained in documents A/605 6 and
A/ AC.18/91, 7 the further implementation of that
part of Article 11 ( paragraph 1) relating to the
general principles of co-operation in the maintenance of international peace and security, and of
that part of Article 13 (paragraph la) which
deals with the promotion of international cooperation in the political field, and to report with
conclusions to the General Assembly;
(d) To consider, in connexion with any matter
under discussion by the Interim Committee,
whether occasion may require the summoning of
a special session of the General Assembly and,
if the Committee deems that a session is required,
so to advise the Secretary-General in order that
he may obtain the views of the Members of the
United Nations thereon ;

( c) To conduct investigations and appoint
commissions of inquiry within the scope of the
Committee's duties, as it may deem useful and
necessary, provided that decisions to conduct such
investigations or inquiries shall be made by a
:wo-thirds majority of the members present and
voting. An investigation or inquiry elsewhere
than at the Headquarters of the United Nations
shall not be conducted without the consent of the
State or States in whose territory it is to take
place;
(j) To report to the General Assembly, should
the occasion arise, on :iny changes in the Committee's constitution or its terms of reference
which may be considered desirable in the light of
experience ;

Resolves that:
1. There shall !Je re-established an Interim
Committee of the General Assembly, to meet
when the General Assembly is not actually in
regular session, on which each Member of the
General Assembly shall have the right to appoint
one representative;

3. The Interim Committee is authorized to
request advisory opinions of the International
Conrt of Justice on legal questions arising within
the scope of the Committee's activities;
4. In discharging its duties, the Interim Com111itt\'e shall at all times take into account the
responsibilities of the Security Council under the

2. The Interim Committee, as a subsidiary
organ of the General Assembly established in accordance with Article 22 of the Charter, shall

6 See O J1icial Records of the third session of the General
Assembly, Supplement No. 10.
.
1 See () Oicial Records of the fourth .<csswn of the General ,·I ssnn/,/y, Suppiement No. 11, annex 1.

• See Official Records of the foi.rth session of the Central Assembly, Supplement No. 11.

17

Charter for the maintenance of international peace

and security as well as the duties assigned by the
Charter or by the General Assembly or by the
Security Council to other Councils or to any
committee or commission. The Interim Committee shall not consider any matter of which
the Security Council is seized and which the latter has not submitted to the General Assembly ;

Considering that the opposition to the application of Austria was based on grounds not included in Article 4 of the Charter,
Recalling the recommendation of the General
Assembly in resolution 197 (III) A 11 of 8 December 1948 that each member of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly, in exercising its
vote on the admission of new Members, should
act in accordance with the advisory opinion12 of
the International Court of Justice of 28 May 1948,
which declared that a State was not juridically
entitled to make its consent to the admission
dependent on conditions not expressly provided
by paragraph 1 of Article 4,

5. The rules of procedure governing the proceedings of the Interim Committee and such subcommittees and commissions as it may set up
shall be those adopted by the Interim Committee
on 9 January 19488 as amended by the Interim
Committee on 31 March 1949, 9 with such changes
and additions as the Interim Committee may
deem necessary, provided that they are not inconsistent with any provisions of this resolution.
The Interim Committee ~hall hair! the first meeting of its annual session at the Headquarters of
the United Nations within six weeks from the
date of the conclusion or adjournment of any
regular session of the General Assembly. The
date of the first meeting of each session of the
Interim Committee shall be determined by the
Chairman elected during the previous session, or
by the head of his delegation, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, who shall notify the
members of the Committee accordingly. At the
opening meeting, the Chairman elected during the
previous session of the Committee or the head of
his delegation shall preside until the Interim
Committee has elected a Chairm:m. The Interim
Committee shall meet as and when it deems necessary for the conduct of its business. No new credentials shall be required for representatives who
were duly accrerlited to the Jntnim Committee
during its previous session ;

L Reaffirms its determination that Austria is,
in its judgment, a peace-loving State within the
meaning of Article 4 of the Charter, is able and
willing to carry out the obligations of the Charter,
and should therefore be admitted to membership
in the United Nat ions ;
2. Requests the Security Council to reconsider
the application of Austria, in the light of this
\\etermination of the General Assembly,

252nd plenary meeting,
22 November 1949,
B

The General Assembly,
Noting from the special report13 of the Security Council on the reconsideration of the application of Ceylon for memuership in the United
Nations that nine memuers of the Security Council, on 13 September 1949, supported a draft
resolution recommending the admission to the
United Nations of Ceylon, but that no recommendation was made to the General Assembly
l ,ecause of the opposition of one permanent
member,

6. The Secretary-Genera! shall provide the
necessary facilities and assign appropriate staff
as required for the work of the Interim Committee, its suh-committ<:>es an<l co111111i'.;sions.

:l50th f•le11a;-y 111ccting,
21 Nm•crnhcr 1949.

lJce1ni11g it important to thf' development of the
U nitcd Nations that all appfaant States which
possess the qualifications for mern.hcrship set forth
in Article 4 of the Charter should be admitted,

296 (IV). Admission of new Members

Considering that the opposition to the appiic;i.
tion of Ceylon was base<l on gronn<ls not included
in :\rticle 4 of the Charter,

A

N.ccalliny the recommendation of the General
Assembly in resolution 197 (III) A of S December 1948 that each member of the Security
Co1mcil and of the (;encrill Assembly, in exercising its vote 011 the admission of new Members,
~hould act in accorda1xc with the advisory opinion
of ,lie Tntcnn,ional Court of Justice of 28 May
1948, which declared that a State was not juridically entitled to make its consent to the admis',illll dependent 011 conditions not expr('ssly pro\·id('(l hv paragraph 1 of /\rticlc 4,

The General .1lsscm/Jly,
Noting from the special report 10 of the Security
Council on the reconsideration oi the application
of Austria for membership in the United Nations
that nine memliers of the Security Council, on
13 September 1949, supported a draft resolution
recommending the admission to the United Nations of Austria, lint that no recommendation
was made to the General Asseml,lv heca:1se of the
opposition of one permanent 111c;nlier,

1. nc1rn11iilcs that Ceylon is, in its jn<lgment,
pc;ice-!oying- Stall' within tllf' meaning of Article
·1 uf the Charter, is al1le and willing to carry out
the oliligaiions ol thC' Chartn, and should there[orC" lie a(lmittccl to mcmlll'rship in the United
Nations;

Deeming it i111porta11t to the development of the
United Nations that all applicmt States which
possess the qualifications for membership sr-t
forth in Artirle 4 of the Charter should he
admitted,

ii

8
Sec document :\/AC.18/8.
"Sec <lcc::mrn: ,\: \C.1SIC: 1 Rev.1.
10
See 0[,icinl Hccords ,,f the fr»,rt/1 s,'ssi1111 of the Gen-

'' -.;,·c . ld))/iss,011 nf a Stale lo the United Natio11s
( Charier, al rliclc 4), .·Idvisory Opinion: I.CJ. Reports
194K, page 57.
' _-.;,T I 1!',rial Rc"rortls nt the fourth srssinn of the Gen-

eral Asse111b/_\', Annrx lo the Ad J!,,c l'olilic,1/ Committee,

document A/982.
11
See 0(/icial Records of 1/zc third session of the Genrral Assembly, Part !, Resolutions, pa~e 30.

eral Assembly, Annex- lo the Ad Hoe Political Committ,·1·, d," .:111cnt .\

rn

l)~~-
