UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/998
22 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 27 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I wish to inform you of recent developments in relation to Cambodia
subsequent to the events of 5 and 6 July 1997, on which the Secretariat briefed
the members of the Security Council in informal consultations, and to my
meetings with Cambodian leaders and foreign ministers of member countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other interested parties in
New York last month. During those discussions, a consensus emerged that it was
highly desirable that those political leaders who had remained outside Cambodia
following those events, particularly members of the National Assembly, should
return as soon as possible in order to participate fully in the political
process to draw up legislation to ensure a level playing field for free and fair
elections in 1998. Certain practical measures were also discussed to ensure
that this would come about in satisfactory conditions.
I am now in a position to inform you that I have received a letter from
His Excellency Mr. Ung Huot and His Excellency Samdech Hun Sen, providing me
with assurances concerning the forthcoming elections and the security and safety
of returning political leaders, as well as regarding their participation in
political activities, and expressing readiness for the United Nations to monitor
implementation. I am attaching a copy of that letter (see annex I), which I am
confident provides the necessary guarantees to meet the legitimate concerns
expressed by the political leaders.
I am also attaching a letter from the Permanent Representatives of
Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand to the United Nations (see annex II)
containing a request for the assistance and cooperation of the United Nations in
monitoring and observing the safe return to Cambodia of all political leaders
and other leading personalities of the United National Front for an Independent,
Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC) as well as of other
parties, and the unfettered resumption of their political activities. Assuming
such action receives the backing of the Security Council, I would be prepared to
provide such cooperation and assistance, while keeping the Council regularly
informed. I would do so on the understanding, discussed with the authors of the
request, that the role of the Organization would be essentially political in
nature, since the actual safety of the returnees as well as their capacity to
resume political activities in an unfettered fashion would be the responsibility

97-37861 (E)

231297

/...

S/1997/998
English
Page 2

of the Cambodian authorities - a responsibility which the authorities have
undertaken to shoulder in the 22 October letter from His Excellency Mr. Ung Huot
and His Excellency Samdech Hun Sen.
I am further attaching a letter addressed to me by His Royal Highness
Samdech Krom Preah Norodom Ranariddh, received through His Royal Highness
Ambassador Sisowath Sirirath (see annex III). I am responding that the
guarantees offered by His Excellency Mr. Ung Huot and His Excellency
Samdech Hun Sen, combined with the role that the United Nations would play at
the request of the Governments of the "ASEAN Troika", provide an adequate
atmosphere for the return of political leaders. I am of the view, after
consulting my Legal Counsel, that the guarantees contained in the letter of His
Excellency Mr. Ung Huot and His Excellency Samdech Hun Sen apply fully to the
Prince, and I am writing to him accordingly.
I would be grateful to you, Mr. President, if you could kindly make the
text of the present letter and its attachments available to the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/998
English
Page 3

Annex I
Letter dated 22 October 1997 from His Excellency Mr. Ung Huot and
His Excellency Samdech Hun Sen addressed to the Secretary-General

On behalf of the delegation of the Royal Government of Cambodia, we wish to
express our deep appreciation for the precious time you gave us for a direct
exchange of views on the current situation in Cambodia, including the issues of
the Cambodian seat at the United Nations and the role of the United Nations in
the Cambodian election in 1998.
May we assure Your Excellency and the States Members of the United Nations
that the Royal Government of Cambodia is fully committed to maintaining and
improving politico-socio-economic stability and ensuring a peaceful environment
conducive to free and fair elections in 1998. Preparations are currently under
way for the election to take place as scheduled.
As discussed, the Royal Government of Cambodia is determined to organize
this election in the most democratic and the fairest manner possible, with the
participation of as many political parties and the observation of as many
international observers as possible. The Royal Government of Cambodia wishes to
reiterate its readiness to cooperate with Your Excellency in coordinating the
dispatch and the work of international observers mandated to observe the whole
electoral process.
In order to ensure that the elections are held in a democratic, free and
fair manner and with the participation of all political parties, the Government
undertakes to guarantee the physical security and safety of those members of the
National Assembly and other political leaders who wish to return to Cambodia and
resume their political activities in connection with the forthcoming elections.
The Government also undertakes to maintain and respect the parliamentary
immunity of members of the National Assembly and to guarantee all other
political leaders' freedom from arrest and detention in respect of acts done and
words spoken prior to their return, and thereafter in respect of acts and words
spoken in connection with their electoral activities. The Government shall
further ensure that all political leaders enjoy freedom from intimidation and
threat in respect of any and all political activities relating to the election
and, in particular, freedom of movement, assembly and speech as provided for
under the Constitution and the electoral law, without discrimination.
The Royal Government wishes to reiterate its readiness for the United
Nations to monitor the safe return of members of the National Assembly and other
political leaders and their freedom to engage in political activities.
We are looking forward to a very close cooperation between the Royal
Government and Your Excellency.

(Signed) UNG HUOT
First Prime Minister

(Signed) HUN SEN
Second Prime Minister

/...

S/1997/998
English
Page 4

Annex II
Letter dated 22 October 1997 from the Permanent Representatives of
Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General

With the concurrence of the parties concerned in Cambodia, we the "ASEAN
Troika" would like to request your assistance and cooperation in monitoring and
observing the safe return to Cambodia of all political leaders and other leading
personalities of FUNCINPEC as well as of other parties and their unfettered
resumption of their political activities. It is our hope that with such support
being extended to them, the sense of personal security of these leaders and of
other people can be ensured.

(Signed) Makarim WIBISONO
Permanent Representative
of Indonesia
(Signed) Felipe MABILANGAN
Permanent Representative
of the Philippines
(Signed) Asda JAYANAMA
Permanent Representative
of Thailand

/...

S/1997/998
English
Page 5

Annex III
Letter dated 24 October 1997 from His Royal Highness
Samdech Krom Preah Norodom Ranariddh addressed to
the Secretary-General

I have the honour to inform you that Ambassador Sirirath Sisowath,
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations, has
conveyed to me today a copy of the letter dated Phnom Penh, 22 October 1997,
addressed to Your Excellency, in which you have so kindly asked Ambassador
Sisowath to keep me informed of the outcome signed by my colleague Second Prime
Minister Hun Sen and Foreign Minister Ung Huot on the issue of guaranteeing the
safe return and security of the members of Parliament and political leaders to
Cambodia.
Since my name was not mentioned, I wonder whether this letter of
Mr. Hun Sen also applies to me as a member of Parliament and a political leader.
As Your Excellency is well aware, I am still being prevented by Mr. Hun Sen from
returning home safely and that false charges and accusations made against me
still have not been dropped. My immunity as a member of Parliament has already
been taken away from me illegally by Mr. Hun Sen.
I am still horrified by his action of 5 and 6 July and therefore I must be
cautious with regard to his approach. He has deceived the participants in the
1991 Paris Peace Accords on Cambodia by totally violating the agreement as well
as dishonouring the efforts and the result of the elections organized and
supervised by the United Nations in 1993.
I would be deeply grateful to Your Excellency if you would circulate both
my letters and that of Mr. Hun Sen as a note from Your Excellency to the members
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, without mentioning the title
of either Hun Sen or Ung Huot, as no nation on earth at present has recognized
the new regime in Cambodia since the violent coup d'état of 5 and 6 July in my
country.
May I take this wonderful opportunity once again to express my warmest
thanks and appreciations to Your Excellency for receiving me last month at the
United Nations and for the care and concern that you have always shown in order
to bring about a peaceful political solution to Cambodia. Your tireless efforts
will no doubt prevail and the Cambodian people will be eternally in debt to you
and the United Nations.

(Signed)

-----

NORODOM RANARIDDH
First Prime Minister
