S/PV.8733

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8733rd meeting

Wednesday, 26 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve/Mrs. Van Vlierberge . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Luna
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Maas
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Gonsalves
Ms. Marais
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Supporting the Non-proliferation Treaty ahead of the 2020 Review Conference

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05110 (E)
*2005110*

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

has also functioned as a de facto negotiating forum
for nuclear disarmament. It has produced important
confidence-building and transparency measures,
including an unequivocal effort to totally eliminate
nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Supporting the Non-proliferation Treaty ahead
of the 2020 Review Conference
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen,
President-designate of the 2020 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I would like to congratulate
the Belgian presidency on convening this meeting
and building on last year’s initiative by Germany.
The Council’s continued attention to nuclear weapons
and to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), in particular, are testament to the role
of both in international peace and security.
It is entirely fitting that this organ consider the
achievements and the future of the NPT. After all, the
NPT is a pillar of international peace and security. Few
multilateral treaties, let alone security treaties, can
lay claim to the record of success that the NPT can.
For 50 years now, it has provided collective security
benefits to all its States parties. It remains an enduring
example of the value of disarmament, arms control and
non-proliferation measures as supporting pillars of
international peace and security, no matter the climate
of the day.
The Treaty continues to successfully constrain the
proliferation of nuclear weapons through a verifiable
safeguards system that is almost universally subscribed
to. We should not forget that at the time of the NPT’s
negotiation, it was estimated that by 1975 there could
be some 20 nuclear-armed States. The success of the
NPT should not be taken for granted.
In addition to the legally binding disarmament
commitments under article VI of the Treaty, the NPT
2/19

26/02/2020

The 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the NPT — marking both the fiftieth anniversary
of the Treaty’s entry into force and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its indefinite extension — presents both
a symbolic and a practical opportunity. It is the perfect
occasion to celebrate the NPT’s many achievements
and the role that it has played in making the world a
safer place. It is also an opportunity to ensure that the
Treaty remains the lynchpin of the disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and continues to enhance all
States parties’ security.
Failure to secure a successful outcome in 2020
would not doom the Treaty or the non-proliferation
regime. It would, however, serve to undermine the
value that so many United Nations Member States
place on it and, in turn, devalue the review cycle as
a way to strengthen not only the implementation of
the NPT, but the regime as a whole. It could further
entrench divisions within the Treaty, with long-term
ramifications. Consequently, I continue to encourage
all parties to approach the Review Conference with a
spirit of flexibility and a willingness to engage in real
dialogue in order to create an atmosphere conducive
to success.
Success at the Review Conference faces many
challenges, not least of which are the varying definitions
of what success entails, as well as the geopolitical
context in which we find ourselves. We cannot skate
over the fact that the world is a very different place
than it was in 2015, let alone in 2010 — the last time
a Review Conference produced a forward-looking
outcome document.
Relationships among States — especially nuclearweapon States — are fractured. So-called great-Power
competition is the order of the day. Division, distrust
and a dearth of dialogue are increasingly the norm.
The spectre of unconstrained nuclear competition
looms over us for the first time since the 1970s. We
are witnessing what has been termed a qualitative
nuclear arms race — one based not on numbers, but on
faster, stealthier and more accurate weapons. Regional
conflicts with a nuclear dimension are worsening and
proliferation challenges are not receding.
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

Having said that, I do not believe that the issues
necessarily preclude success at the Review Conference.
In fact, I hope that those issues can be discussed
constructively and in ways that can move them forward,
as part of the full implementation of the Treaty. In terms
of a forward-looking outcome, obviously that will
depend on dialogue at the Conference itself. However,
I think that there are several issues that should form a
part of any consensus document. Let me mention some
of those today.
First, a high-level reaffirmation of commitment to
the Treaty and to all obligations undertaken as a party
to it seems fitting at its half-century mark.
Secondly, there must be a recommitment to the
norm against the use of nuclear weapons. The recent
increase in rhetoric extolling the utility of nuclear
weapons is dangerous and destabilizing. We should
return to the logic of President Reagan and General
Secretary Gorbachev that a nuclear war cannot be won
and must not be fought.
Thirdly, the development of a package of riskreduction measures that can help the world avoid
the prospect of nuclear-weapon use and move it
towards nuclear disarmament would be a significant
confidence-building measure.

S/PV. 8733

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I now give the floor Mr. Zlauvinen.
Mr. Zlauvinen: We are few days away from the
fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and almost two months from
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT.
It is therefore timely and important for the Security
Council to discuss and reaffirm its commitment to the
international disarmament and non-proliferation system
built on the basis of the NPT, as well as international
cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear science and
technology for the development that it enables.
The Treaty and its Review Conference represent an
almost universal forum to discuss issues that are central
to international peace and security, and that gives the
NPT a unique level of legitimacy that is recognized
by the international community. It is also clear that
issues concerning disarmament and arms control have
been an important part of the United Nations since its
inception. For example, Article 26 of the Charter of
the United Nations confers upon the Security Council
the responsibility for disarmament and the “regulation
of armaments”.

Fifthly, as I noted earlier, we cannot hide from
the fact that the world has changed. As the SecretaryGeneral has said on several occasions, such an
environment requires a new vision for disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control. I hope that the
Review Conference can serve as a springboard for
thinking on how to address the nuclear weapons
challenges of our time.

For almost 50 years, the NPT has proven to be
crucial to maintaining international security and
providing access to peaceful nuclear applications. It
is incumbent on all States parties to continue to work
together and ensure that the international cooperation
provided for by the Treaty continues into the future. As
we near the moment when the international community
will get together here in New York to review the
implementation of the Treaty, discuss all related
issues and, I hope, agree on an outcome document that
provides for a way forward, we will take into account
not just the immediate context, with its limitations and
opportunities, but also the medium term and the future
of peaceful cooperation on these issues that we hope
to see.

The current Security Council includes many States
that will be key players at the Review Conference. I
believe, therefore, that a reaffirmation of Council
members’ support for the Treaty and an expression
of commitment to securing success in May would
provide a significant boost to the Review Conference’s
prospects. Given the stakes, I hope that they will work
towards achieving that goal.

The 2020 Review Conference is therefore coming at
a time of growing concerns and uncertainties. National
and regional expectations are growing. Tensions — both
old and new — are converging on the NPT as a magnet.
Nevertheless, when we look at the past 50 years, we can
hardly say that we are living in the best or the worst
of times, and we can clearly see that the Treaty has
successfully seen us through many times of tension and

Fourthly, States should recognize that challenges to
non-proliferation are not static and that, therefore, the
regime cannot be either. At a minimum, I would hope
that States parties are able to endorse the additional
protocol as the safeguards standard.

20-051103/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

change in the past. We hope that it will continue do so
at the Review Conference.
It may be true that much of the quantifiable
progress made under the Treaty was achieved in the
past, but we sometimes underplay its fundamental
and unique achievement in establishing an efficient
non-proliferation system and underpinning growing
technical and scientific cooperation for the benefit of
all humankind. Those achievements are now taken for
granted, yet 50 or even 25 years ago they seemed to be
unattainable dreams. That is something that we need
to consider as we undertake our responsibility at the
upcoming Review Conference — to sustain what we
have achieved and move forward with our eyes set on
the next 50 years.
In that challenging context, we need to be
ambitious and aim to make progress in every possible
area. To that end, it is of great importance to consider
the three pillars of the NPT in a balanced manner so
that we can reach our shared goal of a comprehensive
and forward-looking outcome. I believe that the three
pillars are, in and of themselves, equally important
and mutually reinforcing. We know that we need to
ramp up consideration of the peaceful uses of nuclear
applications. That is a set of issues that is fundamentally
relevant to the development of our societies and has
been relegated in the debate for too long.
I believe that the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty
calls on all of us to recommit to its full implementation
and to strengthening it with a forward-looking
perspective. The Review Conference is a conference
of the parties, and therefore its outcome will depend
on the resolve and commitments shown by all parties
when the time comes for compromises to be made and
agreements to be reached.
As President-designate of the Review Conference,
I encourage all parties to come to the Conference with
the ambition and resolve to engage in an open and
frank exchange on the implementation of the Treaty
and to strengthen our joint commitment to its legally
binding provisions, which are the indispensable basis
for all international cooperation and progress in the
field of peaceful uses, nuclear science, technology and
applications in all States parties.
In addition, I believe that the next Review
Conference needs to widen its reach and open up to all
voices and ideas. The NPT cannot be a closed club. We
need to make sure that the next generation of leaders
4/19

26/02/2020

and practitioners are included in the conversation;
that the voices of women and the gender perspective
are considered and included in our conclusions and
that operators, regulators, practitioners, academics
and scientists are also part of the discussions. It is
important to use the political momentum of the fiftieth
anniversary to get over false dichotomies. There is no
reason for us not to make progress on every issue where
progress is possible.
As I see it, the Review Conference is an opportunity
for all of us not only to review the implementation
of the Treaty, but to recommit to its objectives by
strengthening its contribution to peace, security and
development in all our countries. I will endeavour to
provide the leadership needed to make sure that the
discussions among the parties reflect their commitment
and bring about a successful and shared outcome of
the Review Conference on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Treaty.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zlauvinen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make a statement.
I now call on the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): Three months ago, I visited
Hiroshima. I stood in the vast empty space that was
created by the explosion 75 years ago. I saw the ruined
buildings and talked to survivors. One of them said to
me, “We have the means to destroy our own civilization”
and “what happened once can happen again”.
The truth that lies in those words led our predecessors
to create the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). This year, we commemorate its
fiftieth anniversary. But commemoration is not enough.
Despite its valued achievements, the NPT faces serious
setbacks. Nuclear disarmament has come to a standstill.
New technologies are creating dangerous strategic
imbalances and proliferation crises are demanding our
fullest attention.
North Korea has acquired nuclear weapons, in
complete disregard of the NPT and numerous Security
Council resolutions. What message does that send about
the credibility of our own decisions? The only realistic
way forward is a two-track approach — pressure, on the
one hand, and diplomatic engagement, on the other. We
should stand united in supporting United States efforts
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

to conduct serious negotiations with North Korea. At
the same time, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), Germany will
ensure that sanctions are fully and duly implemented.
The full implementation of its obligations is also
what we expect from Iran. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action remains the best and only promising
tool to keep Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons.
Europe is playing its part to uphold it, but Iran needs
to do the same and return to full compliance without
further delay.
Yesterday, colleagues from 16 States, supporters
of the Stockholm Initiative on Nuclear Disarmament,
met in Berlin. Like the overwhelming majority of
the international community, we are convinced that
the time to revive disarmament diplomacy is now. In
Berlin, we adopted a political declaration, underpinned
by concrete stepping-stones. Some of those steps can
be taken only by nuclear-weapon States; others concern
all of us. They are a call to put our political differences
aside and take our obligations seriously.
First, we propose a set of practical measures to avoid
misperceptions, reduce nuclear risks and rebuild trust.
They include greater transparency on nuclear arsenals,
crisis-proof communication lines and an open dialogue
on strategic stability and nuclear doctrines. That
dialogue should involve non-nuclear weapon States.
Secondly, we are focusing on verification. In 2019,
we conducted a comprehensive practical exercise
together with France. It showed how non-nuclear
weapon States can participate in verification without
gaining knowledge about the nuclear device. More
work on that should follow.
Thirdly, we are joining forces to protect and
enhance our crumbling arms-control architecture. We
call on Russia and the United States to show leadership
by extending the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
That agreement remains crucial, as it underpins the
commitment of the biggest nuclear Powers to article VI.
With regard to fissile material, it is high time
that we start negotiations on a treaty that prohibits its
production for use in nuclear weapons.
And, finally, all States that have not signed and
ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
must do so. As one of the current coordinators, we will
spare no effort towards that end.

S/PV. 8733

When we signed the NPT, we all subscribed to its
ultimate goal. We must attain a world without nuclear
weapons. No place on Earth makes that clearer than
Hiroshima, and no one bears greater responsibility than
the members of the Council.
Ms. Marais (South Africa): We thank UnderSecretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu and the Presidentdesignate of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, for their briefings.
As we look forward to the fiftieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), South Africa reaffirms its
commitment to the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. It is
undeniable that the NPT has played a critical role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
three broad objectives of the NPT — namely, nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy — are inextricably linked.
Therefore, South Africa maintains its long-held view
that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
are mutually reinforcing processes. Progress in respect
of both is therefore essential to realizing the objective
and purpose of the NPT.
However, while non-proliferation measures have
been strengthened, similar concrete progress has not
yet been realized in the area of nuclear disarmament.
We believe that efforts to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons should be matched by a concurrent
effort to eliminate all nuclear weapons, in a verifiable
and irreversible manner. We likewise remain seriously
concerned about the apparent lack of urgency and
seriousness with which the solemn undertakings,
particularly with respect to nuclear disarmament,
continue to be approached. Still more concerning
are the attempts to negate or reinterpret the nuclear
disarmament undertakings made since the 1995 Review
and Extension Conference.
That state of affairs places the NPT and its review
process under increasing pressure. It falls far short of
the commitments and obligations with respect to article
VI and the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclearweapon States at the 2000 NPT Review Conference
to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals. The outcome of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference constitutes the current nuclear disarmament
benchmarks. Reneging on those commitments is not an

20-051105/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

option. For that reason, it is our view that the success of
the 2020 Review Conference will largely depend on the
extent to which those undertakings are being honoured.
For South Africa, it is essential that the outcome
of the forthcoming Review Conference reaffirm the
unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States.
It is also especially important that while the Review
Conference outcome need not be elaborate, it should
not roll back or reinterpret the agreements reached at
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference.
South Africa joins others in expressing its concerns
about the current geopolitical tensions and the resulting
impact on international peace and security. It is for that
reason that we believe that this current security climate
allows no room for further procrastination to achieve
concrete nuclear disarmament results. We therefore urge
all parties involved to exercise the utmost flexibility so as
to de-escalate tensions. For South Africa, humanitarian
imperatives continue to underpin our search for a world
without the threat posed by the possession, use and
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Those considerations
are today a fundamental and global concern that should
be at the core of our deliberations, actions and decisions
on nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, South Africa remains convinced that
the strength, credibility and vitality of the NPT rest on
the grand bargain across its three pillars and that the
success of review conferences going forward will be
determined by the extent to which those undertakings
are implemented. In that regard, we stand ready to play
our part.
Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu
and Ambassador Zlauvinen for their informative
briefings. We would also like to welcome to the
Chamber the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
committed to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to the full and effective
implementation of the three pillars on which it stands.
We urge those countries that have not yet become
parties to the Treaty to do so in our collective pursuit of
achieving a world free from nuclear weapons.
Nuclear weapons have the capacity to decimate
us and set us back decades in the achievement of our
development goals. To that end, Saint Vincent and the
6/19

26/02/2020

Grenadines has taken several positive steps to grapple
with that existential threat. We are party to the 1967
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America — the Treaty of Tlatelolco — which
established our region as the first nuclear-weapon-free
zone in a densely populated area. Furthermore, we
proudly became the 24th State party to the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in July 2019. We
are committed to ensuring that our region remains a
zone of peace, as declared by the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States in 2014.
While the global number of nuclear weapons has
declined, complete disarmament has not yet been
achieved and geopolitical tensions are made worse
by the existence of those weapons. The Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a significant
step in the total elimination of that threat. It remains
the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime.
We emphasize the need for multilateral cooperation
in effectively addressing the threat of nuclear weapons.
We reaffirm the continued need for nuclear-weapon
States to engage in in-depth and open dialogue on
their respective nuclear doctrines and policies. Doing
so increases mutual trust and confidence among all
relevant parties.
We maintain our respect for the sovereignty of all
States, and in our pursuit of non-proliferation policies
we reaffirm that they should not undermine the rights
of States to peacefully use nuclear technologies. We
continue to support the oversight that the International
Atomic Energy Agency provides in that regard.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is committed to
working with the international community to ensure
that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is effectively implemented. We look forward
to the 2020 Review Conference, and it is our hope that it
will yield success. Indeed, nothing said in the Chamber
today should operate so as to prejudge or pre-empt
the outcome of the 2020 Review Conference. The
most inclusive and representative organ of the United
Nations — that is, the General Assembly — has the
mandate to deal with that issue in the upcoming review.
In closing, we highlight that the total elimination
of nuclear weapons should remain a top priority on
the agenda of the international community. We must
return to a common vision and path leading to the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. Let us work together to
protect the future of humankind.
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Ambassador
Zlauvinen for their briefings.
The Charter of the United Nations begins with
the words “We, the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. Just one and a half weeks after its
signing came the first — and, we hope, the last — use
of nuclear weapons, in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That
marked the beginning of the nuclear arms race, the
consequences of which are still being felt. It took
almost 25 years to address that challenge in the form
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), of which we will celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary this year, in just a few days from now.
In the half-century of its existence, the NPT has
established itself as one of the cornerstones of the
international world order and the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons. The indefinite extension of the NPT,
achieved back in 1995, is evidence of its profound
importance and the fact that the Treaty meets the
interests of all States parties, nuclear and non-nuclear
States alike.
Recently, we have witnessed the breakdown of a
number of internationally recognized mechanisms in
the area of non-proliferation and arms control. The
root cause, as we see it, are the attempts of one State to
dominate the world and impose its rules on the world
community, to the detriment of the interests of other
States and international law. All multilateral agreements
and mechanisms that prevent such domination are
declared outdated and ineffective.
The starting point here can be considered
Washington’s withdrawal in 2002 from the
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, one of the most important
of those agreements. Last year, the United States, under
a spurious pretext, tore up the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF). Almost immediately
thereafter, flight tests of previously banned United
States systems began. Our proposals to impose
a moratorium on the deployment of short- and
medium-range ballistic missile systems, including the
development of a mechanism for their verification,
have not only been ignored by the United States and its
allies, but even undermined. Such actions confirm that
the real reasons for the collapse of the INF Treaty have
nothing to do with Russia’s position and actions.

S/PV. 8733

We are also very concerned about the lack of clarity
with regard to the future of the New START Treaty.
The extension of the Treaty would be a reasonable
step that would make it possible to prevent the further
deterioration of the situation in the area of strategic
stability; avoid a full collapse of the monitoring and
restrictive mechanisms in the nuclear and missile
spheres; and gain time to discuss approaches to
controlling new weapons and military technologies.
Appeals to Russia to extend the New START Treaty are
misguided. President Putin has proposed that the United
States extend the Treaty without any preconditions. We
are waiting for an answer.
At the time, the nuclear deal with Iran was a major
success in the area of non-proliferation. Five years ago,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on resolving
the Iranian nuclear issue was signed and unanimously
endorsed in resolution 2231 (2015). That was an example
of effectively overcoming a crisis that almost turned
into a hot conflict. A breakthrough was achieved once
the parties involved showed a genuine readiness to
listen to each other and to take mutual interests into
account. However, today we see the collapse of that
singular achievement in multilateral diplomacy owing
to the complete rejection by the United States of its
international legal obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations.
Against the background of the United States
officially refusing to ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty and deploying its nuclear weapons on
the territory of some of its NATO allies, in its new
doctrinal approaches Washington is significantly
lowering the threshold for the use of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, NATO member States continue the
practice of so-called joint nuclear missions, which
include elements of nuclear planning and training in
using nuclear weapons involving representatives of
non-nuclear States. That is a direct violation of article I
of the NPT by NATO nuclear-weapon States and article
II by non-nuclear-weapon States. The culmination of
that series of targeted actions was when the United
States and its European allies conducted exercises this
month to simulate the use of nuclear weapons on the
territory of the Russian Federation.
In the interests of reducing the unnecessarily
heightened tension and preserving the possibility for
further strategic dialogue, a year and a half ago we
proposed that Washington at least affirm, or preferably
strengthen, the Gorbachev-Reagan equation that there

20-051107/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

can be no winners in a nuclear war and that such a
war should never be started. We still have not received
an answer.
We understand the concerns of a number of
non-nuclear States that are increasing their demands
to expedite the nuclear disarmament process. We have
always considered the issue as one of the priorities of
our foreign policy. However, all aspects of international
security and strategic stability must clearly be taken
into account. The military actions undertaken by
the United States and NATO in recent years, as well
as Washington’s threats against a number of States,
including Russia, only take us further from the goal of
creating a world free of nuclear weapons.
Ongoing identification of the prerequisites that
would further advance nuclear disarmament is needed.
Above all, that involves improving the strategic situation
in certain regions and in the world as a whole. That
is possible only by taking into account the full range
of factors that have an impact on strategic stability
and international security. Those factors include, in
particular, the unlimited deployment of the United
States global missile defence system, the development
of high-precision strategic non-nuclear weapons, the
possibility of deploying strike weapons in outer space,
undermining the body of international treaties and
agreements on security, stability and arms control, and
attempts to weaken the defence capabilities of other
States through the illegal means of unilateral sanctions,
circumventing the Security Council. It is unlikely that
an international security environment conducive to
progress towards nuclear disarmament can be achieved
without addressing those issues.
The establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery in the Middle East, as provided
for in the resolution adopted at the 1995 NPT Review
and Extension Conference resolution, has always
been a crucial issue within the NPT. We trust that the
conferences on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, the first of which was held in November
2019, will ultimately lead to the desired result,
namely, the development and signing by all Middle
East countries of a legally binding agreement on the
establishment of such a zone. For our part, we have
fully cooperated and will continue to cooperate in that
regard. It is important that the other members of the
8/19

26/02/2020

Permanent Five and, most importantly, all countries in
the Middle East join those efforts.
We view the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) safeguards as a key element of the
non-proliferation regime. Their purpose is to prevent
the diversion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
to the creation of nuclear weapons. We are committed
to continuing to assist the IAEA in strengthening the
safeguards system. At the same time, it is crucial to
preserve the impartial, depoliticized and technically
sound nature of the NPT verification mechanism. An
issue on which the States parties to the NPT appear to
agree is the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
It is now necessary to bring together all States
parties to the Treaty, both nuclear and non-nuclear,
in order to reduce tensions. It is important that the
holding of the 2020 Review Conference should
contribute to strengthening, not weakening, the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, That means it should be held
in the most non-confrontational manner possible. At a
minimum, States parties must emphasize their common
commitment to the Treaty and reaffirm the obligations
they undertook in the course of earlier review cycles.
Russia is interested in preserving and improving
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and is ready to
cooperate closely with all participants to ensure the
success of the 2020 Review Conference.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank Belgium for
organizing this very important briefing. We would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Foreign
Minister of Germany, to the Council. I would also like
to thank Mrs. lzumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, and Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, Presidentdesignate of the 2020 Review Conference for the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), for their
insightful and comprehensive briefings.
Indonesia fully supports the NPT as the cornerstone
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and an integral
instrument to advance efforts for denuclearization
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The collapse
of the arms control architecture, increased tensions
between some States and the continued existence of
nuclear weapons, with their doctrines, underscore the
imperative for a successful 2020 Review Conference.
As a long-standing proponent for a world without
nuclear weapons, Indonesia is participating actively
in the preparations for the Review Conference. While
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

non-nuclear-weapon States must play an effective role,
nuclear-weapon States must also step forward credibly
to uphold the NPT in its entirety. In that context, allow
me to underline three points.
First is the balanced, comprehensive and
non-discriminatory implementation of the three pillars
of the NPT. Those three pillars — disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear
energy — must be fully implemented in a mutually
reinforcing manner. To single out any one pillar and
relegate the other two not only dilutes the Treaty’s
aims and credibility but also undermines support for
the Treaty, which is essential to sustain it. The NPT
enjoyed wide support because it also provided a legal
commitment regarding nuclear disarmament and
enabled the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Secondly, nuclear disarmament must be complete,
verifiable and irreversible. We urge nuclear-weapon
States to fulfil their commitments under article VI of
the NPT. That is an explicit legal obligation of all parties
and its implementation is not optional or conditional.
Indonesia is seriously concerned about the increased
prominence being given by some States to nuclear
weapons in their security doctrines, including through
modernization programmes. Non-proliferation derives
its legitimacy from the absence of nuclear weapons.
Their total elimination remains the only guarantee to
translate our common desire to maintain international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, into reality. The universalization of
the NPT is of vital importance.
Thirdly, an effective non-proliferation regime is
necessary for the creation of a world free of nuclear
weapons. All nuclear-weapon States, as well as all
States non-parties to the Treaty, should place all their
nuclear facilities under the full scope of International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards. Indonesia
also underscores nuclear-weapon-free zones as critical
mechanisms against nuclear weapons. In that regard,
Indonesia welcomes the first conference to establish
a Middle East zone free of nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction. It must be underlined that the
establishment of such a zone in the Middle East is an
integral part of the indefinite extension of the Treaty.
Furthermore, we call for the early accession of nuclearweapon States to the Protocol to the Treaty on the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone.

S/PV. 8733

Reiterating the responsibilities of States parties
under the NPT, we urge everyone to work together to
help attain a befitting Review Conference. The world
cannot afford any backtracking from commitments that
were agreed at previous Review Conferences. Council
members have certain responsibilities to ensure
that the Conference decidedly contributes to global
peace and security. At the national level, Indonesia,
as the coordinator of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries States parties to the NPT, will continue to
play its role and contribute actively to a successful 2020
Review Conference.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Belgian
presidency for organizing this very important briefing
today. We warmly welcome the presence of and
statement delivered by His Excellency Mr. Heiko
Maas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and
appreciate the German initiatives to promote support
for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) ahead of the upcoming Review
Conference of the States Parties in May. We also thank
High Representative Nakamitsu and Ambassador
Zlauvinen for their informative briefings.
After half a century and nine Review Conferences,
the NPT remains the universal cornerstone of nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. It provides a
framework for preventing a nuclear war catastrophe,
pursuing nuclear disarmament and promoting
international cooperation on peaceful uses. Great
achievements have been recorded in the field of
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Many efforts
have been undertaken to strengthen and universalize
the non-proliferation regime. I would like to commend
the role and contributions of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in those two fields, and of the
Security Council vis-à-vis non-proliferation.
Nuclear disarmament has seen some progress, but it
still falls far short of the expectations of the international
community. Today, nuclear arsenals remain capable of
destroying humankind hundreds of times over. Any
use of nuclear weapons — by intention, by accident
or by miscalculation — would threaten international
peace and security. Fifty years later, what remains
undiminished is the insecurity of non-nuclear States,
especially those that have seriously implemented their
non-proliferation obligations in good faith.
Viet Nam reaffirms its strong support for the strict
and balanced implementation of the NPT across all

20-051109/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

three pillars: nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament
and peaceful uses. We have joined all international
efforts on non-proliferation, including various universal
and regional treaties; adhered to the IAEA’s highest
standards on safeguards; and continued to seriously
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into
force of the NPT, we would like to stress the following.
First, confidence-building measures should be
actively pursued, both among nuclear-weapon States
and between them and non-nuclear-weapon States.
Good relations, genuine intentions and concrete steps
towards disarmament — even if small — among
nuclear-weapon States can lower the risk of nuclear
war. Negative security assurances, support for nuclearweapon-free zones and assistance in peaceful uses
from nuclear-weapon States can encourage stronger
adherence to non-proliferation by non-nuclearweapon States.
Secondly, non-proliferation obligations under the
NPT and the relevant Security Council resolutions
should be implemented in a serious and consistent way.
Stronger efforts should be made to ensure adherence
to and the entry into force of all related international
treaties, including the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty.
Thirdly, nuclear disarmament efforts should
be made by nuclear-weapon States, individually or
collectively, as a tangible way to implement article VI of
the NPT, including the possibility of joining the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in the future.
Fourthly, the regime of nuclear-weapon-free
zones should be strengthened through the effective
implementation of related treaties and the adherence of
nuclear-weapon States to existing ones, as well as the
creation of new zones, including in the Middle East.
Here, we call on the nuclear-weapon States to sign the
Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone.
Fifthly, dialogue and negotiations should continue
in good faith to resolve difficult issues, including those
related to North-East Asia and the Middle East.
To conclude, five out of the nine Review
Conferences held so far have failed to reach consensus.
On the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of
the NPT, the cause of peace and the spirit of humanity
must prevail. Let us join hands and even the odds.
10/19

26/02/2020

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Belgium for scheduling
this briefing on the important issue of nuclear
non-proliferation — one of the crucial pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). My thanks also go to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas;
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu; and the President-designate
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
NPT, His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, for their
excellent and informative briefings on the state of
preparations for the Review Conference in April.
Indeed, in April the 2020 NPT Review Conference
will be held, following the previous Conference in 2015,
which ended in disagreement. This year’s Conference
will allow us to take stock of the progress made over the
past five years in the implementation of all objectives
of the Treaty relating to its three pillars: disarmament,
non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and technology.
My delegation is therefore pleased to participate in
a constructive spirit in this briefing on a subject that
is of great concern to the international community.
The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons has been a
contentious issue for decades in the light of its impact
on global security. The Security Council has an
enormous responsibility in that regard. That is another
reason why the Niger, a member of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors,
welcomes this meeting.
It is important to note that, since its entry into force
on 5 March 1970, the non-proliferation Treaty has made
it possible to considerably reduce the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and progress towards disarmament
goals while promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear
technology. Statistics on the gains made clearly
demonstrate the strategic importance of the NPT as an
essential instrument for international stability.
However, despite the positive results, there
remain grey areas when it comes to the Treaty’s
implementation. The violations we have witnessed pose
a serious threat to world peace and therefore demand
the increased vigilance of the international community.
My delegation strongly denounces and condemns those
violations and is outraged by the growing efforts in
recent years to update nuclear arsenals, which still pose
a nuclear threat to the world, which aspires to greater
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

peace and justice. Cooperation among States parties is
an important element of the implementation of the NPT
and must be strengthened if we are to reach the critical
consensus it requires.
The Niger was deeply concerned about the lack
of consensus emerging from the second session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review
Conference, which posed a real obstacle to the
achievement of the NPT objectives. In that regard, my
delegation calls for the strict compliance of States parties
with their international obligations. These States stand
to gain from this instrument of peace. My delegation
calls on all States to work harder to consolidate and
sustain the implementation of the NPT, which is the
cornerstone of the international security architecture.
By ratifying the NPT on 9 October 1992, the Niger
demonstrated its commitment to the Treaty’s objectives.
We welcome the fact that the African continent is today
a nuclear-weapon-free zone thanks to the signing of
the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, which
amply shows Africa’s consensus to achieve a world free
of nuclear weapons. Further, the Treaty insists on the
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
On the eve of the tenth NPT Review Conference, to
be held this year, the Niger reaffirms its commitment to
the implementation of the NPT and to multilateral treaties
aimed at eliminating or preventing the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons at a time when
the emergence of actors promoting terrorism is already
threatening the peace and security of several States.
That is why the Niger once again calls on the nuclear
Powers to show greater responsibility in assuming their
international commitments in the area of arms control
and disarmament in order to spare humankind the
anguish of a new nuclear disaster.
The Niger welcomes the eminently positive
verification and control role of the IAEA within the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. All
States must therefore support its efforts. We must do
all we can to preserve the credibility, impartiality and
neutrality of the Agency.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the work of
the next NPT review conference will be crowned with
the greatest success.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu
and Ambassador Zlauvinen, President-designate of

S/PV. 8733

the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), for
their briefings.
The NPT is the cornerstone of the international
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
an important component of the post-war international
security system and a key institutional guarantee for
advancing nuclear disarmament, preventing nuclear
proliferation and promoting greater benefit from
nuclear energy for humankind.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Treaty and the twenty-fifth anniversary
of its indefinite extension. On the eve of the tenth NPT
Review Conference, Council members must recall the
historic role of the Treaty and to look forward to its
continued significance for international peace, security
and development, with a view to ensuring the success
of the Conference.
At present, challenges in the field of international
security are mounting and the competition among the
major Powers is intensifying. That has had a serious
impact on global strategic stability. Differences
have intensified in the field of nuclear disarmament,
unilateralism is running amok in the field of
non-proliferation and the politicization of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy has become a prominent trend.
In these new conditions, the ongoing strengthening of
the NPT mechanisms and the balanced advancement
of the Treaty’s three pillars — nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy — are of the utmost importance to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the promotion of human progress and development. To
that end, China proposes the following.
First, we must adhere to multilateralism and
safeguard the international order based on international
law. We should maintain a common, integrated,
cooperative and sustainable security concept, taking
into account the legitimate security concerns of all
parties and seeking common and universal security. We
should safeguard the existing multilateral arms-control
and disarmament mechanisms, including those of the
United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament,
and oppose treaty withdrawals and violations. We must
work together to set up rules and regulations in new
areas, such as outer space, cyberspace and artificial
intelligence, in order to meet the new challenges to
strategic security.

20-0511011/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

Secondly, we must stay the course when it comes to
progressive nuclear disarmament and effectively reduce
nuclear risks. The nuclear-weapon States should take
effective measures to reduce the role of nuclear weapons
in national security strategies, reiterate the concept that
a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought,
and exercise restraint in strategic capacity-building and
deployment. Nuclear disarmament should be guided by
the principles of maintaining global strategic stability
and undiminished security for all. The countries with
the largest nuclear arsenals should extend their bilateral
nuclear disarmament treaties and make further drastic
and substantive reductions of their nuclear weapons so
as to create conditions for other nuclear-weapon States
to join the nuclear disarmament process.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and eliminate the risk of
nuclear-weapons proliferation. The proliferation of
nuclear weapons has complex root causes and requires
an integrated approach to tackle the symptoms and
the root causes. The authority and universality of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime must
be strengthened. We must abandon double standards
and selectivity. We must promote political solutions to
regional nuclear hotspot issues and support the full and
effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the dialogue process between the
United States and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
the implementation of the outcome documents of
successive NPT Review Conference, and the decision
to establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East.
Fourthly, we must fully tap the potential to
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and related
international cooperation. The peaceful use of nuclear
energy is an inalienable right conferred upon the States
parties by the Treaty. Preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons should not undermine the legitimate
right of all countries, particularly developing countries,
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The International
Atomic Energy Agency should play an active role in
promoting exchanges and cooperation among countries
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in promoting
common development and prosperity.
China has earnestly implemented the provisions
of the Treaty and the outcomes of previous Review
Conferences. At the third session of the Preparatory
Committee for the tenth NPT Review Conference,
12/19

26/02/2020

we submitted a national compliance report that
comprehensively expounds on our policy propositions
and compliance achievements in connection with the
Treaty’s three pillars. We will update and improve the
national compliance report and submit it to the tenth
Review Conference.
China actively participates in cooperation among
the nuclear quintet — the Council’s five permanent
members (P-5). At the annual P-5 conference in Beijing
in 2018, we urged the parties to clearly define the future
direction of cooperation. At this year’s P-5 conference
in London, China held in-depth discussions with the
other four nuclear-weapon States, the NPT Bureau
and other relevant parties on the issue of maintaining
the Treaty mechanisms. The P-5 working group on
nuclear Terminology, led by China, has made important
progress and will submit a new version of the nuclear
glossary to the tenth Review Conference. The P-5
reached a series of cooperative initiatives to help the
tenth Review Conference achieve success.
As a party to the NPT, China has always firmly
upheld the universality, validity and authority of the
Treaty, remained committed to advancing the NPT
review process and made unremitting efforts to push
forward the process of nuclear disarmament, safeguard
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and promote the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and related international
cooperation. China has always kept to the path of
peaceful development and pursued an independent
foreign policy of peace and a defensive national defence
policy. China will continue to actively participate
in and practice multilateralism, firmly safeguard
the international arms-control and non-proliferation
regime and contribute substantively to the noble cause
of peace and security for humankind.
Ms. Luna (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the valuable briefings
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the President-designate of
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the initiative
to convene this meeting, and we would like to begin
by reiterating our unconditional commitment to the
NPT as the cornerstone of the disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation architecture and an essential tool in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

We believe that the only guarantee against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons is their prohibition and
total elimination. That is why we support the adoption
and endorse the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons, as we believe that it complements and
reinforces the NPT.
We are concerned about the major challenges
facing the NPT, including the termination of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF),
the nuclear situation in North Korea and the standoff
involving the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) with Iran. With the official termination
of the INF, the disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture is under the terrible threat of the possible
resumption of the arms race that we thought had been
left behind with the Cold War. We therefore urge the
parties concerned to renew the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty and begin negotiations on new arms
control measures. Similarly, with regard to the nuclear
issue in North Korea, we hope that greater efforts will
be made to resume dialogue with a view to achieving
the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
under the safeguards and additional protocols of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
We also emphasize the importance of preserving the
JCPOA, which was the successful result of diplomacy
and multilateralism. We believe that Iran must continue
to comply with its commitments in accordance with
the Plan of Action and resolution 2231 (2015), while, at
the same time, the other parties must ensure that Iran
enjoys the previously agreed economic benefits.
On another note, we express our concern about
the number of existing nuclear weapons and those on
alert status and the inclusion of the policy of nuclear
deterrence in security doctrines. It is therefore
imperative that States honour their commitments
without distinction.
Of the three fundamental pillars of the NPT, the
disarmament pillar has seen the least progress. It
is in a state of paralysis and requires that effective
measures be taken in good faith with a view to general
and complete disarmament, in accordance with the
provisions outlined in article VI of the Treaty, which
remains applicable despite its lack of implementation.
It is also necessary to respect and implement the
agreements reached at previous Review Conferences,
including the 1995 resolution on the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, the

S/PV. 8733

13 practical steps adopted in 2000 and the action plan
adopted in 2010.
Moreover, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty remains a key component of the disarmament and
non-proliferation regime. We therefore call on annex 2
States to accede to and ratify the Treaty to facilitate
its entry into force. It is imperative to negotiate as
soon as possible a legally binding, non-discriminatory
and verifiable instrument banning the production of
fissile material.
In conclusion, we hope that States will commit to
reducing strategic risks and ensuring the establishment
of credible verification mechanisms to promote
confidence-building and transparency and facilitate
cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We reaffirm our support for the NPT and its Review
Conference, and we hope that, when it next convenes,
concrete and proactive measures will be agreed.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, and Ambassador Zlauvinen for their briefings.
Over the past 50 years, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has
minimized the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
provided the framework to enable significant levels
of nuclear disarmament and allowed States to develop
secure, safe and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It
has played a crucial role in providing the basis for
our discussions on Iran and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The United Kingdom is committed
to the NPT review process and will work with all
partners for a positive outcome.
We want to ensure that the upcoming 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT allows us to hold
full and frank discussions with the greatest number of
States parties on all pillars of the NPT, reflects on the
successes made so far, and sets a collective direction
for the future. Our ambition is that the State parties
agree a consensus outcome. Let me highlight four of
the United Kingdom’s contributions to a successful
Review Conference.
First, we will submit a final national report, setting
out how we have implemented the NPT across all three
pillars during this cycle. We submitted a draft version
during the 2019 NPT Preparatory Committee and have
hosted a series of feedback sessions with a wide range of
State and civil society representatives and academics.

20-0511013/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

Secondly, we have coordinated the process involving
the Council’s five permanent members (P-5) since the
Preparatory Committee, continuing the excellent work
that took place under the Chinese leadership. The United
Kingdom hosted a P-5 Directors General conference in
London from 12 to 13 February and welcomed there
Ambassador Gustavo Zlauvinen and other members
of the Bureau for a fruitful exchange of views. P-5
discussions at that conference covered all three pillars
of the NPT and included improving transparency and
P-5 cooperation on a range of initiatives.
Thirdly, in the light of our focus on transparency,
the conference included a day for civil society and
think tanks to engage with P-5 officials and discuss
those important issues.
Fourthly, with regard to peaceful uses, P-5 States
have been working together to enhance the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology. We all fully support the
Technical Cooperation Programme of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to ensure that the benefits of
nuclear technology are accessible to those who need
them most.
Nevertheless, we do not underestimate the
challenges surrounding the Review Conference. We
know that some States feel that progress on nuclear
disarmament has been slow. The United Kingdom
continuously engages with a wide range of States
and takes those concerns seriously. The United
Kingdom’s view is that any meaningful discussion on
disarmament must take into account the wider security
environment, which is increasingly difficult. We all
have a responsibility to work towards a safer, more
stable world in which States with nuclear weapons feel
able to relinquish them.
Concerning the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, which others have raised, the United
Kingdom has been clear that we will not sign or ratify
the Treaty. Instead, the United Kingdom will continue
to promote the step-by-step approach, work for the
universalization of the NPT and the early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty,
and promote the early commencement and conclusions
of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty in the
Conference on Disarmament.
We must also ensure that the NPT Review
Conference gives proper regard to the achievements
that it has made possible under its second and third
pillars. With regard to its second pillar, the NPT has
14/19

26/02/2020

played an unparalleled role in curtailing the nuclear
arms race. Historic predictions were made of 10 or
even 20 nuclear-armed States. Today, there remain
fewer than 10. Concerning the third pillar, the global
peaceful use of nuclear energy allows us to address
some of the biggest challenges, from climate change to
economic growth.
As a direct result of the NPT, we have been able
to harness nuclear power to improve the lives of our
citizens, for example, in the areas of food, agriculture,
health care and, as I mentioned, climate change.
For those and other reasons, the United Kingdom
continues to believe that the non-proliferation Treaty,
approaching its fiftieth anniversary, remains essential
to the maintenance of a safe and secure world. We look
forward to engaging with all Security Council members
and all States parties to achieve a successful outcome at
this year’s Review Conference and help ensure that the
non-proliferation Treaty remains effective and central
to ensuring our collective security for many years
to come.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. I welcome Mr. Heiko Maas,
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. I also
thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, as well as Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen,
President-designate of the 2020 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), for their valuable briefings.
Tunisia reiterates its full support for the NPT as
the cornerstone of the entire non-proliferation regime.
We are committed to contributing to the success of the
upcoming NPT Review Conference. We also stress that
the credibility of the NPT is underpinned by the balanced
implementation of its three pillars — disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. In that regard, we express our concern that
the continued lack of any concrete progress in the area
of nuclear non-proliferation could weaken the entire
non-proliferation regime.
In addition, certain States still prioritize nuclear
weapons in their security doctrines. They permit
their use against non-nuclear-weapon States. The
announcement of modernizing nuclear arsenals is also
a source of concern, as it portends a dangerous and
qualitative nuclear arms race.
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

Tunisia is following with concern the difficulties,
at both the bilateral and multilateral levels, that
confront some conventions on the non-proliferation or
reduction of nuclear weapons. We hope that all parties
concerned will resume dialogue to maintain the existing
conventions and push for their complete and effective
implementation, thereby contributing to support for the
non-proliferation and disarmament regime on the basis
of international law.
Tunisia stresses the importance of achieving
the universality of the NPT through the accession of
non-party States as non-nuclear-weapon States. We
also stress the dire need for all States parties to honour
the pledges made at previous review conferences.
The failure of the 2015 NPT Review Conference
must not dampen our efforts. Instead, we should
redouble our efforts to maintain the credibility and
sustainability of the regime established by the Treaty.
That requires us to work for the success of the 2020
Review Conference by adopting a clear outcome on
the implementation of all previous commitments
and promoting the effectiveness of the Treaty. In
that regard, we recall that the decision to establish a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction was and remains integral
to the indefinite extension of the Treaty during the 1995
Review and Extension Conference.
Tunisia believes that the establishment of zones
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction is of great importance since that would lead
to realizing objectives relating to the disarmament of
weapons of mass destruction and non-proliferation,
thereby promoting peace and security at both the
regional and international levels.
In line with our policy and principled positions on
disarmament and non-proliferation, Tunisia acceded
to the NPT, the Biological Weapons Convention,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. Tunisia also
supported the adoption by the General Assembly of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, based
on our belief that the Treaty is in line with the NPT and
supports its objectives.
We believe that the conference on the establishment
of a middle east zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction represents the
proper framework in which to bring together all parties
concerned and establish a constructive dialogue to

S/PV. 8733

address disarmament and non-proliferation challenges
in the region. Following that track, with the concerted
effort of all, will lead to the establishment of a regional
mechanism that contributes to consolidating the pillars
of sustained peace and security in the region and
promoting cooperation in that field, on the basis of
decisions and recommendations reached by consensus.
We consider that the conference is also a step in the
right direction that deserves support from the depositary
States of the NPT and the sponsors of the 1995 decision
on the Middle East. We would like to reiterate that the
responsibility to free the Middle East from weapons
of mass destruction is a collective international
responsibility. We call upon all parties concerned to
participate in future sessions of the Conference.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I
would like to commend the initiative of Germany in
convening today’s important meeting on the issue of
non-proliferation. The fiftieth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) presents the Council with an
opportunity to express support for the Treaty and to
assume collective responsibility for its future.
I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Zlauvinen for their informative briefings.
For 50 years, the NPT has been a key multilateral
instrument of the global effort to pursue nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. With 190 member States, the NPT is
the agreement of greatest adherence in the field of arms
control. The Treaty has significantly helped to contain
the spread of nuclear weapons and reduce the number of
stockpiled nuclear weapons from their Cold War peak.
It has also provided a framework for the safe sharing
of civil nuclear technology, such as for energy, medical
and agricultural uses. We can all agree the NPT has
made, and continues to make, the world safer and more
stable. There is no credible alternative to the Treaty.
However, we should not assume that the Treaty will
maintain its accomplishments and positive role without
active support for its implementation and compliance.
The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
this year is being convened in a complicated security
environment, with increasing international strain on
the non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
Further progress of the implementation of the Treaty

20-0511015/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

remains a challenge. Non-compliance and the risk of
proliferation are causing the most serious concerns.
The flagrant violations of Security Council
resolutions by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea cannot be tolerated. Our objective must remain
to ensure that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea returns to full and verifiable compliance with
all its NPT obligations. Until then, sanctions must be
enforced by all States.
Estonia is deeply concerned that Iran has taken
steps that are inconsistent with its commitments under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We
urge Iran to continue to abide strictly by all its nuclearrelated commitments and return without delay to full
compliance with the JCPOA. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) to monitor and verify Iran’s commitments.
Estonia shares the ultimate goal of a world without
nuclear weapons and continues to advocate for a
progressive approach to be pursued in a realistic and
responsible way, in accordance with article VI of the
NPT. That approach takes account of the international
security environment, without ignoring the concerns of
the risks posed by nuclear weapons. In that connection,
the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty remains crucial for constraining
new weapons development and the improvement of
existing ones. We urge all States, in particular the
annex 2 countries, to sign and ratify the Treaty without
further delay.
Equally important practical measures include the
immediate commencement of the negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament of a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons; work
on risk reduction; dialogue on nuclear doctrines; and the
reaffirmation of existing negative security assurances.
While we are conscious of the difficult and
unpredictable security environment, we need to move
forward on building trust and strengthening nuclear
disarmament verification mechanisms and transparency
on nuclear arsenals with a view to providing a pathway
to further reductions of nuclear-weapon stockpiles. To
that end, we encourage the NPT nuclear-weapon States
to continue their work on all the issues mentioned above
and increase their efforts to deliver outcomes.
Finally, the value of the third pillar of the NPT
and the role of the IAEA’s system in promoting the
16/19

26/02/2020

responsible development of peaceful applications of
nuclear technology should not be underestimated. To
ensure the safe use of nuclear energy, it is important
for all NPT States parties to follow the highest safety
and security standards. Estonia is committed to support
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund and its Technical
Cooperation Programme.
The NPT is the foundation of the global disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. We have to do our utmost
to uphold and strengthen that major multilateral Treaty
of international security and stability. We hope that all
States Parties will engage constructively and in good
faith in identifying common ground that will enable
us to achieve a successful outcome at the 2020 Review
Conference and to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary
of the NPT. There is more that unites than divides
us. We have a collective responsibility to find that
common ground.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence here today
of the German Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Heiko Maas. I would also like to thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu and Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen for their
briefings on the challenges ahead for the upcoming
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
The Treaty is one of the cornerstones of our
collective security system. It is an irreplaceable
bulwark against the risk of nuclear proliferation. It
is, indeed, the only instrument that makes it possible
to prevent nuclear war, as stated in the preamble to
the Treaty, while also permitting the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. Its preservation is essential, because
the threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery has not
disappeared, and because our world today is more
uncertain and volatile than ever.
We are witnessing a troubling degradation of
our strategic environment, the instability of which
is nourished by asymmetries and escalations. The
Security Council is regularly convened to address all
these crisis situations, which are multiplying, from
the Levant to North-East Asia, while the management
of proliferation crises unfortunately remains a major
priority that continues to require us to take action. In
that context, what should be our common road map and
how can we ensure the preservation of the NPT and the
balance of its three pillars?
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

It is above all important to maintain a robust and
united response to nuclear proliferation, whether by
addressing the North Korean crisis or ensuring that
Iran never acquires nuclear weapons. Beyond crises,
we must lend our full support to international bodies,
first and foremost to the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which must continue to have the means
necessary for their activities. We hope that all States
that have not yet done so will accede to the additional
protocol to the IAEA safeguards system. I would add
that we must also strengthen all measures to combat
the real threat of nuclear or radiological terrorism,
beginning with resolution 1540 (2004), which the
Council will review this year.
We must also promote a pragmatic and realistic
approach to disarmament, the ultimate objective of
which is set out in article VI of the NPT. Disarmament
is not in itself sufficient as an objective. We must
first improve the conditions of international security.
To achieve that, we must also see the world as it is.
The expectations for nuclear disarmament are high.
However, in the reality of today’s world, decreeing
nuclear disarmament will not contribute to improving
our security and ensuring strategic stability, but to the
contrary. Let me reiterate here that France will not join
a treaty banning nuclear weapons, which will create no
new obligations but will weaken the NPT standards and
the non-proliferation regime.
France has taken robust, concrete measures
in the area of disarmament, which contribute to
unique achievement in the world, in line with our
responsibilities and interests. We are committed to
progressive nuclear disarmament, in which all States
commit to creating the conditions for a world free of
nuclear weapons, with undiminished security for all.
That obviously requires the United States and Russia
to pursue the reduction of their nuclear arsenals; the
early entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty; and the launching of negotiations on a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for use
in weapons in the Conference on Disarmament.
Lastly, work on the verification of nuclear
disarmament is crucial and must continue — but it
is not enough. We must step up our efforts to reduce
strategic risks and France will take part fully in those
efforts. As President Macron said in a statement dated
7 February, France is also prepared to participate in
discussions that would bring together the five nuclearweapon States, in the context of the NPT, to discuss their

S/PV. 8733

priorities for nuclear disarmament, confidence-building
and the transparency of each State’s arsenal and
nuclear strategies.
With regard to civilian nuclear cooperation, France,
which harnesses the full ranges of nuclear technologies
for energy production and many other applications, will
continue to support countries wishing to embark on
that path or develop their capacity in that area. We will
continue to support the IAEA by maintaining appropriate
contributions, including in the area of nuclear safety
and security, which are indispensable conditions for the
responsible development of nuclear energy.
The NPT, given its robust nature, permanence and
universality, embodies the goal of strong and effective
multilateralism based on the law, towards which we
must collectively work. As we celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of its entry into force, I renew here our
call for members to move forward together towards the
strengthening of the multilateral security framework,
of which the NPT is one of the pillars. They should rest
assured of France’s resolute commitment in that regard,
alongside all those who wish to embark on that path in
good faith.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I want to join other colleagues in thanking Germany
for calling this meeting today in crucial support of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
The Security Council tackles some of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security,
including the prevention of the further proliferation
of nuclear weapons. As we approach the fiftieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT, we look
forward to celebrating that historic occasion together
here at the United Nations on 5 March. Over nearly
five decades, the NPT has proven to be critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
has made us all the more secure by constraining the
spread of nuclear weapons, and it has thereby both
enabled the global peaceful use of nuclear energy and
helped to create conditions conducive to progress on
nuclear disarmament.
Fifty years ago, few would have dared to predict
that we would be here today, celebrating the success
of the Treaty. Prior to the NPT, the United States
expressed dire concerns over a possible snowball effect
of cascading proliferation, which would increase the

20-0511017/19

S/PV.8733

Non-proliferation

world’s nuclear-weapon stockpiles and undermine
confidence in the ability of non-proliferation policies
to prevent such a dangerous sequence. Yet in a
demonstration of remarkable diplomatic resolve, the
international community joined together against that
collective threat, reflecting a rare consensus during a
time of Cold War polarization. Our efforts culminated
in the successful negotiation of that vital Treaty and its
subsequent entry into force. There has been unwavering
international consensus about the indispensable role
of the Treaty in maintaining collective peace and
security. The NPT has succeeded for half a century
precisely because it serves the fundamental and widely
recognized common interest of curbing the proliferation
of the world’s most dangerous weapons.
We have also seen enormous progress on
disarmament, in part because the NPT helped to curtail
the emergence of new nuclear Powers. With the easing
of Cold War tensions and the success of the NPT-based
proliferation regime in impeding the spread of nuclear
weapons, it has been possible to reduce the nuclear
arsenals of both the United States and Russia to levels
not seen since the 1950s. The stockpile of the United
States today has been reduced to less than one eighth of
its Cold War peak.
We must also recognize that advancing towards the
ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons must
take into account the global security environment. We
cannot overlook the fact that the actions of those States
that are expanding and modernizing their nuclear
stockpiles, threatening their neighbours and violating
their arms-control obligations have contributed to a
deterioration in global security conditions.
To address the security challenges that impede
progress on disarmament, the United States, together
with more than 40 international partners, has launched
a path-breaking new initiative, entitled “Creating an
Environment for Nuclear Disarmament”, or CEND.
The CEND Working Group has already met twice
and will meet again in April. The Working Group
seeks to foster constructive dialogue on identifying
the challenges to disarmament and on exploring ways
to improve the underlying conditions in the global
security environment so as to make further progress
towards and ultimately achieve nuclear disarmament.
In that regard, in addition to its emphasis on
dialogue and diplomatic engagement with all relevant
parties, the CEND initiative stands in stark contrast to
18/19

26/02/2020

the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
fails to address the security challenges that continue to
make nuclear deterrence necessary. It will not eliminate
a single nuclear warhead or make any nation more
secure. In fact, when reviewing the text of the Treaty,
it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that its drafters
sought to give greater legal weight to their document at
the expense of the NPT, which is unfortunate.
As we turn towards the 2020 NPT Review
Conference, the United States seeks a positive outcome
of that meeting that reflects consensus on the broadest
basis possible. We believe that consensus is possible
if the parties to the NPT focus on the big picture,
emphasize their common interests and avoid insisting
on divisive positions that cannot lead to consensus.
To strengthen the NPT and the non-proliferation
regime, States must support the universalization of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) additional
protocol, which is an important tool that provides the
IAEA the ability to verify the peaceful use of all nuclear
material in States with IAEA comprehensive safeguards
agreements. Those agreements, in combination with
the additional protocol, have become the de facto
international standard in nuclear safeguards. Moreover,
nuclear supplier States should make the adoption of the
additional protocol by recipient States a requirement
for nuclear exports.
States must also be united in the goal of the final
fully verified denuclearization of North Korea. We
must remain committed to a secure, peaceful and bright
future for North Korea if it fulfils its obligations. We
must remain united in our determination that Iran must
never acquire a path to nuclear weapons.
The 2020 NPT Review Conference will also be an
opportunity to highlight how the NPT and the broader
nuclear non-proliferation regime have made possible
thriving international cooperation on the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, science and technology. We aim to
build on that success. We are optimistic that the NPT
will remain at the centre of international security.
Yet that outcome is far from guaranteed. We must
continue to preserve and strengthen the NPT so that
50 years from now our successors may mark the one
hundredth anniversary of the Treaty as an enduring
accomplishment that continues to promote international
security and prosperity.
20-05110

26/02/2020

Non-proliferation

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
All members have underlined that the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is a
significant achievement. It is particularly important to
reaffirm the gains of the NPT and to strengthen them
in the current international context, where mistrust
prevails over collective action and where the red
lines of the past are likely to be crossed. Indeed, our
multilateral system, based on international law and
carefully built through consensus, is being increasingly
undermined, particularly in the area of non-proliferation
and disarmament. The lack of progress towards the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of
North Korea and the threats to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action concerning Iran, as well as the end of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the still
uncertain extension of the New START Treaty, are not
encouraging signs.
Admittedly, the current security environment
brings specific constraints that should not be
underestimated. But the current challenges cannot be
an excuse for inaction or, worse still, a step backwards
where the interests of some prevail over those of others.
Belgium therefore reaffirms its strong support for
the three pillars of the NPT and urges all signatory
States to spare no effort to achieve a positive outcome
at the upcoming Review Conference. Our ultimate goal
is a world free of nuclear weapons and there is only one
way to achieve it: the full implementation of the NPT.
The Security Council has its part to play by addressing
non-proliferation issues, such as North Korea and Iran,
as well as by improving the overall security situation
through its role in conflict resolution.
Moreover, a specific responsibility falls to the five
permanent members of the Council, the only nuclearweapon States recognized by the NPT. As States that
possess approximately 90 per cent of the world’s nuclear
arsenal, the United States and the Russian Federation
have the duty to avoid unlimited military and nuclear
competition. The fate of the New START Treaty, the only

S/PV. 8733

treaty limiting the deployment of strategic weapons, is
of great importance in that context. We welcome the
recent actions taken by the United Kingdom and France
to reduce their stockpiles and means of delivery. We
hope that China will follow the same path, including
a complete and irreversible halt to the production of
fissile material for military purposes.
An international system based on the rule of law
can succeed only if the rules are respected by all.
Even if some States have a specific responsibility,
the cooperation of all States remains necessary for
the success of the NPT. That is why we call for the
universalization of the Treaty.
Belgium also recalls that a world without nuclear
weapons means a world without nuclear tests. Belgium
regrets that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, which was signed more than 20 years ago, has
still not entered into force due to the non-accession of
eight annex 2 States.
The implementation of the NPT also requires
support for its institutional actors, in particular the
International Atomic Energy Agency as well as the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
to which an appropriate platform must be given at the
Review Conference.
Finally, we wish to underscore that, as the next
Chair of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, Belgium will
be particularly attentive to recent technological
developments that are likely to shorten the path towards
the acquisition of nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, Belgium strongly reaffirms its
commitment to the NPT and calls on the members
of the Council to look beyond their differences and
work together to advance non-proliferation, nuclear
disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

20-0511019/19
