UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/43
13 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3810th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 August 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned about the situation in the
Republic of the Congo following the outbreak of factional fighting in
Brazzaville on 5 June 1997. The Council is particularly concerned at the
plight of civilians caught up in the fighting, which has resulted in
widespread loss of life, displacement of the population and severe
humanitarian conditions in Brazzaville. The Council considers that the
situation in the Republic of the Congo is likely to endanger peace,
stability and security in the region.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of
the International Mediation Committee under the Chairmanship of the
President of Gabon and the National Mediation Committee under the
Chairmanship of the Mayor of Brazzaville to persuade the parties involved
to reach agreement on a ceasefire and a peaceful settlement of the current
crisis. It also affirms its support for the important and constructive
role of the Joint United Nations/Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region in these negotiations.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the recent
recurrence of fighting in Brazzaville, calls upon the two parties to the
conflict to halt all acts of violence immediately and underlines the need
to respect the ceasefire agreement signed on 14 July 1997. It also calls
upon the two parties to resolve the crisis on the basis of the proposals
submitted by the President of Gabon currently under discussion in
Libreville, including agreement on an interim government of national unity
and a timetable for the holding of Presidential elections.
"The Security Council recalls the letter of 20 June 1997 to its
President from the Secretary-General (S/1997/483) drawing attention to the
request of the President of Gabon for deployment of an appropriate force to
Brazzaville, and the relevant letters to the Secretary-General from the
President of the Republic of the Congo and the Secretary-General of the OAU
97-21725 (E)

130897

/...

S/PRST/1997/43
English
Page 2

(S/1997/495, annexes I and II). The Council endorses the three conditions
for the establishment of such a force set by the Secretary-General, namely
complete adherence to an agreed and viable ceasefire, agreement to the
international control of Brazzaville airport and a clear commitment to a
negotiated settlement covering all political and military aspects of the
crisis.
"The Security Council is of the view that, despite some positive
political developments, these conditions have not yet been fulfilled and
calls upon the parties to fulfil them without delay. The Council intends
to take a decision on this matter once the Secretary-General has submitted
a report to it on the question of the fulfilment of these conditions and
containing recommendations on further United Nations involvement in the
Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council also calls upon both parties to respect relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law and to ensure safe and
unimpeded access by international humanitarian organizations to persons in
need of assistance as a result of the conflict, and in any other way to
facilitate the effective implementation of humanitarian programmes.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
