VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of resolution 3 7/ 198 and that a meeting of heads of
national drug law enforcement agencies is convened in
1986;
I I. Also requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding, within the framework
of advisory services, interregional seminars to study the
experience gained by the United Nations system, in particular by the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control,
and by Member States in integrated rural development
programmes for replacing illegal crops;
12. Calls upon the specialized agencies and all other
relevant bodies of the United Nations system to participate actively in the implementation of the present
resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "International campaign
against traffic in drugs".
IOI st plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984

39/144.

National institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 23 of 16 December 1977,
33/46 of 14 December 1978, 34/49 of 23 November 1979,
36/ I 34 of 14 December 1981 and 38/ 123 of 16 December
1983,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Mindful also of the need to create conditions, at the
national, regional and international levels, for the protection and promotion of human rights,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 215 the International Covenants on
Human Rights 216 and other international human rights
instruments for promoting respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the significant role which institutions at the
national level can play in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing and
enhancing public awareness and observance of those rights
and freedoms,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General; 21 7
2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and
independence of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights, in accordance with
national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role that
national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of such national institutions;
4. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment or, where they already exist, the
strengthening of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights;
5. Invites all Member States to take appropriate steps
to disseminate the texts of human rights instruments,
215 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 I 6 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

233

including international covenants and conventions, in
their respective national or local languages, in order to give
the widest possible publicity to these instruments;
6. Recommends that all Member States should consider including in their educational curricula material relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights
issues;
7. Also recommends that all Member States should
take appropriate steps to encourage the exchange of experience in the establishment of national institutions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in carrying out
public information activities in the field of human rights,
to give due attention to the role of national institutions
and non-governmental organizations concerned with the
protection and promotion of human rights;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request, in
the implementation of paragraph 5 above, according high
priority to the needs of developing countries;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and, as
appropriate, increase assistance in the field of human
rights to Governments, at their request, within the framework of the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
his reports and of further information received, to prepare
and submit to the General Assembly, through the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council, a consolidated report, for eventual publication as
a United Nations handbook on national institutions for
the use of Governments, including information on the
various types and models of national and local institutions
for the protection and promotion of human rights, taking
into account differing social and legal systems;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/145.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Charter of the United Nations the
peoples of the United Nations declared their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and small
and to employ international machinery for the promotion
of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter
to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Emphasizing the significance and validity of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 215 and of the International Covenants on Human Rights 216 in promoting
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
21 7 ,\!39 556 and Add. I
