S/PV.7247

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7247th meeting

Thursday, 21 August 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant/Mr. Wilson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Ms. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Flies
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Klein

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention
Letter dated 5 August 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2014/572)

14-51253 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1451253*

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this important
debate.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention
Letter dated 5 August 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/572)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/572, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 August 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.

2/62

21/08/2014

Before I begin, allow me to pay tribute to an
outstanding United Nations leader who joins us for the
last time as High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navi Pillay. As the Secretary-General — and I
believe Council members as well — I have benefitted
from her honest views and unvarnished reports on the
terrible human rights abuses we confront in our world.
High Commissioner Pillay tells it like she sees it. When
people face discrimination and human rights abuses,
they know Navi Pillay is their advocate. Where others
may wish to avoid certain issues, Navi Pillay speaks
forthrightly, without fear. I am sure the Council joins
me in wishing her well in her next chapter. I have no
doubt that she will remain a key voice on the issues
facing the Security Council and humankind. I am very
proud and grateful to have worked with her during the
past six years. I am sure she will remain an outstanding
leader and honorary ambassador of the United Nations
in defending human rights. I wish her all the best.
As Secretary-General, one of my core priorities is
to improve the Organization’s ability to act early and
act preventively. We know that, if we do not address
emerging crises, they risk becoming bigger and costlier
for all. Today’s debate takes place as the world is
gripped by multiple violent conflicts. That highlights
the enormity of the challenge of prevention, and the
need to re-examine and refine our approach.
This year, we mark the one hundredth anniversary of
the start of the First World War, which left an estimated
17 million dead. It was called the war to end all wars.
Yet in the same generation, a second World War would
claim another 60 million lives. The United Nations rose
from the ashes of that devastation with a mission to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
We can take heart, even at this bleak moment, that
over the past quarter century wars between States have
become rare.
Yet we cannot speak of positive trends when we
look at Syria, Iraq, Gaza, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Ukraine and elsewhere. Conflicts
continue to exact an unacceptable toll. Events around
the world today clearly demonstrate the changing
nature and complexity of contemporary conflict. Many
countries face repeated cycles of turmoil. Civil wars
are no longer contained by national borders. Complex

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

threat environments tend to emerge in contexts of state
fragility, extreme poverty, weak institutions, a lack of
unifying leadership, porous borders and marginalized
populations. Terrorism and organized crime fuel
violence and instability. Distinctions between terrorists,
armed opposition and criminal enterprises are blurring.
Such evolving patterns of violence pose a major
challenge to our prevention work. Are our common
tools fit for the purpose? What must we do better?
How can we anticipate what lies ahead? The Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has a
unique responsibility.
Hard-won experience has taught us a number of
lessons about what works in prevention — allow me to
highlight five points.
First, being present early is essential. I speak not
just about early warning, but also about early action:
quickly mobilizing effective and unified diplomatic
action to defuse tensions in order to urge restraint
and to open up space for dialogue before perspectives
become hardened and more hostile. In recent cases,
the United Nations has played an important role in
providing parties with a ladder to climb down from
polarized positions.
It is said that no news is good news. In many cases
the opposite is true — good news is no news. Because
of their very success, such cases do not make the
headlines. But they nevertheless demand our attention
and resources. It takes our collective leadership and
courage to address seemingly far-off, simmering
problems, particularly when one may never get proof of
the value of that investment. We surely have plenty of
proof of the cost of not doing so.
Secondly, we must hone our skills. Conflictprevention and mediation are complex and increasingly
specialized fields. We have made strides in building
up expertise that is high-quality, rapidly deployable
and in great demand — in contexts as varied as peace
negotiations, constitutional reforms, electoral processes
and national dialogues.
Thirdly, partnerships are crucial. We can succeed
only if we build coalitions. I am encouraged by the
number of new peace and security initiatives that have
grown out of our strategic partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations in the Sahel, the Great
Lakes region, the Central African Republic and
elsewhere.

S/PV.7247

Fourthly, we must learn from collective mistakes.
My Rights up Front initiative places human rights
considerations at the very centre of United Nations
efforts in the field, at Headquarters and in our discourse
with Member States. It seeks to ensure that we avoid
the systemic failures of the past and recognize that
human rights violations are early-warning signals of
mass atrocities.
Fifthly, perhaps most important, comes leverage.
The Secretary-General can draw on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and use the power
of persuasion. Those are powerful tools in their own
right, and they reflect a shared understanding among
Member States. But to be effective they require that
the international community be closely aligned,
empowering the Secretary-General to speak on behalf
of a common voice.
When Member States join forces, we can achieve
much. The Council’s consensus on removing chemical
weapons from Syria is one recent case in point. Even
modest United Nations actions can have an important
impact when we have the Security Council’s united
support — speaking with one voice — for early
engagement. However, when consensus is limited
or when our actions come late and address only the
lowest common denominator, the consequences can be
measured in terrible loss of life, grave human suffering
and tremendous loss of credibility for the Council and
our institution.
No more important challenge stands before us than
improving our ability to reach stronger and earlier
consensus. It is time for a new era of collaboration,
cooperation and action from the Security Council.
There are millions of people around the world hoping
for, and counting on, decisive joint action by the one
and only global body entrusted with the obligation to
maintain international peace and security.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his inspiring statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to interact with the Security Council a
few days before the end of my term. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his very kind words and for his
support for my mandate, without which we would not
have been able to advance as we have.

14-512533/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

Conflict-prevention is complex, but it can be
achieved. In many States, democratic institutions
de-escalate disputes long before they reach the boiling
point. Even after violence has broken out, international
actors can help broker and enforce peace. In my own
country, South Africa, the United Nations helped end
300 years of injustice when it declared apartheid a
crime against humanity and imposed sanctions, and
democratic institutions were installed to resolve future
disputes.
In Nepal, following almost a decade of armed
conflict, my Office’s efforts included the deployment
of both short- and long-term strategies. They included
support for Constituent Assembly elections, capacitybuilding for police and civil society and important
Government initiatives, such as addressing caste-based
discrimination.
Following the 2007 massacres in Guinea — a
country at high risk of violence and civil war — the work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) demonstrated the
criticality of early engagement, notably in building
civil society’s capacity to investigate and document
human rights violations. There was coherent action
by national, regional and international actors, and the
Council established a commission of inquiry. Today
OHCHR’s country office continues to support stronger
institutions, transitional justice and reconciliation.
In Colombia, the United Nations efforts to
promote human rights and our capacity-building for
democratic culture and institutions helped to establish
a climate of respectful dialogue. A transitional justice
process included compensation for victims and a truth
commission. We facilitated high-level governmental
recognition of indigenous authorities. Mediation helped
contain local disputes. One particular good practice that
merits highlighting is Colombia’s unique early-warning
system to detect and prevent violations of human rights.
Human rights are always central to conflictprevention. Patterns of violations, including sexual
violence, provide early warning of escalation. The
human-rights agenda is also a detailed road map
for ways to resolve disputes. My Office’s years of
practical experience, including through human-rights
components of peacekeeping missions, demonstrate a
number of good practices that address both proximate
triggers of conflict and root causes. To emphasize
three, let me cite strengthening civil society actors,
increasing participation by women in decision-making
4/62

21/08/2014

and dialogue and addressing institutional and individual
accountability for past violations of human rights.
Yet, as the Secretary-General has pointed out,
the conflict in Syria is metastasizing outwards in
an uncontrollable process whose eventual limits we
cannot predict. Other complex and potentially highly
eruptive conflicts are under way in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Mali, the occupied Palestinian
territory, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
Ukraine. Those crises hammer home the full cost of the
international community’s failure to prevent conflict.
They combine massive bloodshed and devastation of
infrastructure with acutely destabilizing transnational
phenomena, including terrorism, the proliferation of
prohibited weaponry, organized crime and spoliation of
natural resources.
None of those crises erupted without warning. They
built up over years — and sometimes decades — of human
rights grievances: deficient or corrupt governance and
judicial institutions, discrimination and exclusion,
inequities in development, the exploitation and denial
of economic and social rights and the repression of
civil society and public freedoms. Early detection
systems, such as the 51 special procedures experts of
the Human Rights Council, and systematic scrutiny by
treaty bodies repeatedly alerted us to those shortfalls.
Therefore, although the specifics of each crisis could
not necessarily be predicted, many of the human rights
violations that were at their core were known. They
could have been addressed.
That was, in the first place, the duty of the relevant
States. But when Governments are unwilling or unable
to protect their people, it is the responsibility of the
international community and, singularly, the Security
Council, to intervene and to deploy the range of good
offices, support, inducements and coercion at its
disposal to defuse the triggers of conflict.
The Council’s interest in human rights increased
markedly during my tenure. But despite repeated
briefings regarding escalating violations in multiple
crises by OHCHR and other human rights mechanisms,
there has not always been a firm and principled decision
by members of the Council to put an end to crises. Shortterm geopolitical considerations and national interests,
narrowly defined, have repeatedly taken precedence
over intolerable human suffering and grave breaches
of and long-term threats to international peace and
security. I firmly believe that greater responsiveness by
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7247

the Council would have saved hundreds of thousands
of lives.

they accept a small human rights monitoring team with
deployment funded by the Treaty’s trust fund.

A broader conception of national interest would
be more appropriate to a century in which a growing
number of challenges face humankind as a whole.
In those terms, the use of the veto to stop actions
intended to prevent or defuse conflict is a short-term
and ultimately counterproductive tactic. The collective
interest, defined clearly by the Charter of the United
Nations, is in the national interests of every State.

The laws of the United Nations are most needed
when conflict looms, and the Council has the mandate
to address crises before they escalate into threats to
international peace and security.

State sovereignty is often invoked to deflect
United Nations action to prevent serious human rights
violations. But as I have often said to the representatives
of Governments: “You made the law; now you must
observe it”. Sovereign States established the United
Nations and built the international human rights
framework precisely because they knew that human
rights violations caused conflict and undermined
sovereignty. Early United Nations action to address
human rights protects States by warding off the threat
of devastating violence.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/605, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

The Council can take a number of innovative
approaches to prevent threats to international peace
and security. Within the Rights Up Front initiative,
the Secretary-General can be even more proactive in
alerting it to potential crises, including situations that
are not formally on its agenda. To further strengthen
early warning, the Council could also ask for more
regular and comprehensive human rights reporting by
protection actors. For example, my successor as High
Commissioner could provide an informal monthly
briefing.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China,
France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria,
the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America

The work done by commissions of inquiry to
establish clarity and prepare accountability should be
followed by Council implementation of many more of
their recommendations for follow-up. I trust that, in
future, the commissions too will benefit from regular,
official channels of communications with the Council.
Finally, the Council could adopt a standing consensus
on a menu of possible new responses to violations
alerts, such as rapid, flexible and resource-efficient
human rights monitoring missions, limited in time and
scope. Another innovative option could build on the
new Arms Trade Treaty, which requires arms exporters
and importers to confirm that weapons will not be used
to commit violations. States parties could agree that,
where there are concerns about human rights in States
that purchase arms, one condition of sale would be that

It has been an honour to serve the United Nations.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her powerful
briefing this morning.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2171 (2014).
Before we proceed with statements, I would like
to recall that, in accordance with the provisions of
note S/2010/507, which encourages both members and
non-members of the Council to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less, it is our intention to use the
flashing light on the collar of the speaker’s microphone
to indicate when five minutes have elapsed. I shall
strongly encourage both members and non-members of
the Council to conclude their remarks promptly once
the five minutes have elapsed.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour,
as we have a large number of speakers who wish to
participate.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.

14-512535/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their compelling and frank briefings today. I
also pay tribute to the exceptional work of Navi Pillay
during her time in office. Ms. Pillay has been fiercely
and fearlessly independent and principled. Her presence
today at this conflict-prevention debate reinforces the
critical link between peace, security and human rights.
This month, the world commemorates the start of
the First World War. We recall with grief and horror
the devastation that that and subsequent conflicts have
inflicted upon humankind, ravaging societies and
States. Last week in Belgium we discussed whether
we might have prevented the First World War had the
Security Council existed in 1914. My answer: not unless
the Council was prepared to take conflict prevention
more seriously than it currently does. Today’s debate is
an opportunity for the Council to reflect upon its role in
preventing conflict and to recall the moral, humanitarian
and political imperatives of early preventive action.
The nature of conflict has changed in the past
20 years. Intra-State conflicts with complex root causes
have largely replaced conflicts between States. Because
of the international dimensions of such conflicts, the
Council’s agenda is full and our capacity is stretched.
Yet we seem to have forgotten that prevention is
better than cure. The Council cannot continue to act
only in crisis mode. The Council was designed to be
a smoke detector, not just a fire extinguisher. That
is clear from Articles 1 and 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations and from its Chapter VI.
There are two main reasons that we have
sometimes failed to act on early warnings. First, the
root causes of brewing civil wars are complex; it can
be hard to predict exactly when they will flare. The
answer to that is regular and timely briefings on earlywarning indicators from early-warning actors across
the United Nations system. Secondly, the Council is
being constrained by a perceived tension between the
principle of sovereignty and its conflict-prevention role.
However, the true enemy of sovereignty is conflict itself,
as Ms. Pillay has just said. Conflicts can shatter States
and divide peoples. In contrast, early cooperation with,
and support from, United Nations or regional conflictprevention tools can bolster State sovereignty. A good
example of that was the deployment to Nepal in 2005
of a small civilian team, which supported the Nepalese
in ending conflict and launching a Nepalese-led peace
process.
6/62

21/08/2014

While the Council has the rimary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
many actors have a role to play. Flexibility is key. Like
many other things, peace and security begin at home.
Individual States must develop the key foundations
for minimizing, managing and resolving tensions and
for respect for human rights, democracy and strong
institutions founded on the rule of law. At the United
Nations, we need more horizon-scanning and early
discussion of potential conflicts. We must make better
use of the conflict-prevention tools listed in Chapter VI
of the Charter, including negotiation and mediation, as
the Secretary-General has just reminded us.
We have had some successes. The proactive
engagement of Said Djinnit and the United Nations
Office for West Africa in Guinea has had a clear
stabilizing impact. In Yemen, unanimous Council
support for the good offices of United Nations Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar has helped paved the way for
peaceful, if fragile, transition.
But our success rate is patchy at best. Resolution
2171 (2014), which we adopted today, recognizes the
cyclical nature of conflict and the key role that United
Nations regional offices, special political missions,
peacekeeping operations and regional and subregional
organizations can play in breaking that cycle.
Peacebuilding is a thread that must be woven into all
such activities.
Another core element of resolution 2171 (2014) is
the recognition that serious violations of human rights
can be an indicator of conflict, as well as a consequence
of conflict. The use of rape as a weapon of war can
exacerbate conflict as well as ravage lives. That point
was made with characteristic clarity by Sergio Vieira
de Mello, whose tragic killing we commemorated
two days ago. He observed that what was missing
in geopolitics was the recognition that flagrant and
systematic violations of human rights were frequently
the principle cause of global insecurity.
In order to break the cycle of conflict,
accountability, including for the most egregious crimes,
is therefore critical. Societies must heal, and future
perpetrators must be deterred. For moral, political
and humanitarian reasons, the United Kingdom fully
supports the Secretary-General’s drive to put rights up
front. He has called upon his staff to act with moral
courage by reporting early-warning signs of human
rights violations. The Council must display the same
moral courage by heeding and acting upon all early
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7247

signs it receives from the Secretary-General and United
Nations protection actors.

the coordinated implementation of many tools and
multiple actors.

As the threats the world faces change and as our
understanding of the root causes of conflict deepens,
our collective security system needs to adapt. As we
seek to plan for tomorrow while managing the crises
of today, the Council must consider the best preventive
medicine and who should administer it. In short, the
Council needs to switch from a culture of reaction to
a mindset of conflict prevention. Only then shall we
properly fulfil the responsibility given to us by the
Charter of the United Nations.

Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
enumerates the tools that States and the Security
Council can use to bring about the peaceful resolution of
disputes. Those tools are well known and include, inter
alia, negotiation, investigation, mediation, conciliation
and arbitration. Those instruments have not always
been fully utilized in the context of conflict prevention.
We welcome the fact that, with today’s resolution, the
Council has committed itself to making better use of
them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

But we must also look beyond current conflicts,
beyond those already on the Security Council’s agenda,
to recognize the signs that alert us to emerging ones,
keeping in mind that prevention is easier than cure. We
know that most conflicts are preceded by a significant
degradation of the human rights situation. The
Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative belongs
in that context, and we welcome it. We welcome it not
only because it places the question of human rights at
the heart of the activities of the United Nations system,
but also because its goal is to better inform Member
States about populations that are suffering serious
human rights violations or violations of international
humanitarian law, or are at risk for that, and thus to
contribute actively to the conflict-prevention effort.

Mr. Flies (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation. Allow me
also to take this opportunity to warmly thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay,
for what is doubtless her last appearance before the
Security Council.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.
Over the past few months we have witnessed one
conflict after another, some more deadly than the others.
Faced with the annihilation of so many human lives
and such misery and suffering, there is reason to ask
ourselves whether the solemn promise that accompanied
the founding of the United Nations has been kept. Yes,
successive generations have been spared the scourge of
worldwide war, but not the numerous conflicts that in
many areas of the world continue to destroy the lives of
hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of men, women
and children.
With that in mind, it becomes all the more pressing
to ask whether everything has really been put in place
to prevent such conflicts. Today’s open debate and
resolution 2171 (2014), which we have just adopted, are
therefore timely, and I would like to congratulate the
United Kingdom for having taken this initiative.
Even if we are sometimes caught off guard by the
emergence of a crisis situation, no conflict arrives
without warning signs. Training ourselves to recognize
them, analyse them and understand them in order to take
the most appropriate and effective measures to prevent
a situation from degenerating into open conflict — that,
in a few words, is the essence of conflict prevention. In
reality, such an undertaking is complex and requires

The Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect also have a crucial role to play
in that context. The very notion of the responsibility to
protect, as defined in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), is inseparable
from the setting up of an early-warning mechanism.
The Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect fulfil that role
for the Secretary-General, but also for the Security
Council and the international community as a whole.
The Council would benefit from inviting them more
often to report on their work.
By virtue of the provisions of the Charter,
the Secretary-General likewise can contribute to
conflict prevention, in particular by drawing the
Council’s attention to any matter that could jeopardize
international peace and security. That prerogative,
which is granted him by Article 99 of the Charter,
allows him particularly to broaden the horizon of the
Council. We strongly encourage the Secretary-General
to continue to employ that important tool.

14-512537/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

Conflict prevention that is worthy of that
name cannot ignore the cyclical nature of conflicts
related to the root causes that trigger and maintain
tensions — poverty, discrimination, a lack of the rule of
law, and impunity, to name but a few. The Peacebuilding
Commission, established nearly 10 years ago under
the auspices of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, has an important role to play in preventing
a relapse into a situation of conflict and in supporting
countries emerging from conflict towards sustainable
peace. It is another significant tool in the prevention
architecture.
In this year of commemoration of the centenary of
the Great War, it is natural that we consider the causes
of past conflicts. However, that should also prompt
us to look ahead and convince us of the need to make
every effort not to repeat past mistakes. Today we have
available means that were inconceivable a century ago.
It is up to the Council to use those tools by focusing on
action, not only on reaction. Maintaining international
peace and security also involves the more important
aspect of conflict prevention.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom to
organize today’s meeting. We support the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Ms. Pillay for their briefings.
In the history of humankind, war and conflicts
have brought untold suffering and loss to peoples
throughout the world. They have always hampered
social development and progress. Preventing conflicts
and the recurrence of disasters has always been a
common objective of the international community.
The foundation of the United Nations fully embodies
the joint commitment of Member States to prevent
the recurrence of conflict and war. At the heart of the
collective security mechanism, the Council has actively
worked to prevent conflict and has played an important
role in preventing and limiting the escalation of some
regional conflicts.
At the same time, owing to the interlinking security
threats and challenges, the nature and manifestation of
conflict are increasingly complex. We should ponder
about how to prevent the emergence and escalation of
conflicts under the new circumstances and how to stop

8/62

21/08/2014

post-conflict countries from sliding back into conflict,
I would like to emphasize the following four points.
First, the Charter of the United Nations is the
cornerstone of conflict prevention. The Charter
stipulates that Member States bear the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention. Any action taken
by the international community, including the United
Nations, to prevent conflict should comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and respect the
ownership of the countries concerned, seek to support
their efforts and take the understanding and cooperation
of those countries into account. In undertaking actions
to prevent conflicts, priority should be given to peaceful
means, such as dialogue, negotiation and mediation.
Forceful measures can be only a last resort and must
meet the conditions provided for by the Charter.
Secondly, a locally adapted approach is a necessary
condition for successful conflict prevention. Countries
have different national conditions and there are complex
and diverse causes of conflict. There is no one-size-fitsall approach for conflict prevention. Measures must
be adapted to the local conditions of the countries
concerned. Adopting conflict prevention approaches
that are not based on reality is often problematic and
ineffective. When actions such as early warning are
undertaken to prevent conflicts, reliable early-warning
information should be acquired in a timely way. The
differences among countries in terms of their history,
ethnic composition, religion and social and economic
development should be fully taken into account in order
to prevent hasty interventions that could affect efforts
to achieve the peaceful settlement of a conflict.
Thirdly, tackling the root causes is the key to
conflict prevention. Ethnic and religious tensions, a
lack of development, poverty and weak capacities can
all lead to sectarian tensions and exacerbate social
problems or even give rise to bloodshed. Conflict
prevention should address both the root causes and the
symptoms and should address the fundamental political,
economic, social, cultural and other problems. Through
an inclusive political dialogue, it should promote a
national reconciliation process and establish a peaceful
environment that is conducive to social harmony and
ethnic unity.
The United Nations and the international financial
and development institutions should vigorously
support developing countries, in particular postconflict countries, in achieving economic and social

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

development, in increasing their capacity-building and
in promoting social cohesion, peace, reconciliation
and unity in order to prevent the emergence of
discrimination and rivalry.
Fourthly, the international community should
strengthen its coordination and cooperation in order
to ensure smooth conflict prevention efforts. The
relevant United Nations bodies should fully utilize
their respective advantages and potential and act in
a coordinated and consistent way in accordance with
their mandates. They should assist Member States and
regional organizations, such the African Union, in
capacity-building and conflict prevention and support
such States in playing a leading role in developing
concepts and adopting policies in that regard. They
should also help States to assess their experience and to
explore effective conflict-prevention strategies. In an
international community, of which we are all members,
promoting democratic international relations that abide
by the principle of the rule of law is very important for
conflict prevention.
Sixty years ago, China, India and Myanmar
jointly advocated the five principles of mutual respect
for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other’s
internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence. Over the past 60 years, the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, as a transparent
and inclusive principle of international law, have fully
embodied the values of sovereignty, justice, democracy
and the rule of law. They have significantly contributed
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
safeguarding the interests and rights of developing
countries and working for a new reasonable and fair
kind of international relations.
China will continue to implement the Five
Principles of Peacful Coexistence, to work with all
parties to support the United Nations and the Security
Council in playing their due role in preventing conflict
and to make our own contribution to the achievement
of the common security and lasting peace of the world.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the presidency of the United Kingdom
for having convened this open debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. We
are grateful to the High Commissioner for her tireless
efforts in the difficult task of protecting and promoting
human rights.

S/PV.7247

Chile supported resolution 2171 (2014), recently
adopted, because it reaffirms the obligation of States to
settle their international disputes through the peaceful
means provided for by the Charter of the United
Nations or by other peaceful means. That contributes
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and to conflict prevention. All such actions should take
place under the principle of the free choice of States and
the strictest respect for international law and existing
international treaties. That is how we should interpret
paragraph 4 of the resolution.
At the same time, we regret the fact that the
resolution did not include in its text the right to the
truth, enshrined in the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
Chile knows that it is on the basis of the truth and
by dealing with the root causes of conflicts that true
reconciliation is achieved, while making it possible to
prevent future conflicts.
The early prevention and warning of conflicts should
be considered in a multidimesional approach, linking
sustainable peace and security with important objectives
such as attaining the Millennium Development Goals
and the promotion and protection of human rights as a
whole. National, subregional, regional and international
efforts must be seen as an integrated whole in order
to respond to indicators of instability and the threat of
conflict. The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must be an integral part of that approach. A
multidimensional approach to conflict prevention and
settlement must include the gender perspective, which
is key to ensuring a lasting peace. If incorporated in
the formulation of policies, programmes and laws, such
a perspective would guarantee greater cohesion and
social peace.
We reiterate the obligation of all States to resolve
their international disputes through peaceful means
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and in strict respect for international law and existing
international treaties. We highlight in particular the work
of international courts — primarily the International
Court of Justice, which is the main judicial organ of
the United Nations — given their work to resolve
international disputes submitted to their jurisdiction
and their function of issuing advisory opinions on legal
matters. We also value the work done by important
specialized courts such as the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea, by regional human rights courts
such as the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, by

14-512539/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

ad hoc international tribunals and by the International
Criminal Court. We also highlight the work of by the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in resolving various
disputes, including territorial disputes concerning
treaties and respect for human rights and international
law.
In that regard, strengthening the rule of law can be
seen as one of the most important tools for stability. We
highlight the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1), adopted on 24 September 2012, in particular its
paragraph 28, in which the contribution of the Security
Council to the rule of law at the international level is
recognized.
Cooperation is crucial to achieving everything to
which I have referred. In that connection, we reiterate
our support for strengthening political, social and
economic cooperation mechanisms, which would
finally make it possible to ensure international peace
and security.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): Thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this important
discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their insightful and informative briefings. I also
thank the High Commissioner for her service to the
United Nations and to the cause of human rights.
The United Nations was established in the wake of
two devastating world wars, with the intent of saving
future generations from the scourge of such conflict.
Now the United Nations, including the Security
Council, remains the focal point for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Yet we look out at a
world mired in crisis and conflict.
The complex conflicts of today increasingly involve
heavily armed non-State actors, some of whom are
infused with extremist ideologies. Those actors push
clashes across borders, traffic illicit goods, undermine
Governments and destabilize entire regions. While the
international community did not fully imagine such
conflicts at the inception of the United Nations, the
United Nations system has nonetheless developed ever
more nimble and well-suited tools to respond to the
early warning signs of conflict and instability. Today’s
debate offers us a valuable chance to broaden our focus
beyond the crisis of the day and to think strategically

10/62

21/08/2014

about how we can better leverage United Nations tools
now and in the future to prevent conflict.
In that connection, the United States commends
efforts by the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
to monitor and analyse political developments around
the world and to alert the Security Council and the
international community about brewing crises. For
example, last year, Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco warned the Council that heightened
frictions around an election dispute in the Maldives
could lead to violence. Calls for restraint by highranking United Nations officials coupled, with the
Assistant Secretary-General’s visit to the Maldives
the week before the elections, helped to usher in a
peaceful transfer of power. In that vein, we welcome
DPA’s continued efforts to deepen its analysis, work
with other United Nations offices and take measures to
identify potential triggers of violence.
The Department of Political Affairs has also used
active responses to potential conflict scenarios through
its regional political missions. In Guinea, for example,
the United Nations, with the savvy diplomacy of Said
Djinnit, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of United Nations Office for West
Africa at the time, engaged successfully in mediation
efforts ahead of the 2013 legislative elections after
recognizing key warning signs of potential conflict.
Likewise, we welcome DPA’s Standby Team of
Mediation Experts. The demand for such experts
has increased every year since the Team’s inception.
Mediators are playing a critical role in peaceful
dispute resolution in Africa’s Great Lakes region and
in Mali, where mediators have facilitated the difficult
reconciliation process between Bamako and northern
rebel groups.
At the same time, dozens of United Nations special
envoys, political missions, mediators and good offices of
the Secretary-General work tirelessly to bridge political
differences. There is a common thread for successful
missions: they need sound and credible leadership,
strong mandates and monitoring and reporting capacity
on potential drivers and flashpoints of conflict. We now
need better mechanisms for recognizing the earliest
signs and for delivering the right prevention tools at
every stage of a conflict to address root causes, end
impunity and save lives.
One key aspect of that is peacebuilding. In each
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

configuration, the PBC coordinates efforts to build
national political, economic, judicial and civil society
institutions. In Burundi, the PBC Chair’s regular
engagement with local leaders has helped to highlight
potential flashpoints, such as problematic practices
by Burundian leadership, that have the potential to
exacerbate societal frictions and result in violence in
the run-up to elections.
This year’s headlines also remind us that serious
human rights abuses, including sexual violence, can be
an early indication of imminent conflict, as well as a
consequence of it. The horrible accounts of abduction,
detention, rape, murder and other acts of violence
against women in Iraq at the hands of the militants of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and in Nigeria by
Boko Haram appal and concern us greatly. Supporting
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the efforts of the High Commissioner on Human Rights
is an essential tool in addressing and preventing such
injustices.
Finally, we welcome today’s resolution 2171
(2014), on conflict prevention. We share a common
responsibility to do everything in our power to pursue
sustainable solutions to disputes and prevent violence
and bloodshed. It is indeed the reason the Council was
created.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navi Pillay for their statements. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this debate and to congratulate
it for presenting the resolution on the maintenance of
international peace and security that we just adopted
unanimously (resolution 2171 (2014)). Chad took part
in the negotiation of the resolution and sponsored it.
Its adoption by the Council has refreshed our memory
on the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations on the topic of conflict prevention.
It is clear that a lack of efficiency or a certain laxness
in utilizing conflict prevention mechanisms or the
inability to discern the elements that are precursors to a
conflict have often meant that the United Nations must
face a situation of fait accompli. In many cases, the United
Nations — and the Security Council in particular, which
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security — takes action only
after the outbreak of hostilities. As highlighted in the

S/PV.7247

concept note (S/2014/572, annex), no one imagined
at the time that when a young Tunisian street vendor,
Tarek al-Tayeb Mohamed Bouazizi, set himself on fire
that he was going to unleash the Arab Spring. Yet the
early indicators and precursors were already visible
in that country five years before. There was therefore
plenty of time to prevent such an event.
Nothing can justify the silence, inertia and inability
of the Security Council to prevent a conflict when it has
the specific powers to do so. Cycles of violence imposed
on children, women and elderly people around the world
amply show that we have learned nothing from history,
even as we commemorate the most heinous crimes in
the history of humankind.
All of us have deplored the laxity of our institution
and the inaction of the international community in
the management of the Rwandan genocide. But that
did not prevent the onset or worsening of the violence
in Gaza, Syria, Iraq, Central Africa, Ukraine and
elsewhere. Faced with the many conflicts shaking the
world today, we are justified in thinking that the United
Nations is far from fulfilling its primary mission to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
That sad fact should prompt the Security Council to
break out of its customary mode, which boils down to
adopting resolutions and sanctions, and use the powers
conferred upon it by the Charter of the United Nations
and use all the means at its disposal to better prevent
conflicts and maintain peace and security in the world.
Chad welcomes the Council’s initiative to organize
missions made up of Permanent Representatives to
countries in conflict in order to take in the reality on
the ground. It is important that the Council develops a
new comprehensive and inclusive approach to conflict
prevention that takes the human development of States
as the focus of its actions, while as much as possible
avoiding possible outside interference that may cause
an artificial conflict with incalculable consequences.
We also believe that the weaknesses of the Council
are due in part to the frequent use of the veto by the
permanent members, as well as the lack of shared
vision in the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the maintenance of peace and security
should not be seen simply in terms of a mechanism
to prevent imminent conflict, but rather as an earlywarning system that can detect causes of conflict.
The United Nations would not have to expend huge
efforts to manage crises around the world if good
conflict prevention policy were adopted. In a speech at

14-5125311/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

UNESCO in 2012, former Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali rightly stated that
“These conflicts, whose settlement is often long,
difficult and complex, are not unpredictable. Most
of them simmer for a long time before exploding,
and those latent tensions are known to all. But it is
clear that the international community only rarely
mobilizes itself to contain them when there is still
time to do so.”
The Security Council needs more than ever to
improve the current trend in conflict prevention and
maintaining international peace and security. The
contradictions in that regard are among the causes
of the Council’s ineffectiveness. Strategic interests
have long defined the world into spheres of influence,
making it difficult or impossible to take decisions
in certain situations. That is the case whenit comes
to many conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere, where all the symptoms are evident. Abuses
and massive violations of human rights committed in
some countries have been well known but, for unspoken
reasons, they have been allowed to reach a climax.
Yet many initiatives have been taken at the United
Nations, especially by the Secretary-General. But
the results do not meet the expectations, owing to a
lack of synergy in the efforts of the various organs.
Furthermore, there is no real assesment tool to better
measure the effectiveness of the efforts made. We think
that the Security Council could increase is effectiveness
by developing close cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the area of conflict
prevention and maintaining peace and security.
With regard to Africa, the African Union is one
of the largest organizations after the United Nations,
with similar bodies, the most important being the Peace
and Security Security. And at the subregional level we
have, among others, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of the West
African. Under the auspices of the African Union, those
organizations promote the search for peace and security
by doing prevention work, which has sometimes proven
effective.
We commend the existing cooperation in the
framework of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. That model could also be extended
to other areas of tension in the world — for example,
cooperation with the League of Arab States, when it

12/62

21/08/2014

comes to the problems in the Middle East, or with the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
The Council must use the sources of information
available to it to increase its effectiveness in a
country. To that end, the periodic reports of human
rights organization’s, women’s groups and other civil
society organizations provide indicators and warning
signs in the respecive countries that may help prevent
conflicts. United Nations agencies, such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Health
Organization and UNICEF, also inform the United
Nations daily on the situations in different countries.
As a principal organ of the United Nations system, the
Security Council can effectively assist the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representatives and Envoys by
taking firm, impartial and relevant decisions.
The ineffectiveness of the United Nations is in part
rooted in the fact that the Secretary-General is simply
reduced to playing an administrative role with no real
means of coercion. In that regard, the Security Council’s
support for the Secretary-General would allow him and
its team to better carry out his preventive diplomacy
role.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing his
important debate on conflict prevention and for the
comprehensive concept note you circulated among
States Members (S/2014/572, annex).
Let me first acknowledge the dedication of the
United Kingdom to conflict prevention in the Council.
I recall that during the United Kingdom’s previous
presidency in June 2013 the President convened a
meeting on conflict prevention (see S/PV.6982) with a
focus on the effective management of natural resources.
I take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
today’s resolution 2171 (2014), which was introduced by
the United Kingdom and sponsered by a large majority
of Council members, including Rwanda.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. His presence here today once again highlights
his commitment to conflict prevetion as being at the core
of the work of his Office. I also thank United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay for her last briefing to the Council under that
capacity. I wish her well in her future endeavours.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

The concept note for this open debate provided by
the presidency pertinently highlights the need for the
Security Council to shift from a culture of reaction
to one of prevention. With the numerous tragic and
pressing conflicts that persist in the world today, if
the Council is to remain relevant, it is inevitable that it
improve its record in fully understanding early warning
signs of conflict and responding through early action.
Although conlict prevention has become the
centrepiece of the work of the United Nations in the
wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
increasing intra-State conflicts, mainly on the African
continent and in the Middle East, demonstrate that
the concept of conflict prevention has become more
of a theoretical concept than a practical reality. The
activities of the Security Council in past years have
shown more interest in crisis management than in
conflict prevention, as the latter is considered, as a
thematic debate, only once or twice per year.
That is not to suggest, however, that the United
Nations has remained idle in efforts to prevent the
emergence or relapse of conflict. Indeed, there has been
a huge increase in the level of international preventive
diplomacy, diplomatic peace-making, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations — for most part by the
United Nations and, more recently, in partnership with
regional organizations.
I would like here to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his tireless efforts at conflict prevention,
including by preparing important framework documents
and by exercising his good offices around the world.
As the Secretary-General stated, however, good news
is not news, and most of his efforts have been fruitful.
The United Nations should be equipped to fully
understand that different situations require flexibility
as circumstances change and it should deploy a range of
possible measures — both long-term structural changes
and short-term operational changes — to deal with early
warning signs of a situation that might lead to conflict.
We believe that the primacy of prevention resides
in understanding the root causes of conflict, including
the political, economic and cultural dimensions of each
particular conflict, and that we must take effective
measures to address them. Early-warning and response
capabilities are a critical requirement for effective
early prevention. That is a conversation that Rwanda
brought to the Security Council when, during our first
presidency, in April 2013, we organized a briefing on

S/PV.7247

preventing conflicts in Africa through addressing root
causes (see S/PV.6946), which led to the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/4).
As the Council is aware, one of the biggest challenges
in the United Nations system has been the Secretariat’s
capacity in conflict prevention, as pointed out in the
recommendations of the 2000 Brahimi Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations. The adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution
60/1), which embraces the concept of the responsibility
to protect and calls for the international community
to support the United Nations in establishing an
early-warning capability, was a positive step forward.
Nonetheless, early-warning mechanisms are rarely used
to respond to recurring crises, let alone to prevent them.
We therefore call on the Security Council, especially its
permanent members, to increasingly use and support
the work of the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and that of the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect.
The Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative
should be supported and implemented so that the
Organization can respond effectively and correctively
curb the escalation of crises. Protecting human rights
is one of the most effective conflict-prevention tools.
Success in promoting and protecting rights and ensuring
accountability for violations are effective means for
de-escalating conflict and forestalling the human and
financial costs of humanitarian crises. That is why the
international community, including the United Nations,
should support Member States in strengthening the
rule of law and capacity-building for accountability
mechanisms, including judicial institutions.
The evolving role of regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention should not be
underestimated. We recognize the important role of
the African Union and its subregional organizations in
preventing and mitigating conflicts on our continent. We
also recognize the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations in
addressing the recurring relapse into conflict. It is also
important to acknowledge the role of other organizations
in supporting and complementing the United Nations
in peacekeeping, mediation, facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance or in joint efforts in postconflict reconstruction.
In conclusion, I would appeal to the Security
Council to explore ways to address conflict prevention
not through an annual thematic debate, which has

14-5125313/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

little impact on the ground, but through countryspecific debates. We believe that a more frequent use
of Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations and
a more focused use of the horizon-scanning sessions
and country-specific meetings of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
can help us respond to that call.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
We sincerely thank the High Commissioner for her
extraordinary service.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014),
which Lithuania gladly co-sponsored.
The Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. All too often, however, it has
assumed that responsibility only when a conflict was in
full swing and the loss of lives was too high to ignore.
A glaring case of the Council’s failure to act was
that of the genocide in Rwanda, whose twentieth
anniversary was marked earlier this year. The Force
Commander of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda, Roméo Dallaire, warned the United
Nations about plans to massacre Tutsis and offered to
raid arms caches in Kigali. He insisted that where there
was a will, there was a way. The will was not there, and
some 800,000 people were murdered in the subsequent
100 days. Examples abound where the action taken was
too little and too late, resulting in the loss of multiple
human lives and in the exorbitant costs of dealing with
a full-blown conflict.
On the other hand, when the United Nations has
used its powers proactively it has managed to prevent
major crises. One such example is Yemen, to which the
United Kingdom delegation has already referred. United
Nations mediation in post-election Bangladesh in 2013,
the good offices of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, combined
with the engagement of the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, in response to an outbreak of violence in
Kyrgyzstan in 2010, and the often-invisible work by
the Standby Team of Mediation Experts at dozens of
negotiations around the world speak to the importance
of early preventive action.

14/62

21/08/2014

Today, as the Council grapples with an
unprecedented number of conflicts and four level 3
humanitarian emergencies in the face of an almost
chronic shortage of funds for life-saving activities, we
need a qualitative leap in conflict prevention.
As today’s resolution points out, conflict prevention
is a complex undertaking consisting of various
interdependent, complementary and non-sequential
components. I would like to dwell on a few of them.
First, with respect to informed early warning,
the United Nations system, with its country teams in
136 countries, its peacekeeping presence and special
representatives and envoys, is well placed to sound early
warning and provide first-hand information from the
field. Greater synergies and interactivity between the
Organization’s own early-warning capacities and those
of regional and subregional organizations are essential.
Early-warning mechanisms already exist within the EU,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community. We therefore welcome the call in the
resolution to examine how cooperation with regional
organizations could contribute to early-warning
mechanisms and preventive actions.
The Council must make better use of information
from the ground through interactive dialogues and
briefings, including on situations of concern that are
not formally on its agenda. My delegation sees great
potential in briefings from the Department of Political
Affairs (DPA), horizon-scanning and periodic human
rights briefings, as proposed by the High Commissioner
this morning. Making such briefings less formal,
more flexible and needs-based, with an emphasis
on interactivity, could allay some of the sensitivities
related to the Council’s discussing a particular situation.
Further improvement of DPA’s analytical/assessment
capacities would be useful in that respect.
Furthermore, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Advisers on
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect play a
key role in sounding an early alarm. Providing Member
States with prompt, unsanitized information about
serious human rights violations is fully in line with
the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative,
which we wholeheartedly support. In that respect, we
welcome the United Nations efforts to integrate human
rights monitoring into peacekeeping operations.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

The second component is early mediation. As the
Secretary-General said, early action does matter. My
delegation recognizes mediation as an important tool
for defusing emerging conflicts. The good offices of
the Secretary-General and United Nations mediators
could be engaged at the earliest possible stage, with all
the necessary discretion. To enhance the effectiveness
of that particular instrument, further support
should be provided to strengthening United Nations
mediation-support capacities, including the Mediation
Support Unit, the Standby Team and the roster of
experts.
Tht third element is ensuring accountability.
Responding to human rights violations and acting
before they reach tragic proportions is a core concern of
preventive action. As we know, violations of minority
rights, sexual and gender-based violence, intolerance
and faith or ethnicity-based persecutions are among
the root causes of conflict and humanitarian crises.
If unaddressed, legitimate grievances caused by
exclusion, marginalization, lack of accountability and
lawlessness are bound to ignite or reignite a conflict.
A crucial element of conflict prevention, in our
view, consists in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice for all. The Council’s strong voice and
actions in support of the rule of law, accountability
and justice matter a great deal. National truth and
reconciliation commissions, commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions tackling past atrocities are
essential elements in preventing relapse into conflict,
and they merit the Council’s full support. We must also
extend all the necessary support to States in restoring
their judicial systems and investigating and prosecuting
the perpetrators of criminal doings during the time of
conflict. In line with the principle of complementarity,
international judicial mechanisms and tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, have an
important role to play in tackling impunity and ensuring
justice for the victims, thus laying the foundations for
durable peace.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the presidency for having convened today’s
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
This year is the one hundredth anniversary of the
outbreak of the First World War, whose destruction
and extremely high costs, in both human lives and
material damages, led to the creation of the League
of Nations — an innovative attempt to put an end,

S/PV.7247

through the establishment of a multilateral body, to
wars between States. Fortunately, its failure to prevent
the Second World War did not end the determination of
the international community to work to promote peace
through the establishment of the United Nations.
Since then, the nature of conflicts has changed
deeply. We are now in an era dominated by internal
conflicts, an era where there are serious violations of
human rights, including genocide. However, something
has not changed, namely, the fact that conflicts can
be avoided. In the vast majority of cases, prior to the
outbreak of a conflict there are clear indications that
should serve as an early warning. Unfortunately,
the international community and the Council have,
in many cases, shown themselves unable either to
recognize those early signs in time or to act decisively
in preventing the conflict.
The multiplication of conflicts has left the
international community and the Council with limited
political and economic resources to effectively tackle
the challenges to international peace and security.
Likewise, we have witnessed the proliferation of
humanitarian crises that are increasingly alarming.
As a result of those conflicts, there has been a certain
reduction in the financing of efforts in the sphere of
humanitarian assistance, which seems to be structural
and not to depend on the situational crisis that is being
dealt with. That scenario means that we must think
seriously about the conflict-prevention role of the
Council, so that it can comply with its obligations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The fundamental principle of sovereignty gives
rise to the comptetence and obligation of States to
peacefully resolve international disputes, as established
by Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the internal conflicts that affect
them, by tackling the root causes of those conflicts.
The action taken by the Security Council applies only
to those situations that threaten international peace
and security, and should avoid any interference in the
internal affairs of States. The Security Council must
focus its conflict-prevention efforts in a coordinated
fashion, and in cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and regional and subregional bodies, as well as
with other agencies that focus their efforts on conflictprevention and sustainable development. An undeniable
link exists between the root causes of poverty and
inequity and conflicts at the inter-State and intra-State
levels.

14-5125315/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The international community must focus on
addressing such causes through an approach that takes
into account the eradication of poverty and sustainable
development and promotes a comprehensive approach,
one that addresses the basic causes of the problem and
avoids treating the development agenda solely in terms
of security.
We also have to tackle the conditions that lead to the
expansion of terrorism, an element that is increasingly
influential in many conflict situations. The Charter of
the United Nations gives the Security Council a variety
of tools, namely, those of mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial adjudication, which could be
used in conflict settlement. Likewise, we have seen
the effectiveness of the roles played by the SecretaryGeneral through his good offices and through his
special envoys and special representatives, as well as
by the regional United Nations offices. We believe
that it is extremely important that resolution 2171
(2014), which we adopted today, should encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to use his good offices
in order to facilitate and bring about comprehensive
agreements. We hope the renewal of that commitment
by the Security Council will be reflected in facts on the
ground.
Argentina believes that the Council must bear
in mind, among other things, that the fights against
impunity and for justice are factors that prevent conflict
and arms trafficking. The fight against impunity is
something that prevents conflicts. It make a society
stronger, it strengthens democracy, and in that context,
the International Criminal Court certainly is the most
important factor in international diplomacy and at
the centre of the international justice system. But we
must have an adequate regulation of the transfer of
conventional weapons. We cannot expect the work of
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security to be effective if, at the same time, we allow
Member States to provide weapons to parties to a
conflict.
Lastly, the dimension of conflict-prevention must
form part of the work of the Council in the context of
current international politics. The Council must renew
its commitment to tackle the prevention of armed
conflicts, and the States that make up the Council
must also show a strong political will to use the tools
at the Council’s disposal and a true commitment to
multilateralism, thereby overcoming the divisions that
often separate us, divisions which, with regard to some

16/62

21/08/2014

agenda items, prevent the Council from acting. The cost
of failure is, unfortunately, known to everyone. Both
ethically and politically the international community is
not in a position to continue in this fashion.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important open debate and for
the excellent concept note that preceded this meeting
(S/2014/572, annex). We commend your delegation for
the initiative that resulted in the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2171 (2014) this morning. We thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his sobering
remarks on conflicts and their consequences all over the
world. We pay tribute to the outgoing United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi
Pillay, the highly respected African judge, whom we
are very proud of and indeed fortunate to have had in
that office for the past six years. We salute her courage,
her sense of justice and her dedication and commitment
in protecting human decency. We wish her well in her
future endeavours.
Edmund Burke, your countryman, Mr. President,
in his study on the causes of discontents, recommended
that in order to understand tumult and disorder, we must
study the temper of the times. In our world today, the
temper that is clearly discernible is one of foreboding
and despair. Conflicts and disturbances to general
peace and tranquillity are causing apprehension and
unease everywhere. People are wondering if indeed
the end of time and doomsday are at hand. A no-less
respected authority than the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace echoed that sentiment in a recent
article entitled “Is the World Falling Apart?”, in which
an assessment of instability around the world was made.
Conflicts nowadays seem to have a life of their own.
They seem to have an automacity about them that gives
them the character of an instantaneous eruption, thereby
giving little room or time for intervention, mediation
and reconciliation to happen. Conflict-prevention has
therefore become a recurring topic in Security Council
deliberations. Regional and subregional organizations
like the African Union (AU), the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Commmunity are constantly engaged in
conflict-prevention and resolution and post-conflict
management activities. The AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council
regularly meet to address conflict situations in Africa.
Other mechanisms, such as the use of the good offices
of eminent persons, and institutional frameworks like

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Intergovernmental Authority for Development
are also deployed to address conflicts in Africa. The
responsibility to protect was initially an African idea
that has now become an integral part of conflictprevention and mitigation in the United Nations. The
observance of the rule of law and the opposition to
unconstitutional changes of Governments are also
some of the measures put in place by the African Union
to prevent conflict in our region.
The Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights have enumerated the various natures
of conflicts and their consequences. Various factors,
including fragile constitutional frameworks, the
absence of good governance, competition over limited
natural resources and economic disparities, can come
together and make a State vulnerable to conflict, and
conflicts incur great human suffering and economic
loss. Conflicts impede development and, in some cases,
even reverse it. Professor Michael Chalmers, in his
analysis of the cost of conflict-prevention, determined
that $1 in preventive action saved $10 in the recovery
costs borne by the international community, the nation
concerned and the neighbouring States. That clearly
makes a case for preventive action to forestall conflicts.
Another important dimension in the effort to
prevent conflicts is restricting access to arms by
non-State actors, terrorist groups and criminal gangs,
who generally show no hesitation in engaging in
hostile acts against States and communities, or in rival
groups. The proliferation of illicit small arms and light
weapons is making that a very difficult task. We call
on the Council to pay heed to the adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty and the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons and to ensure that the provisions of
those treaties are scrupulously observed by all actors.
Horizon scanning and early warning are tools that
are available to the Council for conflict prevention.
They allow the Council to take a long-term view
of situations in order to facilitate detection and
assessment of issues that may emerge in the future with
the potential of causing conflict or crisis. The tools
provided in Article 1 of Chapter I and in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations on the Council’s
disposal for the provision of conflict do not function
in isolation, and the means of their application is
obviously highly context specific. The strategies are by
nature anticipatory, relying upon early warning to be
effective. Efforts must therefore be made to establish

S/PV.7247

trust with key local, national and regional actors well
before a crisis reaches the tipping point.
Various parts of the United Nations system have
a role to play in conflict prevention. It is essential
that those offices function in a coherent manner and
do not provide varying analyses of a potential conflict
situation. The Council committed itself to a preventive
approach to conflict management in resolution 1626
(2005). The Council has the potential to be a pivot
in the process of generating political will, securing
pre-position funding, building capacities on the ground
and promoting the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools. We should also not forget the important
role that the Office of the Secretary-General could play
in the prevention of conflicts and in mitigating their
impact.
That is why we believe that the time has now
come for the United Nations to use its resources, all
of it, to act in anticipation towards the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their briefings. We would like to acknowledge High
Commissioner Navi Pillay’s achievements over the past
six years and to thank her for her dedicated pursuit of
her vital mandate.
Conflict prevention was the reason the United
Nations was created. It is enshrined in the first
line of the Charter and it is central to the Council’s
responsibility. The prevention of conflict is always
better than cure. As the Secretary-General said this
morning, when actions come late, the consequences are
measured in human lives. But, also, the cost of civil war
is around 30 years of gross domestic product. Recovery
averages 14 years. Those are staggering, generational
consequences. It is natural to be crisis-focused, but it is
short-sighted. Prevention is cost-effective.
The United Nations Office for West Africa, which
has demonstrated concrete prevention results in places
like Guinea, costs under $10 million per year. The
smallest peacekeeping operation costs almost five
times that much; the largest over 150 times that much.
Early warning signs of conflict vary from political
signals, such as social unrest, to humanitarian crises.
The role of the media and civil society in shining a
spotlight on them is invaluable. Different parts of the
United Nations are best placed to monitor early warning
signs from missions to envoys to development actors.

14-5125317/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations needs an effective, system-wide
approach to ensure that this is done effectively.
Information, of course, is not sufficient. Effective
prevention strategies must be underpinned by strong
analysis. The Department of Political Affairs has played
a proactive role in bringing analysis of potential flash
points to the Council’s attention. We also welcome
the pattern of increased briefings from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We would welcome
an informal monthly briefing by her successor, as she
has proposed. We have consistently argued that human
rights abuses can be one of the most important earlywarning indicators — the canary in the coal mine.
The Rights Up Front initiative is a direct reflection
of that link. Among its six action points is the provision
of candid information about serious human rights
violations. A culture of such reporting to the Council
must be encouraged.
For the same reason, we support more Council
briefings from special representatives and advisers
on the prevention of genocide, on the responsibility to
protect, on sexual violence and on children and armed
conflict. We also support briefings from the Head of
UN-Women, because that agency’s role in supporting
women’s political participation is vitally important to
reducing the risk of conflict. We should also increase
use of Arria Formula meetings with civil society and
non-governmental organizations, which often bring a
sophisticated understanding of events on the ground.
All the early warning signs in the world will be of
no use unless the Council acts on them. In that regard,
we must be self-critical; our record is not strong. In
Syria, for example, we failed to take early action as
the Al-Assad Government’s repression led to today’s
incredibly destructive and destabilizing conflict. Why
do we have such a questionable record on prevention?
The Council has struggled to agree on the balance
between responses that are sufficiently early while
respecting the primary responsibility of national actors.
We have yet to get that balance right, but we must.
Faced with early warning, we need to take action in
a strategic manner, focused on the most effective points
of leverage. We should use the tools at our disposal
proactively and gradually ratchet up of our response
as necessary. And we should work with regional
organizations. In all cases early action is vital. There
are a number of areas where we can do more.

18/62

21/08/2014

First, we need to support the Secretary-General — his
good offices, advocacy and mediation efforts — and his
representatives. Our vocal backing for the initiatives of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes is a good example.
We should also be more proactive in mandating factfinding missions, which can have a strong deterrent
effect, and commissions of inquiry, such as that on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We agree
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
Council needs to seriously consider and take action on
the recommendations of those commissions and that
the commissions should have an official channel of
communication to the Council.
Secondly, we need to get behind the Rights Up Front
initiative, lending our political and practical support to
see it realize its full preventive potential.
Thirdly, we can do better to integrate sanctions
into our responses. The mere threat of sanctions can
bring parties to a negotiating table. Arms embargoes
reduce the viability of force as an option. Targeted
individual sanctions can constrain and disrupt the
actions of destabilizing actors, slow conflict financing
and change the political calculations of spoilers.
Fourthly, the Council must do more to implement its
commitment to accountability, including by deepening
its relationship with the International Criminal Court.
Failure to address past crimes is often a powerful driver
of future conflict, and accountability can have a strong
deterrent effect.
In cases of possible mass atrocities, we have a
responsibility to protect. It is important that we are not
impeded from taking practical action in such scenarios
by use of the veto.
Finally, we would endorse more preventive Council
visits. Those need not involve all 15 members. The
five-member Council mission to Indonesia and East
Timor in 1999 helped end the violence and paved the
way for the International Force for East Timor.
In conclusion, we need to build a culture of
prevention which fully reflects the cost of failing to
act. Only then will the aspirations of the Organization,
which emerged out of the ashes of conflict, be fully
realized. The Council has a responsibility to be vigilant,
strategic and proactive.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

meeting of the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution
2171 (2014) to prevent armed conflict, taking into
account how important this issue is in the context of
maintaining international pace and security. We believe
that States have the main responsibility for conflict
prevention. Any international assistance, including
within the framework of the United Nations, should be
carried out with the consent of the host country and
cannot be imposed.
Today, most crises are internal in character, and
the border between assistance in the area of preventive
diplomacy and pressure on domestic political processes
is becoming tenuous, especially when this kind of
assistance is provided at an early stage of a crisis.
Unfortunately, we have often heard proposals in the
Security Council that border on attempts to manage
the internal affairs of States or to interfere in their
constitutional processes. It is clearly important to
strike the right balance. Too much support for one
political group can only further stoke a conflict and
undermine trust in the international community, and in
the United Nations in particular. The proliferation of
mediation efforts, not to mention competition among
ambitious players all trying to win kudos for their roles
as mediators and peace brokers, can end up adding fuel
to the fire.
Clearly, the actions of certain influential States are
directly at odds with the goal of conflict prevention,
thereby engendering serious crises. The consequences
of those crises have led to the destabilization of entire
countries or even regions. The situation following the
invasion of Iraq has developed in such a way that the
breakup of the country is now a possibility, and part
of its territory could become a haven for international
terrorists. We are also witnessing uncontrolled
destabilization in Libya, with bleak prospects for
overcoming that crisis.
In Ukraine, we see how some countries are openly
prodding Kyiv to continue the bloodletting and to reject
proposals that offer a way to peaceful settlement. The
agreements of 21 February and the Geneva declaration
have been forgotten. The road map proposed by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe has been disregarded. Yet
all those documents had real potential for resolving the
political crisis before it morphed into armed conflict.

S/PV.7247

The United Nations, as a universal international
organization with unique legitimacy, plays a significant
role in preventing conflicts. We agree that the
successful early prevention of conflicts depends on
the comprehensive use of the various tools available
to the United Nations. Yet we should have no illusions
that the system can be improved to such an extent that
it can automatically check the temperature of a crisis
and write out a standard prescription. Each situation
requires a delicate, balanced and impartial approach
and a patient search for a unique solution.
We are convinced that early prevention cannot
be based on an arbitrarily chosen mix of certain
indicators of conflict; that paves the way for abuse. It is
unacceptable to favour certain mechanisms available to
the United Nations, even such important ones as human
rights or development indicators. The evaluation
methods of certain entities, which are not transparent
and often biased in nature, should not be used as the
universal bases for preventive action. Nor can we agree
with insistent attempts to force the Security Council to
take into account information and assessments of the
Secretary-General and to adopt measures on that basis.
In fact, that is an attempt to dilute the responsibility
of the Council to maintain international peace and
security.
Furthermore, we should take into account that the
Council does not have a monopoly on discussions and the
use of preventive measures in such areas as mediation,
disarmament and, most recently, the general political
aspects of special commissions under the purview of
the General Assembly. We should also not disregard
the significant potential of regional and subregional
organizations. There is no doubt that the Secretariat can
analyse relevant issues and communicate its experience
in their solution, as reflected in the reports it prepares.
Such reports can be useful if they are drafted in a
professional and impartial way. It is important for them
to focus on the practical benefits of the measures being
proposed.
We see no point in having the United Nations draft
research-intensive publications in which the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are lost behind
a facade of so-called innovative concepts. That task
belongs to academic institutions. Nor should we lose
too much time on the bureaucratic side of matters by
hatching various entities with unclear mandates. In fact,
we should not be engaged in a race for accountability,
invoking unrealistic figures on the number of supposed

14-5125319/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts resolved by the United Nations. It is better
to have one example of real success than thousands of
pages and millions of words.
Based on some of the proposals we have heard, one
could conclude that many of the bodies and structures
of the United Nations could be eliminated, with the
exception of the Security Council. That would hardly
be right. Finally, it is premature to speak of some sort of
conflict-prevention architecture until there is a broader
discussion of the matter. That should involve of all
Member States.
Ms. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and to Ms. Navi Pillay for their briefings.
We would also like to pay tribute to Ms. Pillay for
her service, especially for her efforts on behalf of the
United Nations under difficult circumstances.
The United Nations plays a crucial role in
maintaining international peace and security. Thanks
to its institutions, the Organization has been able to
prevent or forestall the development of a number of
conflicts. However, we must recognize that the United
Nations could have prevented far more conflicts, and
saved far more lives, if preventive measures had been
taken in advance.
A number of factors highlight the shortcomings in
conflict prevention, as some of the preceding speakers
have mentioned. As they observed, things have
substantially changed since the Charter of the United
Nations was adopted almost 70 years ago. Most conflicts
now are intra-State conflicts, involving State and
non-State actors. That does not imply that the Charter
of the United Nations is no longer valid in attempts to
prevent conflicts before they break out. Nonetheless,
we need to envisage a wholistic perspective for all the
Articles of the Charter in order to implement all its
purposes and principles so as to establish international
peace and security worldwide.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States lies at the heart of international relations. It
should not serve as a pretext to keep us from working
together as an international community, as the
United Nations or as the Security Council to prevent
conflicts. On the contrary, it is armed conflicts that
undermine the sovereignty and endanger the political
independence and territorial integrity of States. The
Charter provides guarantees that should serve as the
framework for measures adopted by United Nations

20/62

21/08/2014

bodies for the prevention of conflicts, namely, the rule
of law. Politization has largely affected the ability of
the Security Council and that of other United Nations
organs to prevent conflicts and to effectively address
hotbeds of tension.
We welcome the adoption a short time ago of
resolution 2171 (2014). Its implementation could prevent
conflicts from escalating. The resolution provides
mechanisms, principles and strategies that could be
implemented. We would like to stress, however, the
importance of the provisions of Chapter VI of the
Charter with regard to the peaceful settlement of
disputes. That aspect has been absent from the Council’s
work for many decades, hindering the Council’s ability
to prevent conflicts. The measures set out in Chapter
VI offer the best way to address situations that can
endanger international peace and security, especially
when States are the parties to a conflict. They are the
least onerous measures for preventing or delaying the
outbreak of conflicts.
The Secretary-General, his envoys and his
representatives have major and crucial roles to play
in early warning when a situation has the potential to
degenerate into armed conflict. The Secretary-General
should utilize all available mechanisms to notify the
Council that action is needed when a situation requires
it, based on the information he receives. The Council
should use the ability of the Secretary-General to
prevent conflicts and provide him with all the necessary
means to fulfil his role. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to use preventive diplomacy, good offices and
mediation in coordination with the Council. United
Nations missions, peacekeeping operations and special
political missions could be used to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts. We could also consider the establishment
of working groups under the Security Council so as to
establish mechanisms to follow hot spots of tension.
We underscore the importance of cooperation with
international and regional organizations in the context
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
There is no competition among such organizations
and the United Nations. Their role is as a catalyst and
is complementary to that of the United Nations. One
element that limits the Council’s ability to prevent
conflicts is the absence of timely and accurate
information. We should therefore support and adopt
mechanisms such as the Arria Formula and consider
new mechanisms in order to receive information from
the field.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations and the Council should try to
adopt a comprehensive approach and a clear strategy
within the institutional framework so as to prevent
conflicts. The correct approach requires a strategy
that takes into consideration the operational, legal
and thematic aspects of conflicts. We hope that the
Secretary-General, other United Nations bodies and
the Security Council can cooperate in devising such a
strategy as soon as possible.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. I
would like to warmly thank Ms. Pillay, since this is the
last time that we will have the pleasure of welcoming
her as High Commissioner. I would like to pay tribute
to her commitment and to the influence that she has had
on the Council. We can say that during her term, human
rights have become an essential part of our agenda. We
can still do better, but that development is irreversible
thanks to her.
Conflict prevention is at the heart of the Security
Council’s mandate and one of the primary tasks of
the United Nations. However, with the increase in the
number of crises in several regions of the world, we recall
how much we still need to improve our prevention tools.
In some cases, the threat was identified but the Council
did not act owing to a lack of consensus. Clearly, I am
thinking of Syria, where the blocking of early action by
the Council and the United Nations allowed the crisis
to reach the current level of seriousness. In other cases,
the risk was not sufficiently understood owing to a lack
of early warning. I am thinking of South Sudan, where
the increasing tension and violence did not receive an
appropriate response until the outbreak of hostilities.
All the tools established by the United Nations
system should be used in order to allow the Security
Council to have the best information. At the heart of
that provision, as many of us have said, the SecretaryGeneral plays a crucial role, as set out in Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations. On his own initiative,
the Secretary-General may in particular bring to the
attention of the Council any situation that may threaten
international peace and security. In the same spirit, the
regular briefings by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights have demonstrated their usefulness. In that
regard, I would like to say that we support the proposal
made earlier by the High Commissioner for a monthly
briefing to the Security Council. That is fully within
her mandate and that of the Council. The same applies

S/PV.7247

to briefings by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide.
From the first signs of the crisis in the Central
African Republic, Mr. Adama Dieng warned the Council
about the seriousness of the crisis and helped to mobilize
the international community. Such interventions should
therefore be more frequent and the Council should
make more systematic use of the information provided
to it. The Council should, for example, make good use
of the information gathered by the special procedures
of the Human Rights Council. As many of us have said,
we should also increase the involvement of external
actors, such as regional organizations and civil society,
including in the context of Arria Formula meetings.
In conclusion, once the early warning signs have
been received, the Council must clearly be able to act.
To that end, the Council has additional tools — referral
to the International Criminal Court, the imposition
of sanctions and mediation, for example, can make
it possible to defuse tensions, restore calm and
stabilize the situation. The Council’s ability to act
along those lines is therefore decisive. To prevent is to
act — a concept to which all States Members of the
United Nations committed by adopting the concept
of the responsibility to protect in 2005. In that spirit,
France made a commitment to limit the abusive use
of the veto by the permanent members of the Security
Council in the case of serious crimes. We again call
for the joint approach of the five permanent members.
Such an approach, I am glad to say, has been broadly
supported by civil society and by many States Members
of the Organization. I thank all those that have spoken
in favour of such a measure.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We also thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, for
her presentation. We would like to take this opportunity
to express our deepest appreciation for her prominent
role as a defender of human rights principles during the
six years of her service. We wish her all the best for the
future.
As you, Mr. President, and other colleagues have
pointed out, prevention costs much less than reaction.
At the same time, however, proactive measures are
much more difficult to take when there are still
potential threats. It is therefore important that early
warning signs should be accurately assessed and

14-5125321/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

analysed on the ground. South Sudan is a case where
full-fledged United Nations engagement could not
detect the sign of an imminent crisis. Interacting
closely with all stakeholders, including civil society,
field-based peacekeeping and special political missions
should sensitize their antennae and sound the alarm to
the Council. Early warnings should then be channelled
into concrete preventive action. Sometimes different
interpretations among Security Council members lead
to a delayed response and a lost opportunity. Serious
human rights violations are one important early
warning sign for the Council. The Republic of Korea
fully supports the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front
initiative in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s good offices and
mediation roles can be further strengthened on the
basis of the united voice of the Council. Sometimes
early action is obstructed by the reluctance and
resistance of the Government in question. As is often
the case, intra-State tension feeds on and deepens the
lack of inclusivity. Refusing outside support for an
inclusive political process does not therefore bode well
for prevention. A balance should be struck between the
national prerogative to deal with domestic crises and
international efforts to maintain international peace
and security. The standard for engagement needs to be
clear, reasonable and coherent.
We believe that the horizon-scanning process
at the Secretariat and the Security Council is one
effective tool of preventive diplomacy. In that regard,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General need
to regularly take stock of their efforts for conflict
prevention. That will help them in exploring the most
effective United Nations system-wide strategy to fully
utilize conflict prevention tools under Chapter VI, in
particular Articles 33 and 34, of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Security Council’s inaction due to political
divisions often disappoints people who look forward
to the Council’s action. As such, we believe that the
Security Council should make further efforts to meet
the high expectations of the international community
in the maintenance of peace and security.
The President: May I remind non-Council
members that they should keep their statements to five
minutes or less, and that I shall interrupt them if they
go significantly beyond that limit.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.

22/62

21/08/2014

Mr. Gómez-Robledo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank your delegation, Mr. President, for convening
this debate, and I thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their statements. I would like to pay tribute
to Ms. Pillay for the significant work she has carried
out and the support she has given to Mexico during her
tenure.
Conflict prevention is a fundamental obligation that
extends to others beyond the members of the Council. It
is a joint responsibility that we all share, as permanent
members of the United Nations. Rebuilding the social
fabric of a country and re-establishing other conditions
for governance after armed conflict takes many years.
When those conditions are not restored, fertile grounds
are laid for renewed conflict or for new conflict to
emerge. Preventive diplomacy is then the only tool with
which to break the vicious cycle.
The Organization has been accused of only
reacting to crises. We do not believe that that is an
accurate assessment. We must recognize the role of the
Secretary-General in fulfilling his mandate. However,
it is also true that we face increasing challenges. Every
conflict is different, and there is no one-size-fits-all
formula to prevent them. In the light of that reality,
Mexico proposes three courses of action.
First, Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations should be approached from an evolving
perspective. The implementation of its preventive
measures must address the asymmetries of armed
conflict in the twenty-first century. In addition,
assistance must be provided to States that do not have
the necessary human or financial resources so that
they can be better acquainted with the various options
offered by mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. That is crucial work that must be entrusted to
the Secretariat.
Secondly, prevention should also focus on avoiding
the commission of any grave crimes of an international
nature. Peace cannot be built if perpetrators, regardless
of their status, position or rank, are not brought to
justice for their crimes. It is therefore essential that the
permanent members of the Security Council refrain
from resorting to the use of veto in situations where
war crimes or crimes against humanity could be or have
been committed. Therefore, the Security Council reform
process cannot continue to be hijacked by the definition
of a single issue. Mexico will continue to support all
initiatives that promotes the reform of the Council’s
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

working methods. Consequently, along with France, we
will co-chair, in September, a ministerial-level meeting
to address the urgency of limiting the use of veto in
such situations.
Thirdly, effective prevention requires collective
efforts to strengthen the rule of law at the national
and international levels, which is indispensable to
ensuring development and just and inclusive societies.
Development and the rule of law are two sides of the
same coin.
As a country from the region that has recourse the
most often to the International Court of Justice, Mexico
recognizes the critical role that both the International
Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court
have in strengthening the rule of law and preventing
armed conflict.
Engagement by the Secretary-General, either directly
or through his special envoys and representatives, is of
paramount importance in that task. Intervention by the
Secretariat is therefore key to prevention efforts. In that
regard, as we have done many times before, we call on
all Member States to jointly explore the possibility of
empowering the Secretary-General to request advisory
opinions from the International Court of Justice. In
general, all conflicts have legal expression or purport
to be justified by a violation of an obligation under
international law. Recourse to an advisory opinion by
the Court would be a tool of preventive diplomacy that
would further strengthen the work of the SecretaryGeneral in terms of his mandate.
It is essential to improve the coherence and
effectiveness of the activities of the Security Council
through the use of flexible early-warning mechanisms,
such as in situ missions, and informal interactive
dialogues with the disputing parties and to address
emerging crises.

S/PV.7247

allow indifference to be globalized, as Pope Francis has
said. Guaranteeing peace is a collective obligation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): For conflict
prevention, the Organization and this body, the
Security Council, derive authority from the Charter of
the United Nations to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
suppress acts of aggression, uphold the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
promote international economic and social cooperation.
This, then, is the full context of preventive diplomacy.
From experience, we have learned that the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention are
closely related. States themselves bear the primary
responsibility for preventing conflict — if necessary,
with the help of the United Nations. Preventive action
is effective if it is taken at an early stage, has a longterm human rights and humanitarian perspective
and is geared towards addressing root causes. Peace
and security and sustainable development should not
be separated, because both processes are mutually
reinforcing. The success of prevention would be ensured
through a well-coordinated participation of multiple
actors and entities, especially regional and subregional
organizations.
Prevention should never become a pretext for
interventionism. Preventive diplomacy does not mean
preventive deployment or peace enforcement. We like
your statement, Mr. President, that the Council should
serve as “a smoke detector, not just a fire extinguisher.”
Conflicts should not be brought to the Council’s table
only after they have already erupted.

Moreover, the Council should of course continue
to make use of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. In terms of the latter, it is essential
to design a mechanism for true accountability that
allows for appropriate structures, mandates and human,
financial and political resources. Only then will such
missions be efficient, effective, timely and endowed
with the legitimacy that is needed for their work.

At the same time, the Council should avoid activism
in situations where parties are in a position to handle and
resolve their differences or where regional mechanisms
can play a more effective role. The Council should not
inadvertently become an instrument for igniting or
fuelling crises. After hostilities have already broken
out, such as in Gaza, the Council’s responsibility
increases many fold to intercede and intervene to stop
further deterioration. Passivity or a hands-off approach
in the face of a raging crisis should not be an option.

At the 2005 World Summit, Member States committed
themselves to building a culture of prevention. Those
efforts have obviously not been sufficient. Let us not

In the recent past, there has been a growing tendency
in the Council to adopt resolutions under Chapter
VII. The Council feels that its action is not important

14-5125323/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

enough if it has not done so. Some situations do require
immediate action under Chapter VII. But we urge the
Council to make full use of the preventive diplomacy
tools at its disposal under Chapter VI — especially
mediation, arbitration, judicial settlement, inquiry, the
involvement of regional organizations and the good
offices of the Secretary General — to defuse tensions
and to resolve conflicts that are simmering just below
the surface but threaten to explode.
The Council has little appetite for Conflicts that are
not news-driven. We would suggest that the SecretaryGeneral conduct quiet diplomacy, rather than Council
members. For its part, the Council can appoint special
envoys and special representatives who can pursue
such diplomacy on its behalf. The Council’s preventive
missions should be properly mandated and pursued
to enhance the objectives of building confidence and
finding solutions.
The Council is not omnipotent. Many decisions
impinging on peace and security, especially those
involving major Powers, are taken outside the Council.
It is therefore important for those Powers to use the full
cycle of early warning, conflict prevention and crisis
management to avoid a descent into a new Cold War
or the exacerbation of tensions. A timely agreement
between major Powers on solutions for Syria and
Ukraine, for instance, could have averted the escalation
of those conflicts.
Finally, the Security Council’s efforts to prevent
conflicts will lack credibility if its resolutions are
implemented selectively. The Council’s resolutions on
long-standing issues await attention and implementation,
while the Council takes on new issues. The Council
should uphold the international rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

21/08/2014

We have perused the concept note (S/2014/572,
annex) with great interest. To be honest, it would be
difficult for us to say that we are wiser after having
done so. But then, that may have to do with the subject
that we have at hand today.
The concept note refers to the need for the Security
Council to move from a culture of action to one of
prevention. In general terms, it would be difficult to
take exception to that. Equally important, if not more
so, is the need for the Council to establish a culture of
introspection.
It is not that the Council has not had the tools
that are required for it to fulfill its responsibilities.
The fact is that the Council has decided to use those
tools selectively and on the occasion that they suit the
convenience of those who have taken the decision.
These are political issues, and it is not as if they can be
resolved by any technical fixes.
The concept note refers to the need to respect the
prerogative of national authorities to resolve internal
crises. That, we believe, is a cardinal principle. We
are convinced that the interventionist trend of using
humanitarian concerns as a pretext runs the danger of
exacerbating conflict between and within countries.
The Council should be cognizant of the fact that the
developing world consists of nascent sovereignties. Its
actions should not be such as to revive the insecurities
of a bygone era.
The concept note also refers to the Council using
innovative approaches and taking forward the idea of
preventive missions. We would advise abundant caution.
Unless help is requested by sovereign Governments,
imposing solutions from outside can easily be a recipe
for instant disaster.

Mr. Bishnoi (India): I thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for the briefings that they have provided.

Reference has been made to the role of the SecretaryGeneral and of his so-called good offices function.
Once again, only a role that is acceptable to all parties
can be tenable. Anything else would be perceived as
interference and would be counter-productive.

We welcome this opportunity to share our views
on the subject of conflict prevention, which cannot but
be of the utmost importance to the membership of the
United Nations. We note, however, that decisions are
taken by the Council before the views of non-members
are heard. That has been the case today as well. We
therefore wonder about the purpose served by an open
debate.

While action by the Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations is binding on all
States Members of the United Nations, the efficacy of
most of the conflict-prevention tools that are available
to it depends on its moral authority. Moral authority,
however, can only be limited if the composition of
the Council is demonstrably out of touch with ground
realities. The fact is that the Security Council is today

24/62

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

seen as neither representative nor reflective of the
aspirations and views of the larger membership. It is
only when the composition of the Council is reformed
and it is seen as being responsive to the needs and
wishes of the general membership that its actions will
have have the moral force that is required for them
to be accepted in good faith and acted upon. That, in
our view, is a matter that would greatly benefit from
introspection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): We welcome this
opportunity to highlight the importance of diplomatic
tools in a world where we so often see a hastened resort
to coercive measures.
I also thank the Secretary-General and Human
Rights High Commissioner Navi Pillay for their
briefings. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Ms. Pillay for her dedication, professionalism and
personal commitment to the promotion and protection
of human rights in a non-selective manner.
Two significant anniversaries that have close
relation to the issue of conflict prevention are being
celebrated in 2014. Two hundred years have passed
since the Congress of Vienna, when an exercise in
multipolar coordination, albeit circumscribed to the
European continent, was conceived, fostering a century
of relative peace. We also remember 100 years since
the onslaught of the First World War, a war considered
today by many historians as having been avoidable and
the result of a failure of leadership and diplomacy. As
we reflect on the legacy of those watershed events, it
is appropriate that we ponder the effectiveness of the
means available to prevent armed conflicts. In so doing,
let us not concentrate only on the Security Council’s
business-as-usual approach, nor focus only on those
conflicts that draw the attention of the Council.
Brazil values and encourages efforts in mediation,
good offices, early warning and conciliation measures.
Preventive diplomacy, nevertheless, goes beyond those
diplomatic actions. The greatest threats to international
peace and security need to be addressed in a much more
encompassing way, touching on subjects on which the
Council rarely dwells. First and foremost, preventing
conflicts demands the fulfillment of commitments. In
the field of disarmament, for example, scarce progress
has been achieved towards the elimination of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.

S/PV.7247

Political commitments should also to be honoured.
The Council can make an important contribution to
conflict prevention if it truly engages in resolving
protracted disputes that sow the seeds for renewed
violence in many regions, as the latest conflict in Gaza
attestes yet again. Resolute action by the Security
Council to face its responsibilities regarding the IsraelPalestine dispute would be a crucial measure to prevent
renewed conflict in the Middle East and beyond. It is
important to recall that resolution 1515 (2003), which
endorses the vision of a region where two States, Israel
and Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders, remains unimplemented.
If we are to focus on situations of tension and threats
to peace in parts of the world that are less developed,
another way we can help prevent conflict is through
the fulfillment of multilateral pledges to build more
just and inclusive societies. Commitments to official
development assistance remain far below the goals
set by the Monterrey Consensus in 2002, as very few
developed nations have achieved their national targets
regarding aid flows.
Above and beyond such considerations, perhaps the
most efficient way to prevent conflict is to support and
sustain a strong and functional multilateral system that
is able to respond to evolving challenges. The system,
founded on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, is being eroded by actions or behaviour that a
meeting such today’s would do well to debate.
To strengthen the multilateral system and thus
strengthen our capacity to prevent conflicts, it is
necessary to abandon the reflex of resorting to coercive
measures as the very first option. Unilateral sanctions,
for example, corrode the credibility of the international
order, frequently harm the civilian population and have
demonstrably revealed themselves to be inadequate in
changing behaviour.
Blind faith in the effectiveness of military action
to promote stability is another threat to the kind of
multilateralism that is most conducive to peace. The
recent spiralling of violence in countries such as Iraq,
Syria, Libya and Afghanistan should give us pause
for reflection in that regard. In all of those scenarios,
serious setbacks have demonstrated the limitations of
strategies that attribute to the use of force a role that it
does not and cannot fulfil in today’s world. To counter
such belligerent logic is to actively prevent conflicts.

14-5125325/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The narratives of exceptionalism — the belief that
universal rules and obligations somehow do not apply
to a certain country or group of countries — equally
challenge the strong system we need in order to prevent
conflicts. Preventive diplomacy requires repudiating
double standards when dealing with threats to peace,
thereby avoiding incoherence when facing similar
problems.
Issues of governance also hinder our ability to
better prevent crises. To avert conflicts we should
urgently reinforce the credibility of the institutions
responsible for upholding international peace, the most
important of which is the Security Council. Updating
the composition of the Security Council in order to
make it more inclusive and legitimate in line with the
geopolitical realities of the contemporary world will
decisively strengthen its efficiency and credibility,
and thus enhance the overall preventive capacity of
the United Nations. If no action is taken, the Council
faces a real risk of becoming increasingly obsolete, in
which case efforts to promote preventive diplomacy
will ultimately suffer their greatest setback.
Among the various tools to promote conflict
prevention at the disposal of the United Nations, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) deserves to be
highlighted. By fostering joint international strategies
on reconstruction, institution-building and policydevelopment in vulnerable environments, the PBC has
a key role to play in averting the recurrence of conflict
and in promoting a culture of prevention of conflicts.
The issuance today of a PBC statement on the current
Ebola crisis in West Africa is a good example of how the
PBC can contribute to raise awareness — in that case
in helping to prevent a public health emergency from
becoming a post-conflict peacebuilding emergency.

21/08/2014

zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
have shown their commitment to consolidating the
South Atlantic as an area of peace, cooperation and
sustainable development, free from nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction.
Let me reiterate that Brazil, in the United Nations
and elsewhere, will always privilege diplomacy,
dialogue and persuasion over coercion and will continue
to be an active supporter of improving multilateral tools
to prevent and resolve conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement. In view of the strict time limit on
statements, I will deliver a condensed version; the full
version will be available in the Chamber and on our
website.
We welcome the United Kingdom initiative in
holding this important debate and welcome the adoption
of resolution 2171 (2014) today. That initiative is also
significant in view of this year’s commemoration of
the centenary of the First World War. In that context,
we greatly appreciate the Council’s visit to Belgium
and the Netherlands earlier this month and thank
Council members involved for their collaboration. We
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.

As the current President of the PBC, Brazil
convened the first annual session of the Commission in
June, when we highlighted national ownership, regional
engagement and programmatic interventions as three
elements vital to the consolidation of sustainable peace.
We are confident that the 10-year comprehensive review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in
2015 will strengthen the role of the PBC along with that
of the Peacebuilding Fund, to the benefit of prevention.

Conflict prevention inspired the construction of the
European Union and is a key objective of its external
action. Over recent years efforts have been made to
strengthen our commitment and engagement. We have
welcomed and actively supported the efforts of United
Nations and regional organizations to strengthen their
conflict prevention capacities, including on mediation
and early warning. We contribute with expertise as well
as political and financial support. At the same time,
we have been actively engaged in developing our own
conflict prevention support capacities.

To conclude, let me recall that Brazil has inscribed
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
into its Constitution. Along with our neighbours, we
are consolidating South America as an area of peace,
democracy and cooperation. The Member States of the

Successful conflict resolution and peacebuilding
are crucial to conflict prevention, given the cyclical
nature of conflict and the high risk of recurrence. While
diplomatic attention is often focused on brokering
agreements that end hostilities, it is equally important

26/62

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7247

for the international community to stand behind peace
agreements after they have been concluded and even
more to support their actual implementation. The work
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund is also important in that respect
and needs to be further strengthened. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to review
the peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.

Finally, we welcome that the resolution clearly
emphasizes the interconnectedness between human
rights and peace and security. Building societies based
on the rule of law, democracy and good governance are
crucial aspects of conflict prevention. In that regard, we
also want to highlight the importance of education in
fostering a culture of peace and tolerance — a powerful
tool for preventing conflict.

We commend efforts in different parts of the United
Nations system to strengthen early-warning and conflict
prevention capacities and we also support the call in
resolution 2171 (2014) for strengthening the United
Nations system-wide approach to conflict prevention
and early warning. There are several elements we deem
to be of particular importance in that context.

It is our shared duty to turn resolution 2171 (2014)
and the commitments contained therein into reality.
That will require focused determination from all of
us. From our side we will continue to support steps to
further maximize the prospects of success in United
Nations preventive diplomacy efforts. The peoples of
the world expect no less.

First, the risk of atrocities needs specific attention,
as they can occur in situations where violent conflict
has not yet emerged or where it is part of a sudden
escalation of conflict. There are often important
advance signs when atrocities such as genocide are
becoming increasingly probable. The principle of the
responsibility to protect provides us, in that regard, with
various tools for a system-wide approach to atrocity
prevention, including early warning.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

In that regard, the EU reiterates its appreciation
for the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front initiative
as an important element of the Organization’s efforts.
In cases where atrocity crimes were committed,
accountability for those crimes is crucial in deterring
and preventing future atrocities. The EU is committed
to assisting States in strengthening their national
judicial systems. The EU is also a steadfast supporter
of the International Criminal Court, as it ensures
accountability where States are either unwilling or
unable to do so domestically.
Secondly, we highlight the importance of the nexus
between peace, security and development. Sustainable
development and poverty eradication require peace and
security, and vice versa. And neither can be achieved
without respect for human rights. That nexus is also a
key underlying principle in the application of an EU
comprehensive approach on conflict prevention.
Thirdly, conflict prevention requires an inclusive
approach, without which it cannot be effective. We need
to ensure the equal and full participation of women in
peace processes and conflict prevention strategies.
The full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions is crucial in that regard.

Mr. Prosor (Israel): First of all, Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for convening today’s important
meeting. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
respective briefings.
I speak to you today, Sir, as a man who has seen
and experienced war — both on the battlefield and on
the diplomatic field. My experiences have taught me
that war does not begin when the first shot is fired. War
begins when hatred and intolerance go unopposed. That
idea was expressed by Martin Niemöller, a German
pastor who bravely spoke out against the Nazis, when
he wrote:
“First they came for the Communists, but I
was not a Communist so I did not speak out. Then
they came for the Socialists and the trade unionists,
but I was neither, so I did not speak out. Then they
came for the Jews, but I was not a Jew so I did not
speak out. And when they came for me, there was
no one left to speak out for me.”
We see the forces of tyranny grow stronger, and we
must have the courage to take action. We must abide by
our commitment to speak out and fight until freedom
triumphs over oppression. When my father fled Berlin
in 1936, the writing was already on the wall. Boycotts
against Jewish-owned businesses were common,
graffiti was being scrawled on synagogues and Jews
were called “Untermenschen” or subhumans and were
being beaten and harassed on the streets.

14-5125327/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

Now, 70 years after the Holocaust, Jewish
communities from Cuba to Casablanca are being
threatened, and on the streets of Europe cries of “Death
to the Jews” can once again be heard. Yet the world
seems to have learned nothing. When synagogues
and Jewish-owned shops are burned and looted — is
it enough to claim that anti-Semitism is wrong? When
mobs beat Jews as they walk the streets — is it enough
to only express disgust? When heads of State and
ambassadors in this institution compare Israel to Hitler
and the Nazis — is it enough to issue a condemnation?
Did you, Mr. President, even make an effort to issue a
condemnation?
This institution was born from the ashes of the
Second World War to confront tyranny, but it is
failing. Radical extremism has touched every part
of the world from Buenos Aires to Burgas and from
Bangkok to Burkina Faso. Oppression and extremism
are not bound by borders. Nowhere is the threat more
obvious than in the Middle East. In 2004, there were
21 Islamic terrorist groups spread out over 18 countries.
Today, 41 Islamic terrorist groups are operating in
24 countries. Those groups have crippled communities
and brought entire nations to their knees. And still the
international community remains largely silent. It is
silent as Hizbullah amasses and smuggles thousands of
weapons, as Al-Qaida abuses and persecutes women,
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant slaughters
Christian and Yazidi communities, and as Hamas
intentionally places Gaza’s men, women and children
in harm’s way.
Hamas — like the Islamic State of the Levant
and Boko Haram and Al-Qaida — shares a disdain
for democracy, a contempt for modernity and a
determination to destroy our way of life. In Gaza,
Hamas sees no problem with abusing international
humanitarian centres and religious institutions for
terrorist purposes. It stores weapons in United Nations
facilities, transports terrorists in ambulances and fires
rockets indiscriminately from mosques, schools and
hospitals deep into the heart of civilian centres in Israel.
Few nations have the courage to admit that Hamas is
committing a double war crime — targeting Israeli
civilians while hiding behind Palestinian civilians.
Every nation must ask itself whether it wishes
to see a Middle East that is free, open and tolerant,
or whether it wishes to see a Middle East in which a
violent and radical minority suppresses the rights,
beliefs and aspirations of millions of people. This

28/62

21/08/2014

problem is not hundreds of miles and decades away.
Radical extremism affects us all — right here and right
now. Make no mistake: we are locked in a battle for our
shared security. From this Chamber I issue a warning
to the world — do not close your eyes to the threats
around you.
War is not inevitable — it is not a force of nature, nor
is it a part of human nature. It can and must be avoided.
We all want to live in peace and see our children grow
up in peace, but we cannot stand idly by in the face
of the threats that we face every day. To prevent the
next war, we must go to war against radical ideology.
We must declare a war on incitement, a war on bigotry
and a war on hypocrisy. Armed with our commitment
to freedom, tolerance and peace, I have no doubt that,
working together, we will emerge victorious.
This is a battle that we can win, and we must win.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to express my
appreciation to the President of the Council for holding
this debate on a topic that is of paramount importance.
Egypt, as a founding Member of the United Nations,
has always been a strong proponent of the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which
commit all Member States to the peaceful settlement of
disputes to prevent armed conflicts.
As everyone here is well aware, Egypt is in a region
that is, unfortunately, no stranger to armed strife. The
conflicts occurring in our region have been the subject
of numerous Security Council resolutions. Many of them
have yet to be fully implemented, thus contributing to
the continuation of decades-old conflicts. The conflict
in Gaza, which Egypt is currently exerting strenuous
efforts to mediate and resolve, is one such example.
The continued occupation of land is a leading cause of
conflicts. Therefore, in addition to exploring new ways
for the Security Council to utilize the tools available
to it under Chapter VI, it is also imperative to explore
ways to implement pre-existing resolutions.
As the presidency’s concept paper accurately notes,
conflict today “is driven by a wide range of factors”
(S/2014/572, annex, p. 2) Egypt believes that there are
indeed clear root causes for many of the conflicts under
way in the world. The failure to eradicate poverty, to
achieve development and to arrest the proliferation of

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

organized crime groups should be addressed as among
the underlying root causes of many conflicts.
Another factor driving conflict today is terrorism.
Egypt has long been a victim of that scourge and has
long been at the forefront of the global effort to combat
it. The case of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
is a clear example of the type of threats that a terrorist
group can pose to international peace and security.
There are also other aspects of conflicts. In Africa,
drought has disrupted traditional ways of life and has
led to several severe conflicts as a result of the adverse
impacts of climate change.
Sometimes indicators may be less clear-cut, but
nonetheless very salient. In that context, Egypt believes
that the early detection of signs warning of potential
conflicts, such as the marginalization of some ethnic
groups, tribal-based clashes and the erosion or absence
of State institutions, should be the basis for the effective
containment of such conflicts at their early stages. We
have seen that in the Central African Republic and
Somalia, to name just two places.
While all those factors require a serious effort on
the part of the United Nations and the Security Council
in order to forestall armed conflicts, it is also important
not to lose sight of the key components and cardinal
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. With
the exception of matters pertinent to the preservation
of international peace and security, the Charter clearly
prohibits intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States. We recall
that, when that principle has been violated, conflicts
have ensued, and some continue unabated until today.
Therefore, the consent of the States that might be
subject to conflict-prevention measures should always
be sought and secured before undertaking due action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate and for the concept
note (S/2014/572, annex) that you have prepared. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for the
comments that they have shared with us.
As we all know, the Security Council has been
entrusted, since its inception, with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and

S/PV.7247

security. To achieve that, there has been recognition
of the need for a set of mechanisms and tools that are
applicable depending on the situation or circumstances.
In most cases, they have been used to stop conflicts
rather than to prevent them, but in recent decades we
have seen a greater emphasis placed on prevention. We
agree with that trend, which at the same time raises
new questions. The first has to do with the role that
the Council has played in using the various tools at its
disposal. Secondly, we ask ourselves if those tools are
appropriately suited to the current complexities and,
perhaps more important, whether or not they enable us
to undertake the early consideration of situations that
can degenerate into armed conflicts.
As for the first aspect, we believe that any action
that is undertaken in the area of conflict prevention
must support and complement initiatives undertaken
by the national Governments directly involved and
their immediate neighbours. Nevertheless, in dealing
with the dilemma, mistrust, a lack of knowledge or
a lack of political will may be such that very often
Governments and other actors are reluctant to heed
warnings of potential conflicts. That explains, in part,
why those mechanisms often have not been mobilized
more frequently.
For that reason, we believe that the work of regional
offices and regional organizations can be invaluable,
since their early and timely involvement is crucial. All
preventive actions must begin as soon as possible so
as to reduce the likelihood that tense situations will
degenerate into violent conflict.
With respect to the second matter, if the existing
prevention mechanisms enable rapid responses, we
must bear in mind that every situation has unique
features, and that is why we cannot logically apply
the same prevention model to all cases. The past
experiences we have accumulated as well as the lessons
learned can also provide important clues, including
with regrd to the need to focus on the main causes of
tension and their mitigation, as well as the need to adopt
multidimensional approaches. In that way, the response
capacity of the mechanism will not depend exclusively
on how the mechanism was designed or conceived, but
rather on factors such as capability, experience and
the presence on the ground of those who apply it. Nor
is it appropriate to evaluate the different mechanisms
that could have an influence on the parties on the basis
of the speed with which they can bear fruit. What is
important is to find a formula that reduces mistrust,

14-5125329/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

keeps the channels of negotiation open and limits the
recourse to violence in each particular case.
In conclusion, strengthening and perfecting a
combination of mechanisms for preventive diplomacy
and the peaceful resolution of disputes should better
respond to the growing demands of Member States,
particularly in terms of flexibility, agility and
coherence. Ultimately, the effectiveness of those
commitments will depend on a variety of factors,
including the commitment of the parties, the existence
of political freedom to operate and the decisive support
of the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
British delegation on assuming the Council’s presidency
for this month and for convening this timely debate. I
also would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their respective briefings, which we
have heard with much interest.
In associating itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, my delegation
wishes to make some additional comments.
Malaysia reaffirms its support for efforts aimed
at preventing the escalation of conflicts into threats
to international peace and security. Malaysia also
believes that the United Nations system, including the
Security Council, has an integral role to play in that
regard. With a view to enhancing the effectiveness of
the United Nations system in discharging such a role,
Malaysia also supports efforts to achieve system-wide
coherence, which could, among other things, enable the
early detection of potential crisis situations.
On a related note, the nature of contemporary
conflict situations also raises certain questions,
including as to whether the United Nations, in particular
the Council, is adequately equipped to respond to new
types of conflicts or situations.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
clearly provides an array of tools and approaches that
are available to both the Council and the General
Assembly. In the context of securing the widest
possible support for any proposed preventive measure
or approach, there may be a case for exploring closer

30/62

21/08/2014

cooperation between the Council and the General
Assembly. It is noteworthy that, over the past few years,
the United Nations has utilized a wider range of tools
outlined in Chapter VI, including mediation. Malaysia
views positively the possibility of strengthening the
capacities and capabilities of the United Nations in that
field.
Alongside efforts at the international level, the
capacities and capabilities of actors at the regional
and national levels are also important components of
the international peace and security architecture. They
merit serious, sustained attention and should be further
strengthened.
It is distressing and unfortunate that we continue to
witness instances of situations relapsing into conflict
across various regions today. With regard to preventing
such developments, Malaysia believes that the United
Nations could do more to assist countries and societies
facing such situations.
In particular, Malaysia is of the view that the
potential roles of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
should be given more attention, particularly in the
context of its upcoming review scheduled for 2015.
Among other things, the PBC’s role as a platform for
exchanging expertise and experience could be further
enhanced. Additionally, the role of women in conflict
prevention should be further mainstreamed.
In conclusion, my delegation notes that the outcome
of this debate has been reflected in the form of a Council
resolution — resolution 2171 (2014). Malaysia reiterates
its firm belief that the United Nations in general and the
Security Council in particular should continue to play
a central role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, including in conflict prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this open debate. I would also like to
endorse the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. To save time, I would like to briefly
summarize my statement, which will be circulated in
writing to delegations when I finish.
As a preliminary comment, I would like to say that
it is necessary to move firmly from a reactive culture
to a culture of prevention. Prevention should occupy a
central role in the efforts of the United Nations, and

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Security Council has a fundamental responsibility
in the area of conflict prevention. As some speakers
preceding the Spanish delegation have said, we need to
utilize all the tools available in the Charter of the United
Nations to contribute towards the effective prevention
of conflicts. Among such instruments, I would like to
mention such important ones as commissions of inquiry
and sanctions, which can also play an important role in
prevention.
Spain has placed mediation at the heart of its
foreign policy. It is crucial, in our view, to devote
special attention to the root and structural causes
of conflicts and to their risk factors in order to work
towards their prevention and to ensure the sustainability
of the solutions achieved. For that reason, I am going to
focus on the tools in which my delegation has invested
considerable political and financial capital, namely,
mediation and peacebuilding.
We are committed to preventive diplomacy and
mediation as tools for the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and peacebuilding. We are therefore a
founding member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
and we contribute to the Mediation Support Unit of
the Department of Political Affairs. In addition, along
with our friends from Morocco, we have launched an
initiative for mediation in the Mediterranean that we
are currently in the process of developing further.
As the Secretary-General has observed in his
reports, in order for mediation efforts to succeed, three
conditions must be met. First, mediation must be based
on a profound understanding of the local context. It is
important to listen closely and with sensitivity to the
local players. Secondly, there needs to be a spirit of
local ownership; imposed mediation rarely works. And,
thirdly, there needs to be coherence, coordination and
complementarity among the concerned actors.
The second instrument in which Spain has
invested considerable political and financial capital
is peacekeeping. Peacekeeping operations and special
political missions play a fundamental and invaluable
role. I cannot fail to mention the important role played
also by the Peacekeeping Commission, in which Spain
actively participates, as well as the various regional
entities. As several delegations have observed, we fully
support better and more fluid interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council.
Finally, several delegations have also mentioned
the responsibility to protect. It is important for us to

S/PV.7247

continue to promote the excellent principle of the
responsibility to protect, in particular in its second
pillar, namely, the commitment to provide assistance to
countries in order to enable them to effectively prevent
atrocities.
To conclude, I wish to express my delegation’s
gratitude to you, Sir, for organizing this debate, and
above all for today’s adoption of resolution 2171 (2014),
which represents a good step in the right direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin my remarks by thanking you, Sir, for organizing
this debate on conflict prevention at a moment when
the world is being convulsed by a number of conflicts
and by the expansion of extremism, terrorism and
fanaticism, with their toll of innocent victims and
criminal atrocities.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his detailed briefing and his personal commitment
to keeping conflict prevention at the heart of his
priorities. I recognize the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, whose leadership has
brought impartiality, neutrality and objectivity to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Since her mandate has run its course,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay special
homage to her for the progress achieved by her Office
and to tell her that it was a personal privilege for me to
work with her.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Enshrined in Article I of the Charter of the United
Nations, conflict prevention lies at the heart of the
United Nations mandate. Support for conflict prevention
is not merely a choice but rather an international
obligation aimed at preventing the horrors of war and
armed conflict. Article I is more relevant than ever
in the aftermath of the international community’s
commemoration of the outbreak of the First World War
and at a moment when armed conflicts and a surge
in extremism and terrorism are shaking a number of
regions, with tragic consequences for their populations.
That explains the duty of the international community
to act together to prevent and resolve conflicts by
investing in efforts at conciliation, negotiation and

14-5125331/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

mediation, instead of acting a posteriori, with the risk
of exacerbating conflicts.
As highlighted in the concept note (S/2014/572,
annex), for which we commend the British presidency,
the Security Council is the primary organ with respect
to conflict prevention and is supported to that end by
various mechanisms. The mission of the good offices
of the Secretary-General is also a highly valued
instrument for conflict resolution, and we would like
to register our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s
commitment, his diplomatic expertise and his vision for
the noble aim of preventing and resolving conflicts.
Resolution 2171 (2014), unanimously adopted
today, highlights the important conflict prevention
role of peacekeeping operations, the special political
missions and the regional offices of the United Nations,
which have played a leading role, especially in Guinea
and in Kyrgyzstan. The United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa is currently playing a decisive role as
mediator in the political process in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, we believe that it is essential
to increase the human and financial resources accorded
to those offices, as well as to the special envoys of the
Secretary-General, in order to ensure the successful
fulfilment of their mandates.
An increasingly firm commitment to our continent
on the part of regional and subregional organizations
should also be stressed. In that context, regional
integration comes to the fore as a factor in conflict
prevention and as a means for considerably reducing
the risk of conflict.
Despite their proven efficacy, those mechanisms
for conflict prevention have struggled to adapt to the
evolving nature of conflicts, which are increasingly
intra-State. Indeed, they have not managed to keep
situations from deteriorating, whether in the Sahel, in
the Central African Republic, in South Sudan or in any
number of other theatres of conflict.
Those conflicts have thrown a spotlight on the need
for an integrated, global approach to conflict prevention
that takes into account the changing nature of conflicts,
with the advent of threats linked to terrorism and to
signs of separatism, along with their root causes. It
would be beneficial to revisit those mechanisms in
order to improve their efficacy, bringing an innovative
approach to the process and including new players
who might have a positive impact. In that context, it
is essential to strengthen the support offered to States

32/62

21/08/2014

that request it, particularly with regard to technical
assistance and national capacity-building, since in
the end it is States that are responsible for preventing
conflicts in their countries.
Recent events in North Africa have amply
demonstrated that States with strong institutions can
avoid civil war, while in others rival armed groups
have faced off with consequences for the countries of
the Maghreb as a whole, confirming the critical need
for strengthening cooperation among neighbouring
countries. Moreover, greater involvement on the part
of civil society, in particular women and youth, should
be encouraged, because they can have a positive impact
with respect to promoting dialogue and reconciliation.
Morocco has made conflict prevention one of the
main paradigms of its foreign policy. In that regard,
our country has become an advocate for the values
of tolerance, dialogue, conciliation and negotiation
in Africa and the Middle East. The root causes of the
recent conflicts, often traceable to ethnic or religious
differences, highlight the importance of initiatives such
as the Rabat plan of action on the prohibition of the
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred, which
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence, an achievement and initiative for which
Ms. Pillay deserves credit, or the recent international
meeting on strengthening the dialogue between cultures
and civilizations, which saw the adoption of the Fez
appeal, which stresses the urgent need for new forms
of interaction and understanding among civilizations.
To conclude and in direct alignment with Ms. Pillay’s
proposals, Morocco believes that conflict prevention
is a complex problem. We are more convinced than
ever that the difficulties can be surmounted if the
international community and the Security Council unite
in a proactive manner with good will and determination
and commit themselves to that goal by prioritizing
dialogue, conciliation and negotiation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to make the following
points.
First, 100 years since the beginning of the First
World War, the atmosphere surrounding international
relations is not promising. It does not give the
impression that the States involved in that war learned
anything from the history of that catastrophe, since the
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7247

First World War was followed by the Second World
War, which was more destructive and more painful.

leading to the killing of millions of innocent people and
destruction on a unprecedented scale.

The same policies now seem to govern most
international relations, leading towards chaos and
what could be called a third world war waged by the
same colonial States in the same spirit of opportunism.
However, this time, the agents are present in many
conflict zones around the world.

The peoples of the region are paying the price of
the military invasion of Iraq in 2003, which took place
following unilateral claims that were rejected by the
Security Council and the Secretary-General at the time.
That led to the tragedies of which we are all aware.
The Libyan people are also paying the price of direct
military intervention, which has destroyed the country
and put it in the hands of armed groups and Takfiri
gangs that threaten the peace and security of every
Libyan. We have now seen terrorists and weapons sent
to my country, Syria.

Regrettably, the establishment of the United Nations
did not lead to the noble goal for which it was created — to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
as is stated in the preamble to the Charter. Our peoples,
whose voices joined those of the peoples of the United
Nations in calling for the condemnation of war and for
the prevention of its scourge on humankind following
the Second World War, have suffered more than ever
before from the effects of wars that have caused great
harm to the world, in particular our Arab region, and
that we still feel today. In our history, the suffering of
our peoples has redoubled owing to the ongoing armed
aggression and the various forms of armed military
invasion, especially against Syria, Iraq, Libya and
Gaza.
It is truly ironic that the end of the First World War
in Europe was followed directly by the painful path
of European colonial wars against other peoples. As
soon as the weapons of war fell silent in that war, the
Governments of France and Britain drafted the SykesPicot Agreement. It was a deplorable agreement that
divided the States and peoples of the region into areas
of influence and occupation and opened the way for
the Balfour Declaration of 1917, which sowed Zionist
settler colonization in occupied Palestine and led to the
unprecedented injustice and Israeli settler occupation
of Arab and Palestinian land that continue today. The
Sykes-Picot Agreement also opened the way for the
French occupying authorities that took Iskenderun from
the lands of the Syrian Arab Republic and handed it to
Turkey, which still occupies it today, in order to bribe
Turkey’s then-rulers not to enter the Second World War
on the side of Nazi Germany.
What many States see in the crises in the Arab
region compels us to question who benefits from such
crises. That is particularly the case given the fact that
we have seen organized and coordinated actions in our
Arab region by many States, one after the other, with the
same participating States and regional and local actors
using the same tools, slogans, schemes and resources,

Perhaps it is time to talk about the destruction of
the State in Somalia and in other African States. The
United Nations is called on to bear its responsibilities
and to discharge the role entrusted to it by the States
Members of the United Nations under international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, in particular with
regard to equality, sovereignty and non-intervention.
The maintenance of international peace and security
and preventive action to stop conflicts and to achieve
their settlement are not limited to vying to condemn
terrorism and to justify it with expressions such as
“spring”, “revolution”, “popular uprising” and “peaceful
movements”. There is a clear policy of double standards
in the Organization that continues to frustrate the hopes
of our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We believe that
we need to strengthen the efforts of the United Nations
in order to move from a culture of reaction to one of
prevention. The United Nations needs to agree on a
collective toolkit to assess the severity of the increasing
problems that should be based on international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the multidimensional
approaches of preventive diplomacy, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development.
It is of great importance that the political
differences among the Security Council members should
not hinder the Council’s role in fulfilling its primary task
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since conflict, peace and development are interrelated,
there is also a lack of consensus on what falls under
the Council’s mandate. Furthermore, Security Council
statements issued because members do not agree on

14-5125333/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

resolutions are ineffective in the undertaking of any
action. We therefore call for a united front in the
Security Council.
The Council and Member States should strongly
support the long-term work on conflict prevention of the
Secretary-General and of his special envoys and special
representatives. We support the activities of the United
Nations regional offices in serving as platforms for
good offices and preventive diplomacy. Kazakhstan
proposed establishing a United Nations regional hub for
development and humanitarian assistance in Almaty,
which could complement the work of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. The proposal seeks a more robust political
presence of the United Nations in the vast territory of
the Eurasian region.
Besides United Nations regional organizations, we
must also mobilize the African Union, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the League of Arab States and other regional
entities in order to support fragile States in resolving
their long-standing problems. Kazakhstan initiated the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia (CICA), which is a platform for
cooperation and dialogue in Asia that works actively
in the region. In order to increase its effectiveness and
to further institutionalize it, Kazakhstan proposed
transforming CICA into the organization for security
and development in Asia.

21/08/2014

security, development, the protection of human rights
and the promotion of the rule of law.
One form of such efforts for conflict prevention
could be the promotion of tolerance, non-discrimination
and understanding among the various ethnic and
religious groups and the development of dialogue among
cultures and civilizations. We believe that international
entities and initiatives such as the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, the Congress of Leaders of
World and Traditional Religions and the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures 2013-2022
should play a role in strengthening conflict prevention
and resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate, preparing
the concept paper (S/2014/572, annex) and advancing the
deliberations of the Security Council on this important
topic. NAM also thanks the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their briefings.

Our approaches must also be fundamentally directed
at the protection of civilians — women and children,
as well as humanitarian workers, who are increasingly
becoming targets. At the same time, we must respect
the right of Governments to resolve their own internal
crises. The international community must address the
problems of inadequate financing, insufficient troops,
the lack of adequate civilian personnel and capacitybuilding to handle the multiple and complex mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Conflict prevention also
implies measures after a ceasefire, when peace and
stability are bring brokered as an ongoing process.

NAM has always favoured the idea of according
priority to conflict prevention, and stresses the need to
intensify efforts within the United Nations system to
move from a culture of reaction to one of prevention,
drawing on the lessons learned through a case-bycase and in-depth analysis of the underlying causes
of conflict. Each year, billions of dollars are spent on
conflicts, while the human costs of war in terms of
death and injury, the destruction of civil infrastructure,
displacements and their repercussions for families,
communities, local and national institutions and
economies, as well as those of neighbouring countries,
are far more destructive and destabilizing. The message
is therefore clear: conflicts are too costly for humankind
and must be prevented as far as possible.

Kazakhstan pursues a pragmatic and independent
foreign policy on the basis of balancing interests
and the protection of national interests. My country
stands united with the international community in
strengthening the work of the United Nations and
the Security Council. It supports Member States in
constructively transforming conflict into peace,

Conflict prevention is one of the primary obligations
of Member States. Efforts aimed at conflict prevention
must be in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. That must begin
with national Governments, assisted by the United
Nations. The international community at large should
support such efforts and assist Governments, upon

34/62

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

request, with national capacity-building. At the same
time, the most useful instruments for prevention are
to be found in Chapter VI of the Charter, which deals
with the peaceful settlement of disputes. In our view,
the following measures should be adopted with a view
to thwarting the outbreak of conflict.
First, preventive actions should be initiated as early
as possible in order to make it less likely that tense
situations deteriorate into violent conflict, while, at the
same time, the right of national authorities to resolve
internal crises should be respected.
Secondly, the preventive approach should be
multidimensional and focus on the root causes of
tensions.
The members of the Non-Aligned Movement have
stressed the need to strengthen the role of the Movement
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, confidence-building and
post-conflict peacebuilding and rehabilitation within
or between NAM member States.
NAM also acknowledges the interconnectedness
of economic development, social development,
environmental protection, peace and security, human
rights and the rule of law. Efforts should be made to
ensure that any effort to transform the United Nations
into a more effective instrument for preventing conflict
should take into account the need for a balanced,
coherent and comprehensive approach, in accordance
with the Charter and international law, in order to
enhance conflict prevention and resolution and postconflict peacebuilding strategies, with the aim of
achieving sustained economic growth and sustainable
development. In that context, it is critical that all
principal organs of the United Nations play an active
role in designing and implementing a more effective
collective security system, in accordance with their
respective functions and powers.
With those principles in mind, NAM is ready to
contribute to all efforts to strengthen the conflictprevention architecture at the international level and
make this world a safer place to live for this generation
and generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General

S/PV.7247

and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their statements.
Ending a conflict is much more costly than
preventing one. It is therefore crucial to ensure, early
on, that we understand the warning signs, take decisions
and take action. In oder to ensure that the Security
Council can fully assume its key role in preventive
action and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, it must
fully utilize the various tools at its disposal.
Through the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) initiative, a cross-regional group
of States coordinated by Switzerland that seeks to
reinforce the working methods of the Security Council,
Switzerland has repeatedly raised the question of
improving the preventive capacities of the Council.
First and foremost, the Council needs to be alerted as
early as possible to potential crises in order to take
appropriate action at an early stage.
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly
highlight a few issues that Switzerland believes are
crucial in conflict prevention.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as
an intergovernmental advisory body of the Council,
has a major role to play in preventing the recurrence
of conflicts. Roughly half of all countries emerging
from conflict suffer a relapse into violence at some
point. The recent crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders of that fact. A
coordinated and committed approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding is key to preventing such relapses.
As Chair of the Burundi configuration, Switzerland
believes that the Peacebuilding Commission can fill the
role of a forum where critical situations are discussed
very early, in an inclusive manner and with all the
relevant stakeholders. The upcoming 2015 review
of the peacebuilding architecture will be a valuable
opportunity to implement the adaptations necessary to
further improve that role of the PBC.
The participation of a wide variety of actors through
formal and informal meetings has helped to develop a
comprehensive understanding of complex situations
and to prevent relapses into conflict. Initiatives such
as the recently established Global Action Against Mass
Atrocity Crimes provide indispensable support to
efforts to better grasp local and regional complexities.
Today, the fact that serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights must be seen as
early warning signs of violent conflict is uncontested.

14-5125335/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is therefore vital that the entire United Nations
system have the necessary means to collect and provide
information on populations that are victims of such
violations or are at risk of becoming so. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes and fully supports the Rights Up
Front initiative.
Secondly, special political missions are crucial
instruments for the Security Council’s preventive
diplomacy work. In order to succeed, they need to
assume, among other things, a holistic approach
encompassing all stakeholders, enjoy broad political
support and have the necessary means and resources.
Switzerland welcomes the debate in the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly on special
political missions. Discussing the strengths, challenges
and needs of such missions is crucial to improving their
effectiveness and efficiency. Switzerland will continue
to actively participate in those efforts and in the
discussions in the Fifth Committee on how to improve
support and funding for such missions. We believe that
concrete improvements, such as those recommended
by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, would be an important step
forward.
Finally, we believe that, in future, developing local
capacities and constructive coordination between all
the relevant national, regional and global actors will
be the key to the success of conflict prevention efforts.
Current and past examples of successful cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) support
such an approach. In that regard, we would like to share
with the Council some of the experience we gleaned
from the Swiss chairmanship of the OSCE.
Last May, the OSCE convened a high-level event
in Warsaw to foster cooperation between regional
and international organizations in the area of human
rights. The participation of key representatives of
the United Nations and the Council of Europe made
a major contribution to a fruitful, serious dialogue
with participating OSCE States and institutions. The
recent signing of a cooperation agreement between the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the OSCE’s Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights marks an important
stage in our joint efforts to improve respect for human
rights and their protection.

36/62

21/08/2014

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate, which gives us the opportunity to reflect
on the importance of preventive diplomacy. My country
commends the statements made by the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We also thank the presidency for preparing the
concept note (S/2014/572, annex), which gives members
the foundation we need to participate in this debate and
support the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014).
The primary objective of the United Nations is
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security under a system of collective security. To that
end, the Charter of the United Nations, which created
the Security Council, provided a range of tools designed
to prevent the emergence of new conflicts and enable
action when they do occur. Historically, however, it
appears that the Council’s efforts have been confined
almost exclusively to reacting to ongoing conflicts
rather than to anticipating them.
Clearly, the United Nations in general, and the
Security Council in particular, can and should do more
to ensure that international peace and security are
maintained. Regarding that task, we should note that
Article 99 of the Charter empowers the SecretaryGeneral to call the Council’s attention to any matter
that, in his opinion, represents a threat to international
peace and security. We therefore consider it appropriate
that the Secretary-General, as he has done in several
cases, send his special representatives and personal
envoys to collect information on potential earlywarning indicators that can enable them to anticipate
possible areas of conflict and report on their findings
to the Council.
We are currently witnessing a number of
international and internal conflicts around the world.
They have not arisen spontaneously but for various
reasons, many of them deep and structural, that in some
cases have been incubating for long periods of time.
Economic inequality and social exclusion — along
with the lack of an environment that, through the rule
of law, ensures that all individuals experience the
full and effective enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms — are common causes of the
conflicts that we are unfortunately seeing.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

In my delegation’s view, we therefore have an
unquestionable and urgent need for a comprehensive
and integrated approach to security and peacekeeping
that incorporates an investigation of the root causes
of violence and the social and economic situations
on the ground. In that connection, we must also
abandon outmoded, compartmentalized approaches
and strategies that differentiate between situations of
conflict and the absence of such conflict. The United
Nations should have a complementary and synergistic
approach to the maintenance of peace and international
security that includes preventive diplomacy and
support for conflict-resolution processes by peaceful
means, and that prevents relapses into conflict and
enables peacebuilding. Similarly, due consideration
should be given to security considerations and early
warnings signalling the need for conflict prevention in
the strategies and actions of all agencies in the United
Nations system.
In such an integrated arrangement, I would
like to emphasize the importance of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission — a body in which Peru
participates and the body responsible for supporting
States that have suffered the consequences of
conflict — in implementing the policies developed by
national Governments according to their priorities,
with a focus on the interdependence of security and
development. That will enable us to break the cycle of
conflict by attacking its underlying causes directly. We
have appealed to States to make a positive contribution to
the review process of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture planned for 2015.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance that Peru attaches to preventive diplomacy
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, and that, as we
succeed in developing and implementing measures that
enable us to prevent conflict and reduce the risk that
they may recur or reappear, we will be fulfilling the
mandate of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Laursen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
The Nordic countries welcome this timely initiative
to discuss the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention. We strongly support the adoption today of
resolution 2171 (2014), which lays out a framework for
further strengthening our shared efforts in the field.

S/PV.7247

We also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their clear and
forceful interventions.
The primary responsibility for addressing the
causes of violent conflict lies with Member States.
Conflict prevention is inherently a Government
responsibility, through the creation of representative,
legitimate and inclusive political and economic systems
and respect for human rights and the rule of law. But
there is no doubt that the Council must play a leading
role in preventing and responding to conflict.
We want the Council to make a real difference in
preventing the escalation of conflict. We welcome the
active role being played by the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat in ensuring that emerging issues are
brought to the Council’s attention. We encourage the
use of regular horizon-scanning briefings as a way to
keep its members aware of potential crises and to offer
an opportunity for early action. The United Nations
system as a whole must contribute more to preventing
violent conflict. But Member States must make the
Organization fit for that purpose.
The Council has mandated many important special
political missions that have been essential to conflict
prevention. But it is crucial that such missions be
provided with adequate and predictable funding. In
general, preventive diplomacy deserves more resources
within the United Nations system. Despite broad
recognition of the fact that conflict prevention saves
both lives and money, there is still a striking imbalance
between the funding for conflict prevention versus that
for peacekeeping. We greatly value the work of the
Department of Political Affairs and believe it should be
able to strengthen its resources by diversifying its donor
base and by looking into the possibility of obtaining
more funding through the regular budget.
Early and concerted action can prevent the escalation
of conflict. That requires proactive involvement on the
part of the Council, the Secretary-General and others.
The Council should encourage the Secretary-General
to actively use Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Preventive diplomacy is also about getting the
international community to speak with one voice and
send a clear political message to the parties to a conflict.
The members of the Security Council have a special
responsibility in that regard. But too often we fail to see
any action from the Council. We should explore ways to
maximize the use of existing tools, as described in the
Charter. One such critical tool is mediation. The Nordic

14-5125337/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries welcome the General Assembly’s recent
adoption of a resolution on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in
preventing and resolving conflicts (General Assembly
resolution 68/304).
The Security Council must also continue to
strengthen its close cooperation and engagement with
regional organizations. Lessons may be learned from
the African Union’s efforts to establish a continental
early-warning system. Regional support and ownership
are vital to effective conflict prevention. In recent years,
we have witnessed many examples of cooperation with
regional organizations, particularly in Africa. That
includes cooperation with the European Union, which
actively supports United Nations conflict-prevention
efforts.
The United Nations system has a duty to promote
and encourage respect for human rights in all its work.
An early and holistic focus on human rights is crucial
to detecting potential political conflicts and mobilizing
action. The Nordic countries endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s Rights Up Front initiative, which puts the
crucial issues of protecting people and preventive
efforts at the centre of United Nations strategies and
operational activities. Ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights on the part of States
and non-State armed groups is fundamental to conflict
prevention.
Women remain the single most underutilized
resource for more effective peacemaking and
peacebuilding. Experience shows that empowering
women and supporting their full and active
participation in peace-related political and economic
decision-making can lead to more inclusive and lasting
agreements. That must be a central component in any
conflict-prevention effort.
Sustained peace is not possible without promoting
justice, ensuring accountability and combating a culture
of impunity. The primary responsibility for that rests
with Member States. But the international community
should assist countries, at their request, to develop the
necessary capacities and institutions. The International
Criminal Court plays a central complementary role in
ensuring that those responsible for committing war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are
brought to justice. The continued involvement of the
Council in that area is of critical importance to conflict
prevention.

38/62

21/08/2014

The Council must remain engaged in a wide range
of factors that can cause armed conflict. A welcome
example of that was last year’s debate on conflict
prevention and natural resources (see S/PV.6982). We
would like to see a strengthened focus by the Council
on the nexus between climate change and security.
Finally, conflict prevention and peacebuilding are
deeply intertwined, as some conflicts tend to be cyclical.
The Nordic countries welcome the upcoming review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
including the Peacebuilding Commission. We need
to ensure better coordination of all the elements of
the wider United Nations conflict prevention and
peacebuilding effort, including the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme. Our focus must be on maximizing the
United Nations effectiveness and impact at the country
level to stabilize fragile States, avoid future conflict
and lay the foundation for lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for the United
Kingdom’s leadership in convening today’s open
debate. In order to save time, I will circulate my full
text and make only the salient points.
On the issue of conflict prevention, I would like
to underscore the necessity for the Security Council,
the United Nations system as a whole and Member
States to take appropriate measures quickly, before
situations require large-scale action. It is also important
to promote peacebuilding to prevent relapses into
conflict. According to the World Development Report
2011, published by the World Bank, 90 per cent of the
conflicts that occurred from 2000 to 2009 were in fact
relapses.
To tackle those issues, I would like to share with
the Council Japan’s experiences from two angles.
First, as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) working group on lessons learned, Japan has
been leading the discussion on challenges that countries
might face after the withdrawal of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The working group heard from
the countries on the PBC’s agenda facing transitions,
namely, Sierra Leone, Burundi and Liberia. Discussions
led us to identify two major challenges faced by those
countries in transition. The first was how to maintain
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

financial sustainability, and the second how to ensure
the continuity of an inclusive political process.
To overcome those challenges, we need to consider
a way to maintain the attention and commitment of the
international community, as well as to strengthen a
country’s ownership of its institutions and its political
engagement. I believe the PBC can play a role in
addressing the risk of recurrence during the transitional
period by monitoring the progress and reporting on the
evolution of the political situation, if appropriate, to the
Council. I hope the Council will further strengthen its
coordination with the PBC to that end.
Secondly, Japan, in its national capacity, has also
contributed to assisting in conflict prevention and
the consolidation of peace. Let me touch upon four
examples.
First, Japan has provided post-conflict countries,
such as Afghanistan and Cambodia, inter alia, with
seamless assistance for in the consolidation of peace.
Secondly, Japan is also an active advocate for human
security. Since 1999, Japan has contributed $390 million
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security.
Thirdly, with respect to our efforts in Africa, Japan
has actively supported African countries’ own efforts
to consolidate peace through the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD) process.
Last year, TICAD V was held in Yokohama, Japan. On
that occasion, we announced financial assistance in the
amount of $550 million for peacebuilding in Africa.
Lastly, Japan promotes the role of women in preventing
conflict as well as in consolidating peace. Our efforts
range from the training of female mediators to the
setting up of vocational training centres in order to
empower women affected by conflict.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Japan’s
determination to take an active role in conflict
prevention. Under the banner of “Proactive Contributor
to Peace”, Japan will continue to work together with the
international community to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s open debate on
conflict prevention. I also join those who spoke before
me in thanking the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings on today’s important topic.

S/PV.7247

In line with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council has the mandate to anticipate
and prevent conflicts pursuant to Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. However, much of the
Council’s efforts over the past decades have been
reactive — addressing crisis situations after they
escalate into full-blown conflicts.
Obviously, a failure to act early enough to respond
to conflict situations not only costs the lives of innocent
civilians and results in forced displacement of people
but also wreaks enormous havoc and destruction. That
is clearly demonstrated in, for example, the recent
conflicts in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, to name just two. Over and above that,
however, conflict management and resolution has been
a very expensive undertaking, consuming an enormous
amount of time, energy and resources.
As has been repeatedly mentioned, prevention is
not only better than cure, but it is also less expensive
and averts suffering and destruction. In the light of that
fact, it is critical that more attention be given to the
anticipation and prevention of conflicts. Accordingly,
the Security Council should be much more proactive in
the area of conflict prevention through the utilization of
all the preventive diplomacy tools at its disposal. That
includes, inter alia, the timely and effective utilization
of early warning signals to provide a rapid response to
crises and conflict situations. In that regard, ensuring
synergy and complementarity among the different
prevention and early-warning mechanisms within
the United Nations system is critical to providing the
Council with thorough analysis of conflict trends in a
coherent manner.
In order to enhance its role in the area of conflict
prevention, the Council should act with flexibility in
providing an early and effective response based on
early warning signals in potential crisis and conflict
situations. As clearly indicated in the concept note
(S/2014/572, annex), that has indeed been a challenge
for the Council, which makes obvious the need for
Council to reflect on and draw valuable lessons from
its past experiences with a view to improving its
performance in the future. Moreover, the Council
needs to have closer coordination and complementarity
of efforts with regional organizations and mechanisms
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Since regional organizations and
mechanisms are closer to potential crisis and conflict

14-5125339/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

situations, they could be instrumental in providing an
early and effective response.
Finally, we believe that today’s open debate
builds upon the series of previous meetings that have
taken place on this important topic and contributes to
enhancing the role of the Security Council in the area
of conflict prevention. In the light of changing conflict
dynamics, we believe that is not a matter of choice but
one of necessity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s important debate. My delegation
hopes that today’s meeting will be fruitful, as the
subject continues to deserve our serious attention and
commitment. We wish to offer thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their respective briefings.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Indonesia has always been a strong supporter of the
notion of preventing conflict. In our region, South-East
Asia, Indonesia, together with other States members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
contributes to international peace and security by
addressing any potential conflict in a timely fashion in
accordance with ASEAN’s main principles. We wish
to expand our positive contribution and be part of the
solution to global security challenges. In that context
Indonesia hosted the ASEAN-United Nations Workshop
on Lessons Learned and Best Practices in Conflict
Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy in Djakarta
in April 2013. The workshop enabled frank, candid
discussion among actors. They examined various cases
of conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy and
identified various tangible joint activities in that regard.
We are fully aware that in the current globalized
world potential sources of conflict are multilevel and
multifaceted. They are therefore dramatically changing
the nature of conflict as you, Mr. President, rightly
point out in the concept note (S/2014/572, annex).
Those sources of conflict of course introduce various
key political capacity resources and operational issues
that need to be addressed by the United Nations
system, in particular the Council in consultation with
all Member States. Considering the range and strategic
nature of conflict factors and the solution mechanisms,
40/62

21/08/2014

it is vital that open dialogues like today’s continue.
Maximum common understanding and ownership
and the utilization of different conflict-solving tools
should be sought. We are of the view that the Security
Council can be more proactive in forestalling conflicts,
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Council’s related resolutions.
We therefore welcome the adoption of the resolution
2171 (2014) on this issue. Indonesia agrees with the
emphasis by the Council that conflict prevention is the
primary responsibility of States, and actions undertaken
within the framework of conflict prevention by the
United Nations should support and complement the
conflict-prevention roles of national Governments, as
appropriate.
We also agree that peacebuilding must be an
important component of a comprehensive prevention
strategy, along with tackling the root causes of conflict.
Indonesia supports such a holistic approach, as well
as a greater role by the Peacebuilding Commission to
further strengthen the United Nations system’s work
to prevent conflicts and help forestall their relapse,
in accordance with the agreed mandates. It is indeed
necessary for the Council to make further use of the
advisory, advocacy and resource-mobilization roles of
the Commission.
All peaceful conflict-prevention methods, such as
mediation, negotiation and conciliation, require trust
and confidence.My delegation therefore reiterates
that all United Nations conflict-prevention measures
should involve consultations to reach consensus among
Member States and related parties. Transparency on
these approaches should be fully upheld.
While the role of the Security Council and its
representatives in addressing areas of potential or
existing conflict is appreciated, we would like to stress
that the early engagement of the Secretariat in the
prevention of the potential conflicts must not interfere
in the internal affairs of States.
Finally, Indonesia wishes to reiterate the importance
of financing cooperation and of capacity-building
support to regional and subregional organizations in
support of efforts to peacefully settle local disputes
through regional arrangements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

having organized this open debate on the very important
and pressing topic of conflict prevention.
The nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the years. Of course, the resolution of purely
internal matters is a question for the local legal system.
But it is abundantly clear that the boundary between
intra-State and inter-State conflicts has become
increasingly blurred in recent decades. The most
complicated instances include attempts by a State
to disguise its role in inspiring disorder and fuelling
conflict on the territory of another State, including
by, but not limited to, setting up and supporting a
subordinate separatist regime in areas beyond the
control of the legitimate Government. That obviously
imposes an additional burden upon the international
system and mechanisms, including various regional
and subregional organizations dealing with conflict
prevention and resolution. It is therefore important to
maintain consistency in identifying ways and means of
international response to such situations, as well as to
develop a comprehensive approach to the problem of
violent separatism.
As far as inter-State relations are concerned, the
concept of conflict-prevention is inextricably linked to
the principle of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes enshrined in paragraph 3 of Article 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The true value of
that principle is to commit States to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force,
respect each other’s territorial integrity and resolve
their disputes in conformity with international law.
At the same time, in circumstances where one State
has neglected its obligation to settle an international
dispute by peaceful means and has resorted to force and
occupied the territory of another State, the reference to
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes must
in no way impair the application of the inherent right
of self-defence enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter.
International law requires not just an outcome
in preventing or resolving conflicts, but that such
an outcome be accompanied by a process that is
consistent with particular norms of international law.
It is important that conflict-settlement frameworks
and mechanisms not be used as a tool to consolidate
solutions that are a priori illegal and a fait accompli.
Attempts to impose or encourage such solutions will
fail to provide the necessary foundations for enduring
peace and long-term stability.

S/PV.7247

As a matter of priority, special attention should be
given to the implementation of resolutions adopted by
the principal organs of the United Nations, in particular
those relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution. It is equally
important that Security Council resolutions call things
by their names — call a spade a spade — rather than seek
a balance in addressing the key issue of responsibility.
It is also important to underline the role of the rule
of law in preventing conflict, mitigating the effects of
a conflict once it has arisen and in resolving conflicts
and thus establishing a stable and durable peace. The
imperative of establishing and documenting truth,
shedding light on real facts and combating impunity is
undeniable. Such efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.
We look forward to further initiatives on this
important topic. Azerbaijan will continue to be an
active partner in that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing such an important and
timely open debate. We welcome resolution 2171 (2014),
adopted today. We also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings today.
The delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the delegation of the European
Union. We fully share the ideas expressed by the
European Union on ways to improve the United Nations
performance in the prevention of conflicts. At the same
time, we would like to reflect on the key issues that are
very important from the perspective of our country.
The idea to establish a mechanism for the prevention
of conflicts is at the very heart and essence of the United
Nations. Severe consequences of the First and Second
World Wars and the strong will of States to prevent
such conflicts in future led to the creation of the United
Nations and the adoption of its Charter. The Charter of
the United Nations gives the main bodies of the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, the necessary
leverage to effectively prevent conflicts. Of course, that
mechanism is not perfect. But it can function quite well
if there is goodwill on the part of all players.
For many years, the United Nations and its main
bodies have been helping to improve the technologies

14-5125341/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/08/2014

and techniques of conflict prevention within the
authority and power invested in them by the Charter.
And many of the ideas that have been expressed
today merit serious attention. However, we believe it
is impossible to succeed if the Organization cannot
adequately respond to the main challenges and gaps
that prevent it from being an effective global actor in
the field of security.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we can and
should propose and discuss ideas aimed at improving
United Nations mechanisms of conflict prevention.
There is no doubt that this is very important work.
That is why the topic was a main feature of Ukraine’s
Security Council membership in 2000 and 2001, as well
as its membership in the Peacebuilding Commission in
2011 and 2012.

Respect for the rule of law at the international
level is the basis for international peace and stability,
a key precondition for the prevention and settlement of
conflicts and a guarantee of predictability in and the
legitimacy of international relations. It begins with
strict adherence to the Charter of the United Nations
and other international treaties in force by States
parties.

However, without solving the problem of abuse
of the veto power and without a proper mechanism
ensuring compliance with international treaties, all
our efforts to prevent conflicts may fail any time, and
any State Member of the Organization could become a
victim of that failure.

A lack of responsibility and impunity for the
violation of the Charter and international treaties, which
Ukraine considers as a guarantee of peace and stability
in relations with its neighbours, have been among the
main causes of aggression against my country and the
occupation of Crimea. The Security Council had all
the necessary levers available and should have taken
actions to prevent that conflict in order to secure peace
and stability in the region. Unfortunately, despite
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine by almost all Member States of the Security
Council, the abuse of the veto power by one of the
permanent members actually blocked any practical
measures by the Security Council. The problem is that
by taking advantage of its veto power, the Member
State has committed aggression against Ukraine, even
though, before that, that State had always recognized
the territorial integrity and State borders of my country
in accordance with the relevant bilateral treaties.
In that context, I should like to emphasize that
permanent membership in the Security Council and the
veto power are not just a privilege or matter of good
luck. They entail the obligation and duty to responsibly
take care of the peace and security of our world. Abuse
of that status seriously undermines the authority and
credibility of the Organization and erodes the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Within the framework of the Organization, we have
already started discussions on non-use of the veto in the
case of mass atrocities. My delegation welcomes that
initiative. We hope that, very soon, we will be able to
engage in a substantive discussion on the prevention of
the use of veto power in cases of aggression.
42/62

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): We are definitely not
living in an easy time. Even the summers are not as
they used to be.
Allow me to express our appreciation to you, Sir,
for organizing this important open debate on conflict
prevention. Its importance is reflected in the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014), on the topic under
discussion. We would like also to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings and the work that they
do.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. In addition, I would like to make a
few remarks in my national capacity.
Efforts aimed at preventing conflicts right from
their inception have long been an integral part of the
Organization’s efforts in securing peace and stability.
Nevertheless, the need for effective prevention of
violent conflicts has been steadily gaining in relevance,
especially since the end of the Cold War. Cases such
as the genocides in Rwanda, the ethnic wars in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the State failure in Somalia point
to the need to find the means to prevent conflicts from
escalating into war, human disasters and regional
instability. Slovakia attaches great importance to
conflict prevention processes within and outside the
United Nations framework.
The causes of conflict and the processes of peace
are complex — political, economic, social, territorial,
historical, ethnic and religious. There are also new

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

causes of conflict, such as terrorism and organized
crime, both of which have conflict in their nature and
are difficult or even impossible to mediate or negotiate
beforehand. But certain signs are almost always there.
It is up to the parties, countries, nations and people
at risk to utilize all possibilities and to mobilize the
international community to take preventive action.
Today we have various useful tools that can assist
in the effective prevention of conflict. Among them,
I will mention two — the 2011 report on the theme
“Preventive diplomacy: delivering results” (S/2011/552)
and General Assembly resolution 65/283, entitled
“Strengthening the role of mediation in peace settlement
of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution”.
The United Nations is not alone in advancing
preventive action. Regional bodies have also
increasingly taken up their own initiatives for preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention. There may possibly
be no regional body that has no programme for conflict
prevention. What we have to do and what we need is
closer cooperation and interaction on this issue between
the United Nations and regional organizations.
Prevention cannot be entirely successful without
addressing the root causes of conflict as well as its
enabling and facilitating factors. Credible and in-depth
security sector reform (SSR) has been proven to
play a crucial and decisive role in reducing or even
eliminating conditions facilitating conflict outbreak.
SSR contributes to conflict prevention in a direct and
indirect way. Transparent oversight and uniform control
over all forces and factions directly prevent the renewal
of national as well as inter-State conflicts through
spreading trust and predictability. Security sector
reform may not be a primary preventive instrument,
but it definitely is a preventive tool to create conditions
to avoid a relapse of the conflict, especially if duly
executed in its complexity, starting with security,
democratic governance and the rule of law and followed
by development activities.
Since poverty, unemployment and poor living
standards are among the main causes of conflict,
timely and appropriate investment in sustainable
development — inter alia, but not exclusively, to the
eradication of poverty, programmes for inclusive
education and activities for employment, especially for
young people — are crucial for long-term investment in
sustainable peace in the conflict area.

S/PV.7247

We also have other tools. The concept of the
responsibility to protect, especially its first preventive
pillar, is another tool for preventing mass atrocities. I
would also like to highlight the important role of the
International Criminal Court. It serves not only as an
independent and impartial judicial body, prosecuting in
those situations where a national jurisdiction is unable
or unwilling to address the issue of accountability, but
its authority also has a preventive impact.
In conclusion, some studies consider following
principles to increase the understanding of conflict
dynamics aligned with local specifics to serve conflict
prevention efforts. We may wish to look at these.
First, share, but do not align conflict analyses.
Secondly, align conflict analyses with local
understandings and terminology.
Thirdly, research drivers of peace separately from
drivers of violence.
Fourthly, study the micro-determinants of success
in preventive action.
Fifthly, begin a dialogue on the coordination
of preventive actions on the regional level and on an
internal level with the non-governmental organizations.
Lastly, ensure sufficient and flexible financing
for preventive action. The ratio is 1:60 — $1 for peace
protection, $60 for peace restoration.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council that
Slovakia will fully contribute to the implementation
of the commitments set out in the resolution adopted
today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative to focus on conflict
prevention in the present open debate. We would
certainly expect this debate to be a new stepping stone
in the evolution of the concept and practice of conflict
prevention.
We commend and support the efforts of the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and the Department
of Political Affairs, in particular. Over the years they
have made significant contributions to strengthening
capacities, tools and mechanisms for tangible
prevention, as well as by leading high-quality debate
on its conceptual elaboration. The presence here

14-5125343/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

today of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights demonstrates the urgency of addressing
prevention in a comprehensive and all-embracing
manner. In that regard, we underline the importance
and value of structural prevention as a long-term goal
and of sustainable prevention efforts that address both
the current and the potential root causes of conflicts.
Armenia recognizes the remarkable potential of the
non-governmental sector and civil society as a whole
in identifying and promoting confidence-building
measures as an effective instrument of prevention.
Often, such efforts face considerable constraints,
especially in conditions where a Member State evinces
serious failures to uphold basic human rights and stifles
fundamental freedoms. That problem deserves to be
more prominently recognized and addressed.
Armenia has a significant interest in advancing
international efforts, at both the global and the regional
levels, to achieve and maintain effective prevention. In
that respect, we recognize prevention that aims beyond
simply pre-empting an actual outbreak of conflict.
We stress the equally important priority of preventing
the resumption of conflict in situations where a final
resolution remains pending.
The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is a case in point.
That conflict is the result of the use of force on the part
of Azerbaijan, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, against the population of Nagorno-Karabakh,
which had exercised its right of self-determination. For
the past few weeks, the international community has
witnessed an alarming escalation of tensions, along
with a considerable increase in the number of ceasefire
violations across the Armenian-Azerbaijani border
and attempted incursions and subversive operations by
units of the Azerbaijani army along the border between
Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan. Numerous lives
have been lost, including those of civilians. Prompt
action by the co-chair countries of the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and, in particular, the initiative of the President
of the Russian Federation to host a trilateral meeting
with the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in Sochi
on 8 August, averted further escalation. Yet again, there
are lessons to draw from those latest developments.
Earlier this year, the Armenian delegation raised
the issue of religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East that have been targeted by terrorist
groups and called the attention of the United Nations
to the plight of the Armenian population of the town
44/62

21/08/2014

of Kassab in Syria. Unfortunately, the situation in
the region continues to deteriorate. In the past few
weeks, the international community has witnessed
highly disturbing developments caused by the actions
of Islamic State fighters in north-west Iraq. Minority
populations, most specifically the Yazidis, who are
among the ancient peoples of Iraq, have been subjected
to mass killings. Hundreds of thousands of people,
including Yazidis, Assyrians, Armenians and other
minorities, have been forced to flee. They are in a state
of critical deprivation of the basic necessities of life.
The Government of Armenia has decided to provide
humanitarian assistance to the Yazidi community
through appropriate United Nations channels.
The international community is witnessing shocking
horrors that should in fact be addressed as part of our
commitment to the prevention of mass atrocities. The
time for the international community to act is now. The
need to mobilize efforts throughout the United Nations
system is a matter of the utmost urgency. We call upon
all the relevant bodies and mechanisms of the United
Nations to act without delay. The role of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide is vital on this matter. Armenia calls upon
the Security Council to treat the tragic situation of the
Yazidi population as a matter of the utmost urgency.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a
topic of the greatest importance for the international
community. This provides an opportunity for us to seek
support as we attempt to understand how the Security
Council and the United Nations system can make a
meaningful contribution to conflict prevention, a topic
of special relevance to my country.
Through its experience over more than five decades,
Colombia knows all too well the ravages that conflict
can cause. For that reason, I personally welcome the
words of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay and her reference to her Office’s
efforts to establish a climate of respectful dialogue.
We know how important dialogue is. We also know
that, unfortunately, when the necessary measures are
not taken in a timely manner to prevent crises, the
ensuing crises can go on indefinitely, exacerbating
the institutional instability and economic and social
vulnerability of many of our States. Such conflict
scenarios grow even more pronounced over time and
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

become ever more complex, making an appropriate
response that much more difficult. It is clear that,
when a war becomes prolonged, it also deteriorates,
so that its cause and origin are lost, and people forget
that, even in times of war, there are established norms
under international humanitarian law that require the
protection of civilians — a principle unfortunately
overlooked.
For a number of decades, Colombia has undertaken
a variety of efforts to establish dialogues that would
allow for a rapprochement with armed outlaw actors
in order to bring about, in a constructive manner, an
innovative solution to the ongoing crisis. Now, for the
first time, we are seeing a real possibility of achieving
a negotiated peace in the near term by applying an
innovative process, using our own methodologies,
that includes measures for preventing the relapse into
violent action in the post-conflict period. We know
that the nature of contemporary conflict is ever more
complex and that there is a high likelihood of relapse
if, as a number of today’s speakers have pointed out,
timely preventive measures are not taken that allow
for greater equity and equal opportunities. I take this
opportunity to thank the international community for
its support and contribution to this peace that Colombia
has yearned for over such a long time.
My country has already begun to prepare the
necessary conditions for lasting peace. For that reason,
the post-conflict period has emerged as a pre-eminent
stage in securing stability and must be accompanied by
the economic and social development that will allow
for an inclusive society as well as by the promotion and
defence of human rights to ensure that peace will be
sustainable in the medium and, we all hope, the long
term.
For that reason I reiterate our support for the
invocation by the Security Council of the mechanisms
and tools established by Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations in order to promote a culture of
prevention. The United Nations has the duty to make
them available, the States to use them and societies to
make them their own.
At the same time, Sir, I congratulate you for
including women as fundamental agents for conflict
prevention in your concept note for this debate
(S/2014/572, annex). We should not forget that women
and their families, their children and their societies
are those most affected by conflict. Great importance
should therefore be attached to their active participation

S/PV.7247

in all decision-making processes with respect to peace
and its post-conflict sustainability. Women’s networks
in my country have been vital channels for protecting
agreements and limiting the return to scenarios of
violence. That is why I call for their full inclusion
in the process of decision-making and their active
participation in the search for peace.
Finally, Sir, as you yourself have mentioned, along
with several others, regional organizations can play a
significant role thanks to their cumulative experience,
which includes creative practices that have on numerous
occasions shown themselves to be effective in both
conflict prevention and conflict resolution. In Latin
America, a region with a traditionally pacifist calling,
we have acquired extremely valuable experience in
that sphere through the establishment of regional
organizations such as the Union of South American
Nations, which has enabled us to contribute through
a number of initiatives to the pacific resolution of
conflicts.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, and the
Security Council of our firm support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): For more than
a century, Canada has struggled to defend the values that
it holds dear, namely, justice and freedom — including
the freedom of religion — democracy, respect for the
rule of law, respect for the rights of persons and human
dignity. Those values ​​are the foundation of Canadian
society and we hold them dear, as The Right Honourable
Prime Minister of Canada, Stephen Harper, recalled
on 4 August during the commemoration of the one
hundredth anniversary of the start of the First World
War. The outbreak of armed conflict undermines the
progress made in the areas of economic development
and prosperity. The most vulnerable people, those
who depend on the stability and development of a
community, are too often the main victims of conflicts.
It has also been consistently noted that lasting peace
and stability are achieved only when women are fully
involved at all levels of decision-making, including
the economic and political levels and during peace
processes. In the context of the post-2015 development
agenda, it is therefore important to take into account
obstacles to peace, development and prosperity, such
as the subjugation of women and girls through policies
of exclusion, violence and female genital mutilation,

14-5125345/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

as well as child, early and forced marriages. The best
way to put an end to such crimes and terrible practices
is to ensure that women can fully exercise their rights
and contribute completely to their communities and
country. Peace cannot be maintained if half of the
society is excluded from the political, economic and
social life of a community and a country.
(spoke in English)
Canada is committed to promoting respect for the
human rights, dignity and well-being of women and
girls worldwide. As Foreign Minister John Baird said at
the London Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict in June, where he chaired a high-level dialogue,
women must have full and equal representation at peace
tables and throughout society. It is essential that they be
not just in the room but at the head table.
Canada urges the Security Council to underscore
the importance of the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls as a precondition for conflict
prevention. While we cannot predict what will trigger
an outbreak of violence, we can identify persistent and
escalating drivers of conflict and fragility.
Today, it is impossible to discuss the issue of
conflict prevention without calling to mind the bloody
clashes that are occurring at this very moment in so
many places on the planet. Indeed, it is difficult to
address the topic of prevention without feeling a sense
of failure as major conflicts rage on in Syria, the
Middle East, Iraq, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, to name but a few.
Recently, Canada has used this forum to stress the
importance of recognizing collective human dignity
above all else. Doing so requires a commitment to
conflict prevention, which is as important as an effective
response. The political, humanitarian, security and
development resources and tools at our disposal must be
brought to bear more effectively in order to strengthen
national capacities for conflict prevention. It is now
widely accepted that a successful preventive strategy
not only depends on the cooperation of the United
Nations actors, including the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, but also
requires sustained political will on the part of Member
States.
First and foremost, that includes the readiness of
the membership as whole to provide the United Nations
with the necessary political support to undertake
effective preventive action in specific situations. If
46/62

21/08/2014

neighbouring countries, regional allies and other
Member States that would be well placed to support
United Nations efforts lack the political will to provide
their support, preventive action is not likely to succeed.
While the success of our efforts in conflict
prevention cannot always be quantified, we have
learned certain truths from history. The appeasement
of aggressors, tyrants and terrorists is clearly not an
option. We must remain resolute in the face of such
regimes and organizations. Above all, we must not
forget that the responsibility for the crimes committed
falls first and foremost on those who commit them.
Conflict prevention matters, because without it
vulnerable people in societies, including religious
minorities, women and children, are disproportionately
victimized. We need the United Nations to use all the
tools at its disposal to prevent conflict before it occurs.
The Security Council has a major role to play in that
regard. We need the Member States to give their full
support at all times to United Nations efforts aimed at
preventive action. The resistance and political division
among Member States have already cost too many lives.
We appreciate the efforts to strengthen the
Secretariat with regard to conflict prevention,
including the increasing focus of the Department of
Political Affairs on deploying special political missions
and envoys. Moreover, the United Nations is one actor
among many. Cooperation with other key actors is
critical to success and to ensuring that international
organizations play to their strengths and support the
strengths of others.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to the United Kingdom
and its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August for having convened this important debate and
for the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/572, annex).
I also thank the Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their substantive
briefings.
Thailand wishes to align itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
It is quite ironic to discuss the prevention of conflict
while we are witnessing violence in many parts of the
world, claiming the lives of too many innocent civilians,

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

including women, children and humanitarian workers.
However, it is indisputable that prevention is the most
desirable and cost-effective approach, both in terms of
human lives and financial costs.
Thailand has placed particular emphasis on preventive
diplomacy, as well as on early warning and the peaceful
resolution of disputes at an early stage. Dialogue and
constructive engagement among and with parties to a
dispute need to be promoted in order to achieve a peaceful
and mutually agreeable settlement.
As mentioned in the concept note, the Charter of the
United Nations entrusts the Security Council with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 1 and Chapter VI of the Charter
provide the Council with a variety of tools to enhance its
preventive role. The question is whether the Council can
use the right tools at the right time.
Conflicts, whether inter- or intra-State, often derive
from historical rivalries, territorial disputes, intolerance
among different faiths and beliefs, social and economic
inequality, the unfair allocation of resources, systematic
and widespread violations of human rights, a lack of good
governance and injustice, to name but a few. Conflict is
often not a sudden or isolated event but a consequence of
unresolved issues. There are usually warning signs when
conflicts or violence are imminent. The Council needs to
fully heed those signs and to take action decisively before
the conflict breaks out.
In order to enable the Council to apply the right tools
at the right time, an accurate and unbiased assessment by
reliable sources of the situation showing signs of potential
conflict is necessary. The United Nations country team
on the ground, special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, special envoys and other United Nations bodies,
as well as regional organizations, in accordance with
their respective mandates, can provide useful information
and assessments for the Council’s better understanding.
Regular briefings and reports by the relevant United
Nations bodies and countries concerned can provide
the Council with updates and insights. Thailand fully
supports that practice.
Thailand believes that, in many cases, the Council
is well aware of such early warning signs. However,
what impairs swift action by the Council is a lack of
unity, and diverse national and political interests,
among its members. The indecisiveness of the Council
could affect its own credibility and shatter the hopes
of people trapped in conflicts. Above all, it could

S/PV.7247

cost unnecessary lives and allow massive damage to
occur that could have been prevented. Therefore, the
Council, as the body with the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, needs to live up to
its responsibility by putting aside politics and working
together, because we cannot afford the recurrence of
tragedies and atrocities.
Thailand also believes in the constructive role of
women as agents of peace. Women can significantly
contribute to peace — from conflict prevention to
conflict resolution, from peacekeeping to peacemaking
and peacebuilding, from relief to development and
from recovery to the prevention of relapse into
conflict. The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions have repeatedly called for
increased participation by women. Thailand therefore
urges further implementation of those resolutions and
is ready to work closely with the United Nations and
other countries to increase women’s role in conflict
prevention. Women have always been included in
Thailand’s past contributions of military and police
personnel for missions, and the trend is for increased
participation by women.
Thailand joins others in welcoming the adoption
of today’s resolution 2171 (2014) and reaffirms its
commitment to implement the provisions set out therein.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the best and
most effective approach to preventing and resolving
conflict is to tackle the root causes by peaceful means,
which may require structural change and a change in
attitudes. The parties to conflict must show genuine
political will to make a change. Without political will,
such change is not possible. The use of force is not an
option. It will not resolve existing conflicts but only
create subsequent ones.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends the
United Kingdom for its initiative in scheduling today’s
discussion, and the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
insightful briefings on this topic.
Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
Every day in this Chamber, we bear witness to
the costs of the failure to prevent conflict. Too often,
the United Nations finds itself scrambling to respond

14-5125347/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/08/2014

to crises, including some that could have and should
have been forestalled. The scale of the crises and their
duration mean that we cannot continue with business
as usual. A paradigm shift is needed to rebalance the
current trend. We have to get ahead of the curve.

Fourthly, special political missions, while often
deployed after a conflict has erupted, play a key role
in advancing political dialogue and other peacebuilding
tasks. A Council that can act more quickly might deploy
special political missions much earlier.

As the concept note (S/2014/572, annex) points
out, the Security Council has a range of preventive
tools under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations that can prevent the escalation of disputes
into full-blown crises. We need to think now about
how to enhance the Council’s ability to make better
use of those tools. Otherwise, we will continue to
measure the results in the form of the increased loss
of life, growing insecurity and greater human misery.
In addition, almost by default, we will continue to
saddle costly peacekeeping missions with more and
more responsibilities. Let me touch upon some of the
preventive measures at the disposal of the Council.

Fifthly, parties who refuse to comply with their
international commitments need to be made fully
aware of the consequences. Where that is not evident
or understood, entrenchment and stalemate can ensue,
leading to the types of frustration that Council members
expressed during their visit to South Sudan last week.

First, central to an effective system of conflict
prevention is awareness of the situation, the ability to
analyse the relevant information and the political will
to take action when needed. In this day and age, there
is generally no shortage of information — sometimes
quite the opposite. However, we need to analyse it
better, draw conclusions sooner and then take the right
decisions.
Early warning, as the Secretary-General said, is
effective only when acted upon, and that is the collective
challenge before us all here today. There are too many
unfolding tragedies where we can no longer say “but we
didn’t know”.
Secondly, we need vigorous, sustained diplomacy
where conflict is brewing. Intensive diplomatic efforts
using the good offices of the Secretary-General, his
senior envoys and United Nations staff in the field have
been and can continue to be effective in bringing parties
back from the brink of conflict. That is most effective
when backed by the wider international community.
Thirdly, there has been a concerted effort by the
United Nations to optimize the use of mediation as a
tool to prevent conflict, which we strongly welcome.
The recent adoption of General Assembly resolution
68/303 paved the way for closer partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations. We
have long seen merit in the active role that regional
organizations, with their proximate understanding of
conflict in their own geographical area, can play in
mediating or facilitating dialogue between parties.

48/62

At the institutional level, the successful operation
of the International Criminal Court offers a vital tool
for accountability that bolsters conflict prevention
because of its deterrent effect. The Court was set up
to ensure accountability, but, while the Council has an
inescapable responsibility in that regard, too often we
find it unable or unwilling to act. A sense of impunity
can lead to prolonged conflicts and result in the loss of
more innocent lives.
Looking more locally, I would like to briefly
mention aspects of the Council’s working methods.
There is a need for more efficiency and effectiveness in
how the Council operates. The resolution adopted last
week (resolution 2170 (2014)) on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front shows that
measures can be taken more quickly, but it should not
take a crisis of that nature to provoke rapid action.
In some ways, when issues reach the Council
agenda, it is already too late. We therefore need
to get out in front of emerging issues. To that end,
we encourage more informal exchanges among
Council members on emerging threats and more
horizon-scanning. More fundamentally, the unfettered
use of veto rights by permanent Council members also
inhibits the effectiveness of the Council and needs to
be reconsidered.
On the positive side, as underlined by High
Commissioner Pillay this morning, we welcome the
increasing recognition of the correlation between severe
human rights violations and threats to international
peace and security. In that regard, the SecretaryGeneral’s Rights Up Front Action Plan, which puts the
focus on human rights, is particularly welcome.
If we look ahead, 2015 will be an important year
for the United Nations system. It marks the tenth
anniversary of the 2005 World Summit, when the
international community renewed its commitment
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

to promote a culture of conflict prevention. The year
2015 will also be a watershed, with the negotiation of a
successor framework for the Millennium Development
Goals and a stronger linkage between good governance,
the rule of law and sustainable development. Those
milestones present opportunities for the United Nations
system to get its act more together and strengthen its
resolve to prevent conflict. Ireland looks forward to
actively contributing to those processes.
There is broad consensus on the merits and utility
of a culture of prevention that allows us to identify
crises before they transform into armed conflict, with
the resulting human and material costs. The challenge
before us is to translate that consensus into effective
actions. At a minimum, what the world needs is strong
leadership from a united Council behind the preventive
instruments at its disposal. That requires a common
resolve on the part of those seated around this table and
the full support of all United Nations Members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to join other
delegations in expressing our congratulations to the
United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of August. I also wish to
express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to convene this
important debate on the maintenance of international
peace and security. We also welcome the resolution that
has been adopted unanimously by the Council on this
subject (resolution 2171 (2014)).
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. Similarly, my delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Zimbabwe on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community.
This debate could not have come at a better time, as
it takes place against the backdrop of violent conflict and
bloodshed in many parts of the world, from the Middle
East to Eastern Europe and Africa. We are witnessing
increasing trends of regional instability and insecurity,
which are posing serious threats to international peace
and security. The hard reality of such circumstances is
that no one country is ever truly immune from the direct
or spillover effects of conflict. It is therefore an absolute
imperative that the international community act in

S/PV.7247

unison and make concerted efforts to comprehensively
address those threats in order to create a world that
is safer, secure and prosperous for the benefit of both
present and future generations of humankind.
It is a fact that the Security Council has a vital role
to play in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as part of its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, specifically under Article 24.
However, it is also a fact that the effectiveness of that
role can be legitimately questioned at times when the
Council fails to act swiftly or decisively. Thousands
of innocent lives continue to be lost and humanitarian
crises reach catastrophic proportions, and the
fundamental United Nations objective of safeguarding
humankind is compromised by the selfish national
interests of some Member States. We therefore urge
the Council to definitively take on its responsibilities
and intensify its efforts to fight the just battle. It should
also ensure that commitments undertaken to respond to
international security crises are met without conditions,
in order to lessen the human cost.
Despite the Security Council’s mandated
responsibilities, the burden of responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security does
not lie solely with it. Each region and each nation State
and its citizens has an important role to play in that
regard. It is our duty to shield our citizenry from all
forms of conflict that deprive them of their basic human
rights and livelihoods. It is also our responsibility to
protect them from crimes against humanity, genocide,
war crimes and crimes of aggression. In that connection,
Botswana remains steadfast in its commitment to the
principles of democracy, accountable and inclusive
governance, the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights for all. We continue to
strongly support action against impunity as well as the
strengthening of institutions of accountability at the
national and international levels.
The uncontrolled movement of small arms and
light weapons within and across borders also remains
a cause for our collective concern. Their presence,
illegal transfer and continued use create tensions in
communities, often resulting in the eruption of conflict
in one form or another. The highly destabilizing effect
of such weapons therefore impels us, as responsible
members of the international community, to exercise
great vigilance in controlling their stockpiles and
committing ourselves to ending their illegal trade.

14-5125349/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/08/2014

One of the greatest threats to international peace
and security is the continued use and indiscriminate
testing by some countries of nuclear weapons. Until such
time as those weapons have been completely destroyed,
humankind’s very existence remains in peril. Needless
to say, guaranteeing the preservation of our planet and
the human race compels responsible action not only on
the part of those who possess nuclear weapons but by
all who desire a stable, peaceful and secure world.

on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect, and the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We would also encourage the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to make greater use of his power to bring the
Council’s attention to any matter that he believes might
threaten international peace and security. Against
such a background, the Council should take preventive
measures.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Botswana’s
commitment to playing its part and to giving unwavering
support to the international community’s efforts to
promote and protect international peace and security.

However — and this is still most often the case — the
international community, including the United Nations,
tends to deal with crises when it is already too late and
when a violent conflict has developed a dynamic that
is difficult to derail. That leads to costly interventions.
What are seen as political considerations often
override concerns about violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. All violent conflicts
today show the vital importance of the early-warning
and prevention parts of the conflict cycle, parts that
we have learned to understand so much better in recent
years. The progress that has been made to date could
not have been achieved without the education and
expertise of the Secretary-General’s Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect, whose functions include acting as an earlywarning mechanism for preventing potential situations
that could result in mass atrocities, as well as the
important role of the Special Representatives on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and for Children and Armed
Conflict. The Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front
initiative addresses those lacunae, and we welcome
the establishment of an internal coordination system
within the United Nations, which we hope will soon
be put into meaningful practice, including within the
United Nations country teams.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing this
important debate. The current ongoing conflicts, from
Gaza, Syria, Iraq and Ukraine to the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, and in particular the
suffering of their civilian populations, including women
and children, more than merit such a debate at this
time. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their insightful briefings. And I would like
to take this opportunity to thank High Commissioner
Pillay for her tireless efforts in advocating for human
rights over the past six years, and to wish her the best
in her future endeavours.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
The images we see from the conflicts raging
around the world are heartbreaking and saddening.
What makes them even more unacceptable is the fact
that they occur in spite of our consistent work over the
past decade on issues relating to conflict prevention
and the peaceful resolution of disputes. We have been
persistently building a broad framework that has led us
to the point where that framework must be implemented
and the words of the Charter of the United Nations on
prevention put into practice.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of the international
peace and security. In order to be able to uphold that
responsibility, the Council should strengthen its earlywarning mechanism. In that regard, we see merit in
organizing regular horizon-scanning meetings with
United Nations officials, including the Special Advisers
50/62

When conflicts cannot be prevented, the Security
Council must act promptly to end them. Furthermore,
if genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity are threatening or ongoing, it is
imperative that the permanent members of the Council
not exercise the right of veto to thwart efforts to take
the measures necessary to prevent or address such
situations. In cases where such atrocities are committed,
accountability for those crimes is crucial, not only
in order to prevent future atrocities but also to build
confidence in society. Slovenia is a strong supporter of
the use of the International Criminal Court to ensure
accountability where necessary.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, Slovenia welcomes the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2171 (2014)). Conflict
prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes are at
the core of our foreign-policy priorities. In that regard,
we pay particular attention to the use of mediation as
part of the larger toolkit for preventing and resolving
conflicts and achieving sustainable peace, and for
enhancing United Nations mediation efforts and
promoting the use of mediation in capacity-building at
all levels. Given the vital importance of preventing and
resolving conflicts and ensuring that they do not recur,
we must continue to advance mediation mechanisms,
build mediation capacities, support the inclusion of
women and strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional actors in those areas. We should
also pay attention to education aimed at fostering a
culture of peace, tolerance and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and its member States.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this important debate. We also appreciate
the briefings by the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
we welcome and support the resolution adopted today
(resolution 2171 (2014)).
The primary responsibility for the prevention
of conflicts and the protection of civilian lives lies
with each State. At the same time, the responsibility
for the prevention of conflicts is ultimately shared by
the international community. The United Nations was
founded for that purpose and is well placed to play a
leading role in that regard. A system-wide United
Nations approach to conflict prevention is essential.
Peace, the protection of human rights, justice and
development must be pursued in a comprehensive way.
I would like to focus briefly on three elements — the
preventive tookit of the Security Council, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the protection of human
rights.
In various past efforts, the United Nations has,
through a combination of analysis, early warning, rapid
response and partnerships, been able to help defuse
tensions and crises and assist parties in resolving
disputes peacefully. We commend the work of the
Department of Political Affairs in that regard and would

S/PV.7247

like to take this opportunity to reiterate our continued
support for its work.
In order to be successful in preventive action,
there is also a need for the Security Council to respond
more quickly and decisively to emerging threats to
peace. In that regard, we would welcome the socalled horizon-scannings, or general briefings, by the
Secretary-General on emerging conflicts and possible
volatile situations as a more regular and permanent
feature on the Council’s agenda.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
provides a clear mandate to investigate any situation
that might endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security and offers a range of tools to settle
disputes peacefully before they escalate. It is important
that the Council make full use of those tools, including
the serious consideration of the idea of preventive
missions.
Peacekeeping missions also have an important
peacebuilding component that focuses on stabilization
and preventing the emergence of new conflicts. The
Netherlands commends the rule-of-law aspects of
such missions, including capacity-building efforts and
human rights protection, mass atrocities prevention,
accountability mechanisms and the principle of the
responsibility to protect. All of that helps to prevent
further escalation of conflicts. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment to a
review of United Nations peacekeeping and recommend
that that aspect receive ample attention.
The Netherlands reiterates the crucial role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
In that regard, we would like to commend the efforts
of the United Kingdom to increase the participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping missions
through the creation and support of a senior women’s
talent pipeline.
On the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply committed
to their peaceful settlement and is proud be the host
country for, inter alia, the International Court of Justice
and the Permanent Court of Arbitration. We strongly
encourage the Council to take measures to expand the
use of the peaceful settlement of disputes, in relation to
both State and non-State actors.
Under Articles 34 and 36 of the Charter, the
Council can recommend that parties settle their disputes
peacefully through various means of dispute resolution.

14-5125351/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Council can also suggest the specific form it deems
most suitable for the occasion and request to be briefed
about the results. Where the jurisdiction of the Court has
been established, the Council can also strongly urge the
parties to take their dispute to the International Court
of Justice. Furthermore, the Council could encourage
parties to come to an agreement to accept the Court’s
jurisdiction for their particular dispute even when that
jurisdiction has not yet been established.
In that context, we particularly welcome the recent
visit of the Security Council to The Hague and its
historic meeting with the International Court of Justice.
We are confident that that visit contributed to increased
mutual understanding and future cooperation between
those two principal organs of the United Nations.
Finally, on human rights, one of the most essential
factors in preventing conflict and avoiding tensions
within societies is ensuring and protecting the basic
human rights of all parts of the population, providing
redress for grievances and ensuring accountability for
mass atrocities. In that regard, the Netherlands would
like to take this opportunity to commend the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We especially want to honour the High
Commissioner, Ms. Navi Pillay, for the way in which
she has fulfilled her important mandate over the past
years. Ms. Pillay has been a cornerstone of the efforts
that the United Nations has made to address human
rights issues worldwide. Her tireless dedication, clear
and insightful viewpoints, and especially her courage
to say what is needed when it is needed, have been an
example to us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): We thank you.
Mr. President, for organizing today’s important
open debate and congratulate you on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
August. We also thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their valuable briefings. We also welcome
the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014) today. We would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the High
Commissioner for her outstanding work during her
tenure in office.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

52/62

21/08/2014

I would like, however, to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
Conflicts have a devastating impact on the world.
At least one fifth of the world’s population continues
to live in violent or conflict-affected countries. It is
striking that conflict hits the most vulnerable the
hardest. It is our duty to help resolve conflicts, and we
must share the burden and provide new generations
with a safer environment. Conflict resolution and the
building and maintenance of sustainable societies are
the greatest challenges of our time.
With the many real challenges that remain to be
addressed in the current, ever more fragile international
peace and security context, we must recognize that we
have a long way to go before we truly have an effective
system. Turning understanding into action and moving
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention is a
demanding task. We all know, from many examples
across the world, that prevention and early intervention
can and do work and is cost-effective. That is why I
would like to underline the importance of United Nations
early-detection and early-warning mechanisms. Our
focus should definitely be directed towards preventive
measures in order to prevent crises from developing and
escalating and to mitigate the possible repercussions
thereof. To that end, Montenegro, as a member of
the Group of Friends of Mediation, advocates that
mediation be truly established as a core function of
the United Nations, as prescribed in Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In this
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished.
Regional and subregional organizations could play
a positive and valuable role in facilitating the beginning
of dialogue and the establishment of a conciliatory tone
when approaching conflict resolution, as we have seen
in many instances in Africa. When the regional or
subregional approach does not bear fruit, it is for the
United Nations and the Security Council to step in and
assert ownership. In order to make sure that the United
Nations maintains its rightful place as the central
mechanism for global governance, the Organization has
to assume a modern, reformed profile that recognizes
new geopolitical realities and the world’s evolving and
multifaceted conditions and environments.

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me point out that threats today must be tackled
through joint efforts and in an integrated manner
across the entire nexus of development, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, the rule of law and human rights.
Proceeding in that manner, we can achieve societies
that live in enduring peace. Given its vast accumulated
expertise and knowledge, the United Nations is well
positioned to provide such holistic and tailored support
to nationally led undertakings by Member States.
In order to have peaceful and conflict-free
societies, there has to be an enabling environment
for inclusive institution-building, which assumes the
active engagement of national and local authorities,
parliaments, communities, civil society, academia and
women’s groups. Only in that way will political reforms
be able to take root and open space for the development
of national dialogues, reconciliation efforts and other
initiatives.
Equal focus also needs to be placed on transparency,
accountability and effective management and oversight,
with a view to strengthening the legitimacy and
integrity of security institutions. In combination, all of
those aspects will contribute to our common objective
of maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is not enough to try to eliminate existing conflicts
in the world or to create mechanisms designed to
prevent them; it is necessary that the root causes that
induce them and nurture them be eradicated. Many
conflicts result from the interests of hegemonic and
imperialist domination, acts of aggression, the struggle
to control natural resources, persistent colonialist
and neocolonialist strategies and practices, today’s
unfair and exclusionary international order, unequal
exchange, discrimination, xenophobia, interventionism
and violations of the right to self-determination of
peoples. What is required to prevent conflicts is
solidarity, international cooperation and assistance,
and joint action to eliminate poverty, unemployment,
hunger, inequality and their root causes.
The Security Council certainly has an important
role to play with regard to conflict prevention, but it
must perform those functions in accordance with the
powers granted to it under the Charter of the United
Nations. The members of the Security Council should
advocate peaceful solutions and show a strong,

S/PV.7247

effective and clear resistance to the recourse to war.
They should take every opportunity to adopt courses
of action that safeguard the lives of people involved
or affected by conflict. They should never promote
armed confrontation, much less be champions of
the philosophy of regime change, which in practice
contradicts the pacifist essence of the Organization.
However, we do condemn Council inaction before
prolonged conflicts, such as that between Israel and
Palestine. How are we to understand the Council’s
passivity and ineffectiveness faced with the killing of
innocent Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip, who
are victims of an excessive and indiscriminate use of
force? It is undoubtedly a question that has no answer,
given how much remains to be done by the Security
Council and the international community on conflict
prevention.
Cuba reiterates its call for an end to all acts
undermining the sovereignty and the right to selfdetermination of any State. We therefore reiterate here
our resounding rejection of the recent plan funded by the
United States Agency for International Development,
which runs contrary to the Cuban people’s exercise
of their right to self-determination. The plan seeks
to make young Cubans into agents of destabilization,
promotes measures contrary to the constitutional order
endorsed by the Cuban people and has used, beginning
in 2009, young Latin Americans recruited to that end.
American officials, who have condoned the authorship
and implementation of the plan, are showing the hostile
and intrusive nature of their policy towards Cuba, the
goal of which is to destabilize the country in order
to overthrow the political, economic and social order
established by the Cuban people. Cuba demands the
cessation of all subversive, interventionist, illegal and
covert actions by the United States.
In conclusion, I would like clarify for the
representative of Israel that the over 1,000 Jewish
people living in Cuba enjoy every right and privilege,
including the right to emigrate to Israel, which is a right
that they exercise freely. What does not exist in Cuba
today is the concept of Judaism as a bellicose cause or
a pretext for indiscriminate attacks against innocent
civilians. In Cuba, the Jewish people are Communist
while at the same time practicing their Judaism, as their
own religion, and enjoying the exercise of their full
rights. In Cuba, the Jewish people do not participate
in indiscriminate bombings against innocent civilians.

14-5125353/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Do Hung Viet (Viet Nam): Viet Nam commends
the United Kingdom presidency for the initiative to
hold today’s open debate on conflict prevention. We
appreciate the informative and insightful briefings by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Our topic today is all the more pertinent in the
wake of a number of crises that the world is watching
with profound sorrow across the continents. Talk
about conflict prevention, to some, could be seen as
déjà vu all over again. Nevertheless, time and again,
the international community has to bear witness to
numerous conflicts that, in hindsight, could have been
averted or at least moderated. Many lessons were
elaborated at the open debate in this very Chamber on
war, its lessons and the search for permanent peace
last January (see S/PV.7105), yet the fact is that only
more simmering tensions and conflicts have broken out
during the intervening months. It is therefore imperative
to revisit the lessons learned and the measures for
conflict prevention, and our delegation would like to
touch upon the following.
First, conflicts stem from the wishful thinking that
the imposition of force from a position of strength will
work, and from an ungrounded belief in power politics
and its accompanying aggressive behaviour. History
has, however, provided us with ample evidence that the
use of force will only result in massive loss of lives and
material destruction. The use of force should no longer
have any standing in the twenty-first century.
Secondly, human progress since the end of the
Second World War has provided us with strong
institutions of peace, which we must hold dear and
strongly promote. Faced with warning signs of
inter-State and intra-State conflicts, including those
related to territorial disputes, international law and
its fundamental principles must be upheld, especially
the principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes
and respect for national sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It should be stressed that, in the wake of
discord and disagreement, the most important principle
that the parties concerned must uphold is the need to
accede to common international and regional rules and

54/62

21/08/2014

normative frameworks. In that connection, we welcome
the related elements set out in the resolution adopted by
the Council earlier today (resolution 2171 (2014)).
Thirdly, basic principles must be translated into
concrete actions. Parties related to inter-State and
intra-State conflicts, bearing in mind the potential
severe consequences of violence and coercion, should
be supported to engage in sincere dialogue and other
means of peaceful settlement. International and regional
organizations should promote such efforts and facilitate
efforts addressing the root causes of conflicts. Such
crucial engagement, if conducted in the appropriate
manner, could be conducive to more creative solutions
to outstanding issues.
In that respect, over the past decades, the United
Nations, including the Security Council, has played a
critical role thanks to the creative and timely employment
of the various mechanisms and tools available to it.
Those include the important role of the SecretaryGeneral and his special envoys, good offices missions,
fact-finding missions, mediation, reconciliation and
peacebuilding efforts, the employment of which in
other parts of the world could be further studied.
As a result, the growing workload at the United
Nations related to conflict prevention can be interpreted
as commensurate with the growing role accorded to the
Organization. That can also be seen as an indication
that more needs to be done by the United Nations,
in which the primary responsibility is given to the
Security Council, especially its permanent members.
In doing so, coordination among the Council, the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly and regional
organizations should be further promoted for better
information sharing and early warning for effective
conflict prevention.
The international community today is equipped
with not a few tools, lessons and measures for effective
conflict prevention. But the ultimate reason for a number
of failures has been the lack of strategic trust among
the parties concerned and the failure to understand that
what the parties could have achieved by preventing and
avoiding conflicts would far outweigh what they did
after giving up chances for peace.
The Security Council, together with other
international and regional partners, could engage in
promoting a culture of peace and proactive prevention,
including by adhering to international law and common
rules and norms and by taking concrete action under

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

frameworks of dialogue and consultation. Only by
doing so will we be able to live up to our task of saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and thank you for holding this open debate.
This topic has particular importance for my
country on the basis of our foreign policy, which has
contributed to international efforts to prevent conflict,
to deal with its root causes and to work with the parties
concerned towards a peaceful settlement at a time when
the international community is responsible for saving
future generations from the scourge of war, as provided
for by the preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, since the establishment of the
United Nations, the world has witnessed the outbreak
of many conflicts, even though their root causes have
been addressed. Such disputes have become non-State
armed conflicts, giving rise to many material and
human losses that exceed those of international armed
conflicts, as well as the exacerbation of international
terrorism, poverty, the lack of development and ethnic
and religious persecution.
The facts on the ground around the world lead us
to conclude that there is a need to operationalize the
tools adopted by the United Nations and to enable
international and regional organizations to assume their
roles in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter so as
to prevent disputes from reaching the stage of armed
conflict. The mechanisms outlined in the concept note
(S/2014/572, annex) that you, Mr. President, kindly
provided, such as early warning and the role of the
Secretary-General and his special representatives and
special envoys, as well as preventive missions, must
also be put into practice, since we believe that such
measures will help to prevent conflict and to maintain
international peace and security. Since conflict
prevention is a proactive step, the effectiveness of such
measures requires, in our view, short-, medium- and
long-term strategies to assist implementation by all the
parties concerned so as to establish an international
environment of stability.
As we discuss this important issue, perhaps we
should recall today the fact that, in its presidential
statement of 31 January 1992 (S/23500), issued at the

S/PV.7247

end of a meeting held at the level of Heads of State
and Government, the Security Council stressed the
importance of peacemaking and peacekeeping, as well as
preventive diplomacy, to prevent conflict. If preventive
diplomacy seeks to resolve disputes before they arise,
the promotion and strengthening of institutions that
support peace will ensure non-recurrence.
Experience has frequently proved that mediation,
in particular diplomatic mediation, is one of the
fundamental ways to prevent and to resolve disputes,
as provided for by the Charter of the United Nations.
In the context of international conflict prevention
efforts, the State of Qatar has therefore participated in
mediation between many conflicting parties. That has
been welcomed and supported by the Security Council,
and peaceful settlements that led to the prevention of
many conflicts in the Middle East and Africa and their
human, economic and financial costs have been found.
We welcome resolution 2171 (2014), adopted by the
Security Council today. We believe that it contains many
important elements that will contribute to international
conflict prevention efforts. Allow me to underscore the
following.
The first aspect is the need to act early in order to
identify those cases that may lead to conflict and to use
special means, such as early warning, mediation and
the efforts of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international resolutions.
The second element is the need to address the
root causes of conflicts, in particular the lack of
development, social justice and non-respect for human
rights.
Thirdly, if a conflict occurs, peacemaking must be
undertaken.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians must
be a priority in conflict, while underscoring the
responsibility of States to protect civilians.
Finally, there is a need for international assistance
to promote peace measures and the implementation
of agreements between the parties. Peace institutions
must also be supported.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Sucuoğlu (Turkey): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the United Kingdom

14-5125355/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

presidency for scheduling this important debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their insightful briefings.
Today’s debate is not only is timely but also has
symbolic value. As we commemorate the centenary of
the start of the First World War this year, the eruption
of episodes of violence around the globe, the surge
in terrorism and violent extremism and the increase
in atrocity crimes, coupled with the growing number
of displacements and humanitarian emergencies,
are becoming increasingly widespread. Those
worrisome developments hamper the capabilities of
the international community, the United Nations and
the Security Council to ensure timely and effective
responses. I would like to take this opportunity to touch
upon a number of key points that Turkey sees as crucial
to consider in the framework of this debate.
The first issue that I want to stress is mediation. It
is an effective cross-cutting tool that is consent-based
and applies to all stages of the conflict cycle. It is the
most cost-effective and efficient way to prevent and
resolve conflicts. The United Nations has successfully
supported a wide range of mediation efforts since its
inception and has taken important steps to enhance its
mediation capabilities in recent years. It is necessary
to continue to develop such United Nations capabilities
with political, technical and financial support.
The Group of Friends of Mediation, founded in 2010
and co-chaired by Turkey and Finland, has expedited
its efforts to contribute to the United Nations in that
respect. I would also like to underline that promoting
intercultural and interreligious dialogue is one of the
most effective ways to prevent conflicts. With that
understanding, Turkey, together with Spain, launched
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations initiative
in 2005.
Our second point is related to regional organizations.
Although the primary responsibility remains with
the Security Council, regional and subregional
organizations play an important role in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in their
respective regions. Regional organizations have unique
perspectives and a local understanding of the conflicts,
cultural norms and security challenges within their
regions, which gives them a comparative advantage.
The most recent General Assembly resolution 68/303,
initiated by the Group of Friends of Mediation and
adopted only a few weeks ago, is the first resolution
56/62

21/08/2014

on mediation that recognizes the key role that regional
and subregional organizations play in that field. In
addtion, Turkey welcomes the cooperation between the
Secretariat and regional organizations on mediation,
specifically capacity-bulding.
Turkey also attaches great importance to the United
Nations regional offices. They are crucial tools for
early warning, prevention and mediation. At the same
time, they are essential mechanisms that provide the
United Nations with direct access to information from
the field. In addition, the idea of preventive missions
mentioned in Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/1999/34 could be further explored as an
innovative conflict prevention mechanism.
Our third point is on the importance of national
ownership. The peaceful resolution of disputes is a
sovereign responsibility embedded in the Charter of the
United Nations. Yet, especially in the present climate,
where the growing number of conflicts and the increase
in violent extremism and terrorism, which take their
toll on innocent civilian populations, the international
system also needs to provide appropriate responses
for the protection of civilians. The best way forward
is to prioritize support for the building of local and
national capacity. Such endeavours must be supported
by the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and other actors when the need arises.
The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund are two very important tools that can be used to
support national capacities in that respect.
Finally, security is a precondition for development
and development generates more security. Conflict
prevention should therefore be seen as a comprehensive
approach that integrates security, development and
human rights. In that regard, we would also like to touch
upon the interface between security and development
and the role that women can play in that respect. As we
embark upon a process to develop a set of sustainable
development goals for post-2015, we believe that gender
equality and the empowerment of women should be at
the centre of all our solutions and commitments. That
will also further our agenda on women, peace and
security.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the best
way to combat threats to global peace and security
and to prevent conflicts is through a unified display of
determination and the cooperation of the international
community. Political divisions within the United
Nations, particularly in the Security Council, deprive
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

the world of its most important guarantee for global
peace.
Finally, this body is a serious platform, which
compels us not to respond to the voice of one delegation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Lingenfelder (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to this important debate on conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
insightful briefing, and we would also like to pay tribute
to Ms. Navi Pillay, outgoing United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her hard work
and commitment in working to ensure the protection
and promotion of human rights for all humankind. In
the same breath, we welcome Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al-Hussein of Jordan’s appointment as the new High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and we look forward
to working with him.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and with that to be delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Zimbabwe on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community.
South Africa has long recognized the importance
of conflict prevention in averting such outbreaks.
Besides the humanitarian consequences of conflict, the
escalation of peacekeeping costs over the years has also
required that the international community focus more
on preventing conflicts rather than merely managing
them once they have started. Conflict prevention is
anchored in the text of the Charter of the United Nations,
specifically in Chapter VI, which gives the Security
Council a substantive toolkit for the pacific settlement
of disputes and the maintenance of international peace
and security, including negotiation, inquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful
means of the parties’ choice.
We welcome the progress the United Nations has
already made through a plethora of initiatives such as
the good offices of the Secretary-General, the creation
of special envoys, the establishment of an earlywarning system and the Mediation Support Unit, and
the deployment of special political missions, country
teams and regional offices, as well as other diplomatic

S/PV.7247

initiatives aimed at preventing conflicts. Security
Council action should support such efforts rather than
be at odds with them. We have seen occasions where
the Council’s actions have undermined United Nations
and regional efforts to mediate conflicts peacefully.
As a member of the Friends of Mediation, South
Africa is part of an effort by Member States of the
General Assembly to reset the focus on preventive
measures for conflict management, and we urge all
Member States, including Council members, to heed the
Assembly’s call for the provision of sustained political
support, expertise and timely and adequate resources
both for mediation efforts and for implementing agreedon outcomes of mediation processes. It is critical that
we ensure predictable resources for mediation efforts
and for support to United Nations mediation capacitybuilding activities and those of regional and subregional
organizations.
Africa continues to bear the brunt of violent conflicts.
For that reason, the African Union has worked tirelessly
since its inception to establish a comprehensive Peace
and Security Architecture founded on the recognition
that both preventive diplomacy and post-conflict
reconstruction and development are key to eradicating
conflicts on the continent. In our subregion, the
Southern African Development Community continues
to play a critical role in ensuring subregional stability.
In that context, the region’s Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security, which South Africa is soon to chair,
has undertaken mediation efforts to quell potential
conflicts. The efforts of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to end conflict
in that region are a welcome step. In that regard, we
would like to urge that the Nairobi declaration signed
in December 2013 be fully implemented as soon as
possible. South Africa looks forward to participating in
the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference,
to be organized in December by the Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa in collaboration with
the ICGLR.
The mechanisms that the African Union has put in
place in this area testify to the continent’s commitment
to addressing peace and security challenges in a
comprehensive manner. With that in mind, the African
Union has always striven to deepen its partnership
with the United Nations on matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, while
at the same time recognizing that the peaceful resolution
of disputes remains a sovereign responsibility. The

14-5125357/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union for maintaining peace and security is
informed by the reality that regional organizations have
a comparative advantage in confronting such challenges
within their regions. All of these efforts are anchored
in the United Nations Charter, particularly Article 33,
which establishes mediation as one of the diplomatic
methods for the pacific settlement of disputes. As the
nature of conflicts has tended to change, becoming
intra- rather than inter-State, preventive diplomacy
has become an indispensable tool for both the United
Nations and regional organizations.
In the last few years, we have witnessed a
reduction in the number of violent conflicts as a result
of the collective efforts of the United Nations, the
international community and regional organizations.
However, many countries’ recent relapses into conflict
are disconcerting, and we need to work together to
prevent the loss of hard-earned gains.
In conclusion, South Africa strongly believes that
dialogue is critical. We therefore hold the view that
in preventing lapses and relapses into conflict, we
must always underscore the importance of creating
and maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration. In developing
mechanisms for early warning and conflict prevention,
our efforts should always be made in the context of
the rule of law, with respect for national sovereignty
and in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
Finding a global strategy for conflict prevention,
including traditional means of mediation as well as
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding methods deployed
under the Charter, is essential. We firmly believe that
socioeconomic development, lying at the heart of
conflict prevention, is a critical component for realizing
sustainable peace and can help develop economic
opportunities in countries affected by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 15 members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). SADC
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate
on conflict prevention. I would also like to thank

58/62

21/08/2014

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings.
Today’s debate enables us to exchange views on
how to prevent conflicts against a backdrop of the
growing numbers of simultaneous crises that are
facing the world today. The nature of such conflicts
has changed dramatically in recent years and poses a
correspondingly greater challenge to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The causes and
dynamics of these threats to peace and security demand
innovative and robust approaches to conflict prevention
and resolution.
SADC believes that the top priority for the
maintenance of peace and security is enhancing our
ability to manage and contain disputes before they
break out into violent conflicts. Our greatest challenge
is to accurately predict and be proactive in forestalling
armed conflict. The currently overstretched United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and their high
financial cost, as well as the human toll that war takes,
attest to the importance of conflict prevention. Given
that the overwhelming majority of contemporary
conflicts are intra-State, and that the dynamics of
such internal conflicts are often the result of poverty,
underdevelopment, economic deprivation and exclusion,
prevention should be underpinned by sustainable
development. SADC believes that there is an inexorable
link between peace and development. There can be no
peace without development and, conversely, there can
be no development without peace.
The billions of dollars spent on conflict every year
could be put to better use by humankind through the
prevention of conflicts before they occur. The human
costs of war, including death, injury, the destruction of
infrastructure, displacement and their repercussions,
cannot be allowed to continue and must be prevented.
It is our collective responsibility to stop this cult of
violence.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and has
been accorded specific tools for preventing conflicts.
Its preventive role is set out in paragraph 1, Article 33.
in Chapter VI of the Charter, which lists a variety of the
tools at the Council’s disposal, including negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, preventive diplomacy and the involvement of
regional organizations. Effective prevention requires a
14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

comprehensive and coherent strategy. The comparative
advantage of regional and subregional organizations
often makes the difference needed to prevent tense
situations from deteriorating into violent conflict.
They are well placed to understand the root causes of
a conflict because of their proximity to the crisis and
are well positioned to influence their prevention and
resolution.
The African Union, through its Peace and Security
Architecture, has managed to identify various factors
and root causes of conflict on the continent and has
established institutions and mechanisms to address
them. The establishment of a continental early-warning
system under Article 12 of the Protocol relating to
the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
facilitates the anticipation and prevention of conflicts
in Africa. The Panel of the Wise also plays a significant
role in mediation and conflict resolution. In addition,
regional and subregional mechanisms have taken steps
to develop early-warning systems, although they are at
different stages in their efforts.
SADC launched the Regional Early Warning Centre
in July 2010, whose overall objective is to strengthen
the regional mechanism for conflict prevention
management and resolution in line with the provision
of the Protocol on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation in the Strategic Indicative Plan for the
Organ. The SADC system is based on the presence of
a national early-warning centre in each State, which
feeds into the regional early-warning centre based in
Gaborone.
SADC has also established a stand-by brigade,
whose mandate includes, inter alia, undertaking
intervention for peace and security restoration at the
request of a Member State. Such a request was made
with regard to the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is essential for the United Nations to cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations and
harness their comparative advantage in order to develop
effective preventive mechanisms. SADC wishes to
reiterate that conflict prevention is more cost-effective
than peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We call on the
United Nations to continue its efforts to assist the
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union
and subregional organizations in building capacity to
address the security challenges the continent is facing.

S/PV.7247

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
initiating work on a resolution on conflict prevention
(resolution 2171 (2014)).
New Zealand is concerned that the Security
Council has been debating conflict prevention as
a thematic issue for over a decade. But, too often,
conflict prevention has been little more than a thematic
vision. The Council has been much less successful in
implementing practical conflict prevention outcomes in
specific cases.
We should recall Kofi Annan’s 2006 warning that
“[a]n unacceptable gap remains between rhetoric and
reality in the area of conflict prevention” (A/60/891,
para. 4). That unacceptable gap still exists. New
Zealand had hoped that today’s debate might be an
opportunity to shift the focus to making prevention
of conflict a practical reality. Resolution 2171 (2014)
is a useful reiteration of some important concepts,
and we welcome the language concerning human
rights, conflict and insecurity. New Zealand welcomes
attempts to move from abstract discussion and start
considering how it can respond differently and respond
better in specific cases.
In 2002, the Council established the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, which was initially quite successful in
developing practical conflict prevention methodologies.
In 2003 and 2004, under Angola’s chairmanship, the
Working Group exercised important leadership on
conflict prevention in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi.
It applied methodologies similar to those now used
in the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configurations.
There is, however, no clear record of why that
innovative leadership lapsed after Angola left the
Council. But the precedent remains. The question at
hand is how to recover that will and those practical
mechanisms. In recent years, changes to the Council’s
working methods have made it more difficult to play
the preventive role. Relevant tasks have become more
pre-programmed, more formal and more concentrated
in a few penholders’ hands. Innovations, such as
horizon-scanning, have been controversial, but we
welcome continuing attempts to improve the concept.

14-5125359/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

The prevention gap can be a serious problem in postconflict situations, even where there is a large-scale
United Nations presence. That was demonstrated in
2006 in Timor-Leste, and again more recently in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic. We must learn
from those experiences of how the Council exercises its
big picture oversight and acknowledge that a prevention
culture must be more a part of its day-to-day work.
With the right consultation mechanisms and sufficient
resourcing, regional or subregional organizations can
play a very significant prevention role. There is now
significant experience in effective cooperation in
Africa, the Asia-Pacific region and elsewhere.
We must also be alert to the political reality that
prevention will often give rise to concerns about
intervention and sovereignty. Discussing prevention
in the abstract can exacerbate such concerns, but
in specific cases the parties are often interested in
meaningful steps. Yet considerable political sensitivity
will remain on the part of Governments and other parties
and must be handled with discretion, neutrality and
flexibility. Traditional Council working methods are
not well adapted to such tasks. In particular, permanent
members often dominate the discussion on relevant
issues, which can lead to push back and ultimately to
inaction. We must also be mindful of the Council’s
traditional tendency to delegate conflict-prevention to
the Secretariat and that the stigma of appearing on the
Council’s formal agenda keeps some countries from
seeking early assistance.
The political risks and opportunities associated
with prevention will of course differ from case to case,
so the prevention tools that might be applied in any
situation will often differ as well. But we must clearly
and unequivocally acknowledge that discussion is not
enough. The Council must also demonstrate a sustained
commitment to specific situations. Only then will we
close the gap between rhetoric and reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to express my
sincere congratulations to the United Kingdom on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate, which my delegation hopes will highlight
the importance of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
60/62

21/08/2014

United Nations, in support of conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding activities and forging greater regional
and national ownership.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community and with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
While it remains the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to maintain international peace and
security in accordance with the Chapter I of the Charter
of the United Nations, conflicts continue to have a
negative impact on social, economic and political
development, particularly in Africa. There is therefore
an urgent need to create an environment conducive
to peace and development. We believe that such an
environment can be created through the promotion
of the rule of law, which is essential for peace, the
prevention of armed conflicts and the enhancement of
cooperation among States.
It is worth noting that Chapter VIII of the Charter
encourages cooperation with regional bodies in efforts
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. Furthermore,
it is important to note and to recognize that regional
and subregional organizations are closer to erupting
situations and are not only familiar with the issues,
but also understand the dynamics of the conflict in
any given region. Neighbouring countries also often
bear the burden and consequences of conflicts in their
surroundings. It is for that reason that my delegation
supports the principle of complementarity between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations in preventing conflict and thereby
maintaining peace and security.
In that context, Namibia commends the cooperation
agreement between the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council,
which is aimed at enhancing and strengthening closer
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. That
kind of cooperation will enhance Africa’s institutional
capacity for conflict prevention and resolution and
ensure sustainable peace on the continent.
International peace and security is critical for the
promotion of the rule of law. The Security Council is at the
heart of that endeavour. As a member of the committee
of 10, we would like to underline the fact that, in order

14-51253

21/08/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

to become more effective, the comprehensive reform of
the Security Council to make it more democratic and
transparent and enable it to better serve humankind has
become more relevant. We note that, faced with some of
the current international conflicts, the choice of action
or inaction by the Security Council is based only on
self-serving political considerations, which may hinder
the effective implementation of its mandate. Calls for
the reform of the Council in order to create harmony
can never be overstated.
There is no doubt that the successful prevention of
conflicts depends on the skilful identification of early
warning signs and preventive diplomacy, mediation,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures.
Protecting humankind from the scourge of war is
the principle foundation of the United Nations. Namibia
believes that this noble goal can be achieved only when
all Member States refrain from the use or threat of the
use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purpose
and principles of justice and international law. The right
to self-determination, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, respect for human rights and
respect for equal rights for all without distinction on
the basis of race, language, religion or cultural or social
character are obligations under the Charter that should
guide State conduct at the international level.
In conclusion, while this debate is devoted to
conflict prevention, it should be highlighted that the
international community, working in concert and
motivated by the common objective of achieving
international peace, should identify the root causes of
conflicts in the world with the aim of finding lasting
solutions. Namibia welcomes forums like this, where
we can collectively take stock and exchange views on
the state of conflict prevention in the world.
The President: The representative of Azerbaijan
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to make a
further statement.
The statement made by the Armenian representative
earlier today was nothing but the standard Armenian
effort to mislead and to substitute notions, comparing
apples and oranges. That is especially true in the case
of conflict prevention and conflict resolution: although
they may be the same fruits, they are not the same
things. That is preposterous when one is speaking

S/PV.7247

about an unresolved conflict that started more than
20 years ago.
The Security Council witnessed today once again
another effort by the Armenian representative to distract
the general membership from the annexationist policy
of his country towards Azerbaijan and from the fact that
Armenia has occupied a large portion of Azerbaijani
territory and ethnically cleansed a large portion of the
Azerbaijani population. Armenians’ unconstructive
approach to the negotiations, its interest in maintaining
the status quo, its evasion of the Madrid peace plan, its
refusal to comply with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, its policy of ruthless ethnic cleansing
and the latest provocative actions on the front line,
which are aimed at undermining the peace process,
all provide the strongest grounds for the international
community to impose substantial sanctions against
Armenia.
The continued presence of Armenia’s armed forces
in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan remains the
biggest threat to the peace process. Therefore, first and
foremost, the armed forces of Armenia must withdraw
from the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. The earlier
Armenia realizes this, the sooner peace, stability and
predictability can be restored in the region.
The President: The representative of Armenia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I asked for the
floor to make a further statement in response to the
comments made by the representative of Azerbaijan, and
I refer to my earlier statement, in which I spoke about
the risks of a resumption of conflict and the prevention
of a resumption as an equally important priority that is
of concern to us. I referred to the most recent escalation
and the most recent developments, which have been a
matter of serious concern. I also referred to the lessons
to be drawn from the most recent developments. Those
lessons are many.
First, the alternative to a peaceful settlement of
the conflict is sheer catastrophe: a return to the war,
destruction and deprivation of the 1990s. Armenia has
no interest in war, but is capable of defending peace and
determined to do so.
Secondly, genuine and lasting peace will be based
on a compromise. The proposals by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group’s

14-5125361/62

S/PV.7247

Maintenance of international peace and security

co-Chairs in Kazan, Russian Federation, in 2011, which
stem from the Madrid principles and are based on the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Helsinki Final Act, particularly those pertaining to
the non-use or threat of use of force, territorial integrity,
equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and the
elements outlined in the statements by the Presidents
of the co-Chair countries between 2009 and 2013,
represent in their integrity a reasonable compromise
for the peaceful settlement of the conflict. They enjoy
Armenia’s full support.
Thirdly, the road to peace is paved with good
will, genuine political commitment and leadership.
Confidence-building measures are essential requisites
of a peace process at all stages. In our specific situation,
strict adherence to the terms of the 1994 ceasefire
agreement and the 1995 ceasefire strengthening
agreement, which was concluded on a trilateral basis,
the withdrawal of snipers and the implementation
of a mechanism for the investigation of incidents of
ceasefire violations along the front lines represent

62/62

21/08/2014

credible and tangible verification measures and must
be implement without delay.
Finally, the rhetoric of war and hatred has no place
in a genuine peace process. Public figures should
refrain from resorting to hate speech and glorifying the
perpetrators of hate crimes. Silencing the voices of peace
and reconciliation and stiffling efforts to promote trust
and confidence among peoples are the exact opposite
of preventing conflicts. Such deplorable measures
underscore the significance of the need to recognize
the function of protecting human rights and freedoms
as a fundamental component in a comprehensive,
structured approach to conflict prevention. Consistent
failures in human rights protection in Azerbaijan are
the underlying reasons behind the recent escalation of
tensions.
The President: The are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

14-51253
