S/PRST/2000/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 July 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4174th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 July 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts”, the President of the Security
Council stated that the following statement by the President would be issued as a
document of the Security Council in accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statements of its President of 30
November 1999 (S/PRST/1999/34), 16 September 1998 (S/PRST/1998/28), 24
September 1998 (S/PRST/1998/29), 30 November 1998 (S/PRST/1998/35),
and 23 March 2000 (S/PRST/2000/10), and further recalls resolutions 1196
(1998) of 16 September 1998, 1197 (1998) of 18 September 1998, 1208 (1998)
of 19 November 1998, and 1209 (1998) of 19 November 1998. Bearing in
mind its primary responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it reaffirms its role in taking
appropriate steps aimed at the prevention of armed conflicts. It affirms its
commitment to the principles of the political independence, sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of all States. The Council also affirms the need for
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
“The Security Council stresses the need for the maintenance of regional
and international peace and stability and friendly relations among all States,
and underlines the overriding humanitarian and moral imperative as well as the
economic advantages of preventing the outbreak and escalation of conflicts. It
highlights, in this regard, the need to create a culture of prevention. The
Council reaffirms its belief that early warning, preventive diplomacy,
preventive deployment, preventive disarmament, and post-conflict peacebuilding are interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. The Council emphasizes its
continuing commitment to addressing the prevention of armed conflicts in all
regions of the world.
“The Security Council recognizes that peace is not only the absence of
conflict, but requires a positive, dynamic, participatory process where dialogue
is encouraged and conflicts are solved in a spirit of mutual understanding and
cooperation. Bearing in mind that causes of conflict are often nurtured in the
minds of human beings, the Council calls on Member States, relevant bodies
of the United Nations system and other relevant organizations to promote a

00-54378 (E) 200700

*0054378*

S/PRST/2000/25

culture of peace. It recognizes the importance of appropriate implementation
of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, adopted by
the General Assembly on 13 September 1999 (A/RES/53/243), for preventing
violence and conflicts as well as strengthening efforts aimed at the creation of
conditions of peace and its consolidation through post-conflict peace-building.
“The Security Council recalls its important role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
It reaffirms the importance of its consideration of all situations which might
deteriorate into armed conflicts and to consider follow-up action, as
appropriate. In this regard, it expresses continued willingness to consider the
use of Council missions, with the consent of host countries, in order to
determine whether any dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security, and to make
recommendations for action by the Security Council, as appropriate.
“The Security Council highlights the importance of the full support of all
States for the efforts of the Security Council and other relevant United Nations
organs and agencies in developing and implementing appropriate strategies for
the prevention of armed conflicts in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council underlines the importance of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and recalls the obligation of the parties to
disputes to seek actively a peaceful solution in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council also recalls
the obligation of all Member States to accept and carry out its decisions,
including those for the prevention of armed conflict.
“The Security Council also stresses the importance of a coordinated
international response to economic, social, cultural and humanitarian
problems, which are often the root causes of armed conflicts.
“The Security Council recalls the essential role of the Secretary-General
in the prevention of armed conflicts in accordance with Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations, and expresses its willingness to take appropriate
preventive action in response to matters brought to its attention by States or
the Secretary-General and which it deems likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council encourages the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations system to enhance its early warning capacity,
and notes in this regard the importance of drawing on information from a
variety of sources, given the multiple factors that contribute to conflict. It
invites the Secretary-General to make recommendations to the Council, taking
into account the views of Member States, and in light of past experiences, on
the most effective and appropriate early warning strategies, bearing in mind
the need to link early warning with early response. The Council invites the
Secretary-General to present to the Council reports on such disputes,
including, as appropriate, early warning and proposals for preventive
measures.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role regional
organizations and arrangements play in the prevention of armed conflicts,
including through the development of confidence- and security-building
measures, and re-emphasizes the need for effective and sustained cooperation

2

S/PRST/2000/25

and coordination between the United Nations and these regional organizations
and arrangements in the prevention of armed conflict, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. It expresses
its willingness, within its responsibilities, to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General in collaborating with the leadership of regional
organizations and arrangements in order to develop strategies and programmes
to be employed at the regional level. In this regard, it encourages the
strengthening of modalities of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations and arrangements, including in early warning and the
mutual exchange of information. It recognizes the need to enhance the capacity
of the Organization of African Unity and, in particular, its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of effective postconflict peace-building strategies in preventing the re-emergence of conflicts.
In this context, it also recognizes the need for close cooperation among bodies
of the United Nations system and with other organizations and arrangements in
the area of post-conflict peace-building, and expresses its willingness to
consider ways to improve such cooperation. It also stresses that the design of
peacekeeping mandates which fully take into account operational military
requirements and other relevant situations on the ground could help prevent
the re-emergence of conflicts. It highlights the importance of strengthening its
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with Article
65 of the Charter of the United Nations, in the area of the prevention of armed
conflicts, including in addressing the economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems which are often the root causes of conflicts. It
underlines that economic rehabilitation and reconstruction constitute important
elements in the long-term development of post-conflict societies and the
maintenance of lasting peace, and stresses the importance of international
assistance in this regard.
“The Security Council highlights the importance of preventive
deployment in armed conflicts and reiterates its willingness to consider the
deployment, with the consent of the host country, of preventive missions in
appropriate circumstances.
“The Security Council recalls the emphasis it placed in its statement of
23 March 2000 on the process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which can be vital in stabilizing post-conflict situations, reducing
the likelihood of renewed violence and facilitating the transition from conflict
to normalcy and development. The Council will also take appropriate
measures, with the consent of the State concerned, aimed at preventing the
recurrence of armed conflicts, through, inter alia, developing adequate
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and re-integration of excombatants, including child soldiers.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peace-building. It stresses the
importance of their increased participation in all aspects of the conflict
prevention and resolution process.
“The Security Council recognizes the fact that the illegal exploitation of
and trade in natural resources, particularly diamonds, can contribute to the

3

S/PRST/2000/25

escalation of conflicts. The Council is particularly concerned that the proceeds
from the illegal exploitation of and trade in high value commodities such as
diamonds are providing funds for arms purchases, thus aggravating conflicts
and humanitarian crises, in particular in Africa. It therefore expresses its
willingness to seek the cooperation of Member States and the business
community in curbing the illegal exploitation of and trade in these resources,
particularly diamonds, and in effectively implementing the measures imposed
by its relevant resolutions aimed at curbing illicit diamond flows.
“The Security Council, while fully conscious of the responsibilities of
other United Nations organs, emphasizes the crucial importance of
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
means of their delivery for the maintenance of international peace and security.
“The Security Council also highlights, in particular, the importance of
preventive disarmament in averting armed conflicts, and expresses concern
that the proliferation, excessive and destabilizing accumulation and circulation
of small arms and light weapons in many parts of the world have contributed
to the intensity and duration of armed conflicts and pose a threat to peace and
security. It calls upon States, international organizations and the business
community to increase their efforts for prevention of illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons.
“The Security Council also emphasizes the importance of continued
coordinated regional and international action with regard to small arms and
welcomes initiatives such as the Organization of American States InterAmerican Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and other Related Materials, the European
Union/Southern African Development Community Action Programme for
Tackling Arms Trafficking in Southern Africa and the Economic Community
of West African States Moratorium on light weapons. It welcomes and
encourages efforts to prevent and combat the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of and the illicit trafficking in small arms.
“The Security Council underlines the vital importance of effective
national regulations and controls on small arms transfers. The Council also
encourages Governments to exercise the highest degree of responsibility in
these transactions. It also calls for complementary supply- and demand-side
measures, including those against illegal diversion and re-export. It also
underlines the obligation of all States to enforce existing arms interdiction
measures. The Council emphasizes that the prevention of illicit trafficking is
of immediate concern in the global search for ways and means to curb the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small arms, especially in regions
of conflict.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of adequate, stable and
predictable resources for preventive action. The Council also recognizes the
importance of consistent funding for long-term preventive activities. The
Council encourages the consideration of conflict prevention in development
assistance strategies and recognition of the need to ensure a smooth transition
from emergency humanitarian assistance to development in the post-conflict
stage.

4

S/PRST/2000/25

“The Security Council acknowledges the important activities supported
by the Trust Fund for Preventive Action and encourages Member States to
contribute to this Trust Fund.
“The Security Council recognizes the increasing demand for civilian
police as a critical element in peacekeeping operations as part of the general
approach to conflict prevention. It calls upon Member States to explore ways
to meet this demand in a timely and effective way. The Council invites the
Secretary-General to include his recommendations in this respect in the report
on conflict prevention requested below.
“The Security Council underlines the need for continued in-depth
consideration of this issue and, in this regard, invites the Secretary-General to
submit to the Council, by May 2001, a report containing an analysis, and
recommendations on initiatives within the United Nations, taking into account
previous experience and the views and considerations expressed by Member
States, on the prevention of armed conflict.
“The Security Council affirms that a reformed, strengthened and
effective United Nations remains central to the maintenance of peace and
security of which prevention is a key component and underlines the
importance of enhancing the capacity of the Organization in preventive action,
peacekeeping and peace-building.
“The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of 30
November 1999 and reaffirms its willingness to consider the possibility of a
meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers on the issue of the prevention of
armed conflicts during the Millennium Assembly.
“The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.”

5
