United Nations

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6092nd meeting
Wednesday, 18 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Dai Demao
Ms. Villalobos
Mrs. Dinić
Mr. Veyssière
Mr. Kitagawa
Mr. Puente
Mr. Kravchenko
Mr. Dikmensoy
Mr. Rugunda
Ms. Velamati
Mr. McBride
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Identical letters dated 24 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/813)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27223 (E)

*0927223*

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edouard
Aho-Glele, Chairperson of the African Union Peace
and Security Council.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Aho-Glele to take a seat at the
Council table.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I would like to thank the Libyan presidency of the
Security Council, which currently also holds the
chairmanship of the African Union (AU), for
organizing this open debate; the Secretary-General for
his informative briefing; and Mr. Prodi for introducing
the report (S/2008/813) on behalf of the African
Union-United Nations panel established by the
Secretary-General.
Allow me to begin by saying that the European
Union attaches great importance to the existing and
further developing partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. I would also like to
highlight, right from the outset, how much we
appreciate the recent key efforts of the African Union
in the area of peace and security, including the
deployment of African Union peace-support operations
and the African Peace and Security Architecture. These
efforts are fully in line with the principle of African
ownership, which the European Union is also fully
committed to. In this context, the European Union
appreciates the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations panel led by Mr. Prodi in preparing the report.
The United Nations cooperation with regional,
subregional and other international organizations under

2

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, has, for a
number of years now, been in the spotlight of the
Security Council. This has been duly reflected in
several Council decisions. Allow me to highlight at
least two such resolutions: resolutions 1631 (2005) and
1809 (2008). These are truly strategic partnerships. The
European Union strongly believes in such partnerships
and fully supports any effective, focused and wellcoordinated effort, be it on the side of the United
Nations Secretariat or on the side of the United Nations
Member States, to further develop and operationalize
them.
The European Union is proud to be building one
such strategic partnership with the United Nations in
many fields, including in the area of international
peace and security, the maintenance of which, under
the Charter, is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council. Today, the European Union and the
United Nations increasingly develop together thematic,
strategic responses and operations. Allow me to recall
here today the example of Operation Artemis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003, which was
a landmark in the particularly close European UnionUnited Nations cooperation in crisis management. It
was subsequently formalized in the first joint European
Union-United Nations declaration, signed on
24 September 2003, and supplemented by a joint
statement of 7 June 2007.
In recent years, approximately twenty EU
military and civilian operations under the European
Security and Defence Policy have been launched in all
continents. Many of them are carried out under
Security Council mandates, including in cases when
the United Nations is no longer present in the
particular territories. In 2006, for example, mainly in
response to the call by the Secretary-General for
reinforcement of the United Nations operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the European
Union launched a EU-led force (EUFOR) mission in
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In January 2008,
the European Union launched the bridging operation
EUFOR Tchad/RCA in eastern Chad and north-eastern
Central African Republic, the main task of which was
to set the ground for a full-fledged United Nations
operation in the same territory, the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT). Only three days ago, on 15 March
2009, based on close partnership and effective
coordination between the United Nations and the

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

European Union, most members of EUFOR
Tchad/RCA were re-hatted, and today MINURCAT
operates with its own military component, with around
1,650 nationals of European Union member States in it.
Most recently, as of December 2008, the European
Union launched the military operation called Operation
Atalanta (EU NAVFOR Somalia), which is being
conducted in support of resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816
(2008), 1838 (2008) and 1846 (2008).
Of course, what I have just referred to is in no
way a complete account of the various forms of EUUnited Nations partnership and cooperation in the area
of international peace and security. I have mentioned
these examples mainly to clearly demonstrate that
partnerships between the United Nations and its
regional and subregional partners, such as the one
between the United Nations and the European Union,
are not only important but are effective and make a
tremendous difference on the ground.
The European Union fully supports efforts aimed
at enhancing dialogue and interaction between the
Security Council and representatives of regional,
subregional and other international organizations. This
is directly linked to providing for more effective and
efficient carrying out of the Security Council’s work
and to contributing to making the Council’s
deliberations more strategically oriented, as well as to
ensuring that better account is taken of the current
realities on the ground. The expertise, first-hand inputs
and leverage that regional and subregional
organizations have to offer are major assets that the
United Nations and the Security Council can truly
benefit from.
It is a well-known fact that today many
challenges to international peace and security lie in
Africa. Nine of the 19 current United Nations
peacekeeping operations and numerous other types of
United Nations missions and offices are situated in
Africa. About 70 per cent of United Nations
peacekeepers and 73 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget go to Africa. Just from these
basic facts, it is obvious that it is essential for the
United Nations to have established and to further
develop effective partnerships and cooperation with the
African Union.
The European Union fully supports efforts aimed
at widening and strengthening United Nations
cooperation with the African Union. In practical terms,

09-27223

close cooperation between the African Union and
United Nations institutions and relevant bodies should
be developed. We are encouraged by the fact that the
modalities and parameters of such cooperation have
been well established thus far, including through
regular interactions between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. These interactions are also
fundamental in view of the relevant decision-making
processes for peace support operations. They can, inter
alia, provide for a better understanding of the conflict
situations and challenges at hand and contribute to
ensuring clarity of shared goals.
As I have already mentioned, the European Union
greatly appreciates recent endeavours by African
regional and subregional organizations, in particular by
the African Union, to deliver peace in the continent.
We commend the progress made in this regard so far.
This is in line with the principle of African ownership,
which the European Union fully supports. The African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as efforts
aimed at creating an African standby force, are recent,
highly visible demonstrations in this respect. For its
part, the European Union has provided major support
to those African Union Missions and will continue to
do so, including through its naval operation EU
NAVFOR ATALANTA by contributing to the
protection at sea of United Nations vessels delivering
the logistical support package to AMISOM.
The immensity of the tasks, which stems from
increasingly difficult conflict environments and other
related challenges, requires substantial institutional and
operational capacity, including on the part of the
African Union. Among these tasks and challenges, the
European Union attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians as an integral part of most
peacekeeping operations, as well as to the attainment
of high standards in peacekeeping, including in
particular the principle of zero-tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse.
The European Union is committed to assisting the
African Union in developing its peacekeeping
capabilities and human capacities. We fully support
similar endeavours in relations between the African
Union and the United Nations. Support in the area of
logistics and training are essential elements of such
cooperation. Furthermore, the European Union
supports the idea of a multi-donor trust fund to finance

3

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

long-term African Union capacity-building. In this
context, the European Union believes it will be
pertinent to address specific modalities of such a fund,
as well as its relations with existing funding
mechanisms, including the European Union African
Peace Facility, in order to provide additional resources
to the African Union.
With regard to funding mechanisms for African
Union peace operations carried out under United
Nations mandates in particular, the European Union
understands the need for predictability and
sustainability. Sustainable and predictable funding
mechanisms should be reflective of the different scope
and nature of the United Nations and its regional
partners and should avoid restraining the independence
of the respective partners in their specific spheres of
competence and responsibility. These conditions fully
apply, for example, to the instrument of a multi-donor
trust fund, which could, inter alia, enable donors to
assist the African Union and troop-contributing
countries during operations. On the use of United
Nations assessed funds, additional discussions will be
needed. The European Union looks forward to the
assessment that the Secretary-General will prepare,
taking into account the report of the panel as well as
the implementation of resolution 1863 (2009).
The European Union strongly believes that
security is a precondition for development. The
European Union is the biggest donor of development
aid to Africa. The European Union and the African
Union have a well-established partnership, and the
European Union is fully committed to developing it
further.
A cornerstone of the European Union-African
Union partnership is the joint Africa-European Union
Strategy agreed upon in 2007, which is accompanied
by an ambitious and concrete three-year action plan for
the period until 2010. It focuses on important
objectives that range from security to democratic
governance, human rights and development. The first
of the eight strategic partnerships under the strategy is
the partnership for peace and security. It includes
projects such as joint evaluation missions to conflict
and post-conflict areas, comprehensive consultation
mechanisms, the training of experts, the development
of joint strategies and so on.
Joint European Union-African Union activities in
this regard also include frequent political dialogue, the

4

strengthening of the African Continental Early Warning
System, ongoing assistance to African Union politicalmilitary structures and extensive training programmes.
The three priority areas of the partnership for peace
and security are, first, dialogue on challenges to peace
and security, secondly, full operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, and, thirdly,
predictable funding for African-led peace-support
operations.
The Africa-European Union strategic partnership
on peace and security is underpinned by a financing
architecture. The European Union instrument called the
African Peace Facility (APF), which was established
on the request of the African Union, represents a major
source of predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
for African-led peace-support operations, as well as for
the building of the required capacity to plan, lead and
manage operations. With a total allocation of €440
million since 2004, the APF has provided a major part
of the funding to a number of African-led peace
operations — AMIS in the Sudan/Darfur, AMISOM in
Somalia, the Central African Multinational Force
(FOMUC), now the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in Central Africa (MICOPAX), and two African
Union operations in the Comoros — and to
strengthening the capacities of relevant institutions and
structures, as well as to strengthening interactions
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations.
As decided just a month ago, the APF will
continue to function over the next three years with the
allocation of €300 million. It will also allow for the
funding of African-led mediation efforts and postconflict stabilization activities. This substantial support
package is further reinforced by an additional €200
million being provided for building the peace and
security capacity, activities and missions of the African
subregional organizations.
In conclusion, let me emphasize once again that
the European Union is strongly committed to further
developing its own strategic partnership with the
African Union and to providing long-term support to it
in a wide range of areas. At the same time, the
European Union fully supports further strengthening
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, including and in particular in
the field of peace and security. In view of recent
developments in Africa that remind us of the
importance of effective conflict management, conflict

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

prevention and the rule of law, the European Union is
determined to continue assisting the African Union in
developing its own capacity to deliver peace and
stability on the continent and to become an
increasingly strong partner to the United Nations and
the entire international community. We see today’s
open debate as part of a long-term dialogue in this
regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Edouard Aho-Glele, Chairperson of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Mr. Aho-Glele (spoke in French): As the
President has said, I am speaking on behalf of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in my
capacity as its President for this month of March. The
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
expresses its appreciation to the Security Council and
to you, Mr. President, for having made the necessary
adjustments to its agenda to allow the Chairperson to
speak in today’s debate on the issue of support for
peacekeeping operations conducted by the African
Union, which gives us the opportunity to express the
views of the Peace and Security Council on the report
under consideration (S/2008/813).
Certain aspects of the Peace and Security
Council’s position have already been outlined by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, as well as by members of this Council and other
States Members of the United Nations. Nevertheless,
on behalf of the Peace and Security Council, I would
like to reaffirm several crucial points, some of which
appear in its communiqué No. 178 dated 13 March,
which we formally asked the African Union to pass on
to you, Mr. President, so that the Security Council
could take it into account during its discussions.
The Peace and Security Council wishes to recall
and to stress the importance of the role of regional
arrangements as a basis for partnership between the
United Nations Secretariat and the Commission of the
African Union and between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, on the other. The Peace and
Security Council would therefore like to express its
gratitude for the initiative of the Secretary-General to
establish an African Union-United Nations panel on
support for peacekeeping operations in Africa. We also
congratulate the panel, headed by Mr. Romano Prodi,

09-27223

on drafting a report that makes it possible to take
suitable decisions.
The Peace and Security Council seeks not to act
as an advocate to this Council, but rather to encourage
it to assume its full responsibility for taking the useful
decisions required of it in its primary role in
maintaining international peace and security and
thereby support the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in its role as regional actor and leader
on the African continent.
The Peace and Security Council, in its secondary
role as regional leader, welcomes the good relations
between our two bodies in the settlement of numerous
recent crises and attacks on peace and security on the
African continent. However, situations persist in which
the appeals of the Peace and Security Council have
either not been heeded by the Security Council or have
only provoked a timid response or received a tardy
response. That was the case — and it is worth stressing —
with the situation in the Sudan, where the Peace and
Security Council has called upon the Security Council
to defer the indictment brought against the President of
the Sudan. That request was made last year, but the
Security Council has yet to respond. To the
consternation of the bodies of the African Union, an
inappropriate action has just been undertaken by the
International Criminal Court, which endangers the
search for peace and security in that part of Africa that
is the Sudan.
The Peace and Security Council therefore appeals
to the Security Council to listen more carefully to
Africa’s concerns and, following the example of what
we are doing today with the consideration of this
report, address the Peace and Security Council’s
requests that the issues of peace and security on the
African continent be dealt with.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Aho-Glele for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Terzi de Sant’Agata (Italy): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you personally on your
appointment as the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council by your country, to
which Italy is linked by very close and friendly
relations.

5

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

I would like to welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Foreign Minister of South Africa, the
Chairperson of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, and especially the
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel,
former Prime Minister Romano Prodi, who will speak
again in due time before the conclusion of today’s
debate.
Italy ranks first among countries of the European
Union in contributions of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, ninth in the global ranking,
and sixth among contributors to the peacekeeping
budget. These statistics explain why we are so
interested in ongoing efforts to enhance and update
peacekeeping doctrines and procedures.
Our interest extends to efforts being made in the
General Assembly and its Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; in the Security Council,
where France and the United Kingdom are promoting
an interesting debate; in the Secretariat with its “New
Horizon Project” for peacekeeping; and, last but not
least, in considering every possible way, such as the
African Union-United Nations panel, to improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
members of the panel, in particular Chairman Prodi,
for their very valuable contributions to this debate of
the Security Council and to the future peacekeeping
efforts of the United Nations in Africa.
The report, in our view, is well focused, balanced
and rich with practical recommendations and
proposals. Its main political objective is a clear and
defined strategy for improving cooperation between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations. Such a
vision, as outlined in the report and explained by
Chairman Prodi, implies much closer interaction
between United Nations and African Union bodies
from the very start of the decision-making process.
Regional actors, including the African Union, have
better knowledge of internal dynamics in their areas
and enjoy greater legitimacy with local Governments
and public opinion.
About 70 per cent of United Nations
peacekeepers and 73 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget go to Africa. Therefore, the
regional dimension is key to ensuring effective and

6

coherent responses to peace and security challenges.
Regional ownership means a common vision and
shared responsibilities. In the spirit of the AfricaEuropean Union (EU) Lisbon strategy, AU
empowerment in managing regional crises must be
upheld.
As my delegation recently stated in the informal
General Assembly plenary meeting on Security
Council reform, Italy is convinced of the need to
enhance the regional dimension — and therefore the
African voice — in a reformed Security Council. To
help promote the regional dimension, reform should
assure that decisions taken by the Security Council on
regional crises foresee a larger role for Member States
belonging to the region affected. In that context, we
also welcome the proposal for the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council to work together
more closely and to structure a more consistent
relationship between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission.
The more a continent grows in all its dimensions —
political, economic, social, demographic — the more it
is bound to share global responsibilities based on an
equal partnership. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional, subregional and other
international organizations in maintaining peace and
security is encouraged by Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The report refers rightly to that principle and
underlines United Nations-EU structured relationships,
such as the United Nations/European Union Steering
Committee as an effective example for the African
Union. With regard to cooperation among the United
Nations, the EU and the African Union, I wish to fully
align myself with the statement made earlier on behalf
of the presidency of the European Union.
The report also focuses on two elements that we
deem essential to achieving more reliable and secure
peacekeeping: training and logistics. The effectiveness
and safety of peacekeepers depend on equipment,
adequate training and professional standards that
cannot be improvised. Existing training centres should
be improved and adequately supported. The report is
right in underlining the need for a closer relationship
between the AU and the United Nations Logistics Base
in Brindisi and a possible role for the United Nations
logistics hub in Entebbe.
The
predictability
and
sustainability
of
peacekeeping financing are of undeniable importance,

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

which is why we endorse the report’s proposal to
establish a long-term multi-donor capacity-building
trust fund. With regard to the use of assessed
contributions, while we reject any automatic
mechanism, we are open to discussing that option in
the context of clear and swift United Nations
takeovers. Concerted efforts are needed to work out
generally agreeable solutions.

report. We welcome it as a step towards enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and towards supporting African
peacekeeping activities, particularly in the light of the
efforts of the AU to build its institutional capacity in
that regard and to enhance its capability to respond to
crises and emergency situations and achieve long-term
stability on our African continent.

In conclusion, my country fully agrees that the
AU-United Nations panel’s report is an important step
forward, provides a solid platform for our work at the
United Nations and sets clear objectives with which my
country is willing to concur.

It must be noted that the need for peacekeeping
operations is increasing in Africa and that the success
of such operations depends to a large extent on the
availability of resources and equipment, as
demonstrated by the experience of the African Union
Mission in Sudan before it was transformed into a
hybrid mission and of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Italy for respecting the five minutes
assigned to him. I take this opportunity to remind
speakers to kindly confine themselves to the fiveminute limit and that all statements longer than five
minutes should be condensed.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by welcoming Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations, and to thank him and the
panel members for their efforts in preparing the report
(S/2008/813) that we are considering today in the
context of efforts to invigorate partnership between the
United Nations and the AU, pursuant to Chapter VIII
of the Charter and the Constitutive Act of the African
Union.
There is no doubt that the enormous growth and
evolution of activities related to the maintenance of
international peace and security at the level of the
United Nations and regional organizations, especially
in Africa, highlights the importance of exploring ways
to support regional efforts in that field within a
comprehensive system that functions consistent with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and
contributes to advancing the efforts of regional
organizations to peacefully resolve conflicts in a
geographical context, in cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations, which has the primary
responsibility to respond to conflicts and to maintain
international peace and security.
My delegation therefore followed with interest
the work of the joint panel and carefully studied its

09-27223

In the light of predictions that a decrease in the
demand for peacekeeping operations in the near future
is unlikely, and until a decrease in the number of
conflicts is achieved through intensified efforts to
improve mediation and conflict prevention, the need
for peacekeeping operations will continue to increase
in the future. That increase would have a negative
impact on United Nations peacekeeping activities, both
in terms of unprecedented and growing budget
requirements that overwhelm the budgets of Member
States and by making countries reluctant to contribute
the required troops at appropriate times to achieve the
objectives of peacekeeping and by hampering their
ability to provide equipment. All of those issues
underline the importance of invigorating the role of
regional organizations, especially by providing
essential financial resources and enhancing their
institutional capacities in peacekeeping.
Here we call upon the United Nations and donor
countries and organizations to support the AU, by
providing necessary financial resources, as called for in
resolution 1809 (2008), addressing the lack of
equipment and insufficient logistical support, and
responding to the specific challenges faced by the AU
due to the complexity of the conflict environment and
the lack of capacities necessary, including financial
capacities, to achieve a rapid response in some cases
and to strengthen peace, stability and development on
the African continent.
All of those goals require joint coordination at
three levels. The first is between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council; the second is

7

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

between the United Nations Secretariat peacekeeping
bodies and their AU counterparts; the third is between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the AU Peace and
Security Council consistent with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Here, and to enhance the
possibility of implementing the report of the joint
panel, I wish to highlight a few points mentioned in the
report’s recommendations as the main pillars for
supporting the peacekeeping capacity of the African
Union.
First is the need to enhance and develop the
institutional capacity of the AU, strengthen its ability
to respond to crises and promote a sustainable African
capacity that can help achieve the long-term stability of
the continent and address, consistent with the Charter,
situations that breach peace and security.
Secondly, it is necessary to establish a strategic
and more effective partnership between the Security
Council and the AAU Peace and the Security Council,
on the one hand, and between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission on the other, in
order to achieve long-term success and ensure a joint
vision of the two organizations on how to address
peacekeeping in Africa by enhancing the ability of the
AU to provide a rapid response and bolster the United
Nations capacity to guarantee sustained operations.
Third is the need to expand and establish joint
working modalities between the United Nations, the
AU and other organizations, in particular in
maintaining international peace and security, based on
the model of the Steering Committee established in that
regard between the European Union and the United
Nations, including the exchange of staff and the
promotion of expertise, capacity-building and other
relevant issues, in particular in the field of logistics and
financing.
Fourth is support for training programmes to
develop African peacekeeping capacities, including
regional training centres in Africa, while keeping in
mind the fact that such centres are fundamental to
building capacities and responding to needs at the
regional and subregional levels, as well as those of
Member States.
In conclusion, Egypt supports the proposal of the
panel to establish two new financial mechanisms, as
stated in the report. I will not go into detail, but I will
affirm
Egypt’s
strong
support
for
those
recommendations. We hope that their implementation

8

in the medium and long terms will bring about a
decrease in conflicts in Africa and put the continent on
the path towards peace and development.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Ms. Hulan (Canada): Allow me to begin by
echoing the words of appreciation that have been
expressed by previous speakers here today to
Mr. Prodi, Commissioner Lamamra and Minister
Dlamini Zuma for their presence and presentations this
morning. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Council today on an issue that we all agree
could affect the way that peacekeeping is conducted in
Africa for years to come, namely, the need to increase
coordination with the African Union (AU) and enhance
its long-term capacity to respond to urgent
requirements for peace operations in Africa. Canada
considers that the report of the panel of experts
(S/2008/813) provides an excellent basis for further
efforts towards a sustainable and predictable funding
relationship between the international community and
the African Union.
Africa is facing some of the most dire
humanitarian and security situations in the world.
While the entire international community is committed
to bringing a peaceful resolution to the conflicts on that
continent, it is important to acknowledge that African
organizations continue to show a particular and
extraordinary commitment to that effort. Canada
applauds the African Union and African subregional
organizations for their involvement in African peace
and security and supports the continued contribution of
African States to conflict resolution and peacekeeping
operations on the continent.
Canada has long supported African Union efforts
in the area of peace and security. In cooperation with
other partners, Canada has provided direct training,
equipment and other support to the military, civilian
and police components of AU and United Nations
missions to build capacity for peace operations in
Africa that meet African needs, including the
development of the African Standby Force, direct
support to the African Union Mission in Sudan and
now in support of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Canada also remains committed to supporting the
development of African peacekeeping capacitybuilding, including through the implementation of our

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

G8 commitments. We are encouraged by the results
demonstrated by the African Union, notably progress in
the development of the police component of the
African Standby Force and the continent-wide training
and implementation plan, but we acknowledge that
further donor support will be required to consolidate
and sustain the achievements that have been realized
thus far.
It has become increasingly clear with the recent
AU mission in the Sudan and the current mission in
Somalia that ad hoc donor funding mechanisms for AU
missions are neither sufficient nor carry the required
predictability or accountability to be reasonably
considered as a sustainable model for future
cooperation. Improvements must be made and a more
comprehensive approach taken to the provision of
support to African-led operations if effectiveness and
efficiency are to be improved. The panel’s report opens
the door to some possibilities that need to be further
studied to determine a way forward. Further
consideration should also be given to the complexity of
transition planning. The processes associated with
recent transitions, such as in Liberia and Darfur, should
be assessed with a view to determining the best
methods and realistic timeframes associated with those
processes.
With such a high proportion of peacekeeping
activities being conducted in Africa and the
commitment of the African Union to increase its
operational capacity, Canada very much supports
developing an effective strategic United Nations-AU
relationship. As the panel of experts notes, that
relationship needs to be further strengthened, in
particular between the AU Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council. Those efforts
should be aimed at maximizing the AU’s strengths, as
well as at developing a stronger mutual understanding,
joint approaches to issues and improved continuity in
the transition of peacekeeping operations. Canada
commends both the United Nations and the AU for the
continuing close cooperation between respective
officials, which was noted in the report, and urges a
strengthening of the relationship at that important
level. Canada welcomes further analysis and discussion
of the potential mechanisms that could support an
effective strategic relationship.
Canada takes note of the new ideas stated in the
report regarding mechanisms to address sustainable
funding for both operational and capacity-building

09-27223

activities. We agree that while the AU is stretched to
respond to crises across the continent, the need for
overall organizational capacity-building must not be
forgotten.
It is clear that the demand for new missions, as
well as the scale and complexity of existing missions,
have both continued to grow and that that has resulted
in significant cost increases to the Organization. Since
2000, the cost of United Nations peacekeeping has
more than tripled and there are now some 18
operations in the field, requiring a heavy commitment
from the United Nations and its Member States. While
we are supportive of mechanisms to increase the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations in Africa, we
must be conscious of the overall costs of United
Nations operations and responsible in maximizing the
effectiveness of every dollar spent. To that end, we
encourage all missions to be reviewed regularly for
areas of success where United Nations presence may
be reduced in order to preserve global capacity to
respond to new and urgent crises.
Finally, I would like to extend Canada’s
particular appreciation to Mr. Prodi and his team for
casting a critical eye on the challenging and very
timely issue of supporting African Union peacekeeping
operations. We are encouraged by the efforts to address
this issue and look forward to further analysis and
consideration by the Secretary-General and the African
Union Chairperson.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Congo.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to thank you for having organized this
debate on an issue so crucial and vital to Africa. I
extend my delegation’s congratulations to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Japan,
who led the Council’s work during the month of
February, and seize this opportunity to offer to him the
warmest appreciation of the Government of the Congo
for his country’s commitment to peace in Africa.
Once again, Africa returns to the Security
Council’s agenda, as if to remind us that the
establishment and maintenance of peace and security
remain a major challenge, even though appreciable
progress has been achieved as a result of actions taken
under the leadership of the African Union.

9

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

Here, it is worth recalling that peace and security
are preconditions for all sustainable economic
development. It is to that end that the African Union
and its regional and subregional integration
organizations are endeavouring to build a peace and
security architecture, including by putting in place
early warning systems and standby forces as
peacekeeping operations conclude.
This quest for peace and stability, including with
regard to conflict prevention, management and
resolution on the continent, is vibrantly reflected in the
actions carried out in Darfur, where the African Union
Mission in Sudan preceded the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and in Somalia
with the African Union Mission in Somalia, which is
awaiting substantial support from and a handover to
the United Nations.
Similar efforts have been made at the subregional
level. The contribution of the forces of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community,
expanded to the Economic Community of Central
African States, was most decisive in the gradual
restoration of stability in the Central African Republic
and facilitated the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
Various initiatives of African countries have made it
possible to give the populations of such countries as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
reasons to hope for lasting peace.
Africa’s political commitment to investing in
peace and stabilization on the continent is thus a
reality. Regrettably, that commitment collides with a
dearth of resources and limited capacities. That is why
my delegation appeals once again to the international
community to continue to support and further commit
itself alongside the African Union and its subregional
organizations in their joint efforts to establish a peace
architecture and in the deployment of peacekeeping
operations and various peace processes under way on
the continent.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
multifaceted support provided by Africa’s bilateral and
multilateral partners, which are assisting the African
Union in its various peace and security programmes,
and recognizes the growing involvement of the United
Nations. The Council’s recent decisions concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Central African Republic and Somalia reflect the

10

concerns of Africa and open up promising prospects for
peace and security in those countries — prospects that
are, however, waiting to be realized.
Here, my delegation highlights the relevance of
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which today serves as a springboard
for developing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, in particular between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The challenges that Africa is called
upon to meet in order to establish and ensure lasting
peace and security, particularly within the framework
of peacekeeping operations, should promote more
dynamic and better coordinated cooperation with the
entire United Nations system, since the causes of
conflicts and crises are as many as they are varied.
Thus, such cooperation, if it is to be fruitful, must
focus on strengthening the complementary efforts of
those two bodies, particularly in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding.
In that context, my delegation would like to
congratulate Mr. Romano Prodi and the African UnionUnited Nations panel that he chaired on their report on
modalities for support to peacekeeping operations
under a United Nations mandate, contained in
document S/2008/813. The relevant recommendations
set out in the report, while not exhaustive, enlighten us
as to the path to be followed to make the difficult work
of establishing and building peace more effective. The
African Union has undertaken that task in its
supplementary role, which cannot replace the primary
role of the United Nations and its Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, this process is only in its infancy and should
be followed up with an in-depth analysis of those
recommendations in order to strengthen the human and
institutional capacities of the African Union in the area
of peacekeeping and to ensure that it has sufficient and
predictable resources.
Finally, by striving to meet the challenge of
achieving peace and security, African States and the
African Union, in a joint spirit of enthusiasm, wish to
play their rightful role in extricating the African
continent from its tragic fate of war, conflict and crisis,
which is hampering its march towards development. To
that end, they have quite rightly turned to the United
Nations, which is a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations, to ensure that an Africa where peace and

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

security reign can fully participate in international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
appointment as Permanent Representative of the great
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I also wish to thank
you for having organized this debate on the issue of
peace and security in Africa, to which both of our
countries attach particular importance.
I should like to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for
presenting the highlights of the report (S/2008/813) of
the panel that he chaired under the mandate set out in
resolution 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008. We are
grateful to him and to other members of the panel for
that contribution, which is part of the overall efforts to
strengthen the African Union’s capacity to meet the
challenges facing Africa in maintaining peace and
security. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, for his important
statement, to which my delegation fully subscribes.
My delegation studied with great interest the
report of the African Union-United Nations panel on
modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the approach that it
recommends, which reflects our desire to see a
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union develop on an equal and coordinated
basis founded on an approach aimed at optimizing
comparative advantages.
I should like to emphasize that the strategic
partnership envisaged between the United Nations and
the African Union arises from the manifest willingness
of the Union’s member States to take their destiny into
their own hands by honouring their commitments and
by directly and collectively addressing the factors of
instability in the region. Here, I should like to
commend the initiative taken by South Africa in April
2008 to propose this agenda item to the Security
Council, of which today’s discussion is a part, and to
welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Dlamini
Zuma.

09-27223

The African Union, by virtue of its role as a
federative body, has invested significant resources in
order to assume its share of the burden of promoting
peace, security and stability in the region. However,
given the many challenges that Africa must overcome,
the needs are considerable, and the mobilization of the
scarce resources available on the continent is not likely
to meet them. That raises the issue of the choice that
African countries must make between the increasing
needs of development and the demand for conflict
prevention. Both require a certain level of resources
that are in desperately short supply, particularly in the
current context of economic and financial crisis.
It was with that in mind that, in January 2007, the
Assembly of the African Union requested the United
Nations to consider, in the context of Chapter VIII of
the Charter, the possibility of financing through
mandatory assessed contributions peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union or under its
authority and with the consent of the United Nations.
In that regard, Algeria welcomes the
recommendations of the panel chaired by former Prime
Minister Prodi, in particular the two proposals for
financing mechanisms that it suggests. We are pleased
by the warm welcome that they have received today
and, in particular, by the emphasis placed by most
speakers on the need to ensure predictable, stable and
flexible funding for support operations conducted by
the African Union.
With regard to other recommendations, my
delegation would like to stress that the report
highlights the need for Africa to move from being a
beneficiary of aid to being a full-fledged global
security actor. In that regard, the panel cited the
measures taken in recent years by the United Nations
aimed essentially at linking the African Union and,
more specifically, the Peace and Security Council more
closely to its decision-making, strategic and planning
process. The report also identifies areas in which
United Nations assistance has proved valuable, while
specifying that such effort should be carried out with
other institutional and non-institutional actors capable
of providing a range of services.
My delegation wishes also to draw attention to
the complexity of the modalities by which
administrative and financial decisions are taken in the
United Nations and to the relatively heavy
administrative and financial controls to which those

11

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

decisions are subject. Transposing those modalities into
the African context risks unnecessarily making current
African Union procedures more onerous; this could
have a negative effect on the broadly acknowledged
comparative advantage the Union enjoys in being able
to react quickly to crisis situations, even in the absence
of all necessary elements.
In conclusion, Algeria expresses its support for
the panel’s proposal that a joint African Union-United
Nations team be established to examine in detail the
panel’s recommendations. My delegation also supports
the draft presidential statement that has been proposed
for adoption by the Council following this debate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): My delegation wishes to
commence, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
your appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and thanking you for
convening this important debate on peace and security
in Africa. My delegation also welcomes the presence
during these deliberations of the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Lamamra. Kenya also commends His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the AU-United
Nations panel, and his team for a wonderful report
(S/2008/813).
Peace and security has eluded many parts of the
continent of Africa for many decades. From the Horn
of Africa to the Great Lakes region to West Africa,
conflicts have been endemic. In past years, there has
been commendable progress both in achieving peace
and in fostering economic growth. However, new
threats emanating from the shift of inter-State to intraState conflicts have changed the nature and character
of the security framework.
The cost of these conflicts is having a negative
impact on the continent; it manifests itself through
massive destruction of property and the uprooting of
whole communities. In addition, general insecurity
inhibits economic development, and, along with the
consequent conflicts, brings with it an enormous
financial burden, including on the international
community. Related problems such as the destruction
of infrastructure, environmental degradation, disease
and the massive displacement of populations mean that
the aftermath of conflict is more damaging and longlasting than the conflict itself.

12

My delegation is encouraged by this debate
because it underscores the fact that Africa’s peace and
security issues are now receiving increasing attention
at the international level. We are also heartened by the
broad acknowledgement that peace and security
concerns in Africa comprise an integral part of global
peace and security concerns. The causes and
consequences of conflicts and instability in Africa have
significant linkage to global developments and political
interactions in the international arena. The
international community therefore needs to offer
commensurate responses to crisis situations in Africa.
In the past, support rendered has tended to be
calculative, often delayed and, frankly, insufficient.
This trend undermines the very essence of the United
Nations, which is vested with the responsibility of
ensuring global peace and security.
Threats to peace and security in Africa are
diverse, and initiatives to contain them should equally
be diverse. They should consist of promoting long-term
conditions for development and security, building the
capacity of African institutions for early warning, as
well as enhancing their capacity to prevent, manage
and resolve conflicts.
Institutionalizing commitment to the core values
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) through leadership should also be a major
consideration. Any attempt to straitjacket conflict
resolution runs the risk of sacrificing effectiveness.
There is, therefore, a need for a programme of
democratizing the entire agenda of Africa’s peace and
security architecture, starting with the basic structures
of government and looking outwards to the subregional
and regional institutions to mobilize collective action.
While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security,
regional and subregional organizations act on its behalf
and have proved useful precursors to larger United
Nations efforts. Kenya firmly supports the devolved
approach to conflict resolution and reiterates its
unflagging commitment to the support for regional
organizations such as the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States. My
delegation
encourages
the
strengthening
of
partnerships between the AU and the United Nations in
the area of political and technical cooperation. To that
end, Kenya takes note of Security Council resolution
1809 (2008), which established the African Union-

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

United Nations panel to consider the modalities of how
to support peacekeeping operations established under a
United Nations mandate.
Kenya also welcomes the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that its efforts
to marshal resources from the international community
serve to enhance integrated strategies for post-conflict
recovery. This to a great extent supplements regional
efforts and results in meaningful peace. We are
encouraged that the Commission has recognized the
role of African regional and subregional organizations
and the important role of women in peace and security
efforts. We look forward to the further strengthening of
these roles.
We know that peacebuilding is an important but
lengthy process. Nevertheless, we need to continue to
take concrete steps to address the root causes of
conflicts in Africa, especially the lack of economic and
social development and strong governance institutions,
and we need also to put in place mechanisms to ensure
that conflicts do not recur.
There has been tangible progress in focusing the
attention of the international community on sociopolitical problems in Africa, especially in the Great
Lakes region and the Horn of Africa. Kenya and the
other neighbouring countries have been involved in
collaborative efforts to stabilize the region.
In that regard, Kenya especially welcomes
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) which, inter
alia, provides a support package for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to be funded through
assessed United Nations contributions and the
establishment of a trust fund to allow for the funding of
the force. Cognizant of the security challenges in
Somalia, Kenya has offered to train Somali citizens,
who will thereafter join Somalia’s security structure.
In conclusion, my country supports the resolution
of conflicts by peaceful means. Kenya’s mediation
efforts in several conflicts in the Horn of Africa and its
continuous contribution of peacekeepers to missions in
Africa and beyond are testimony to its commitment to
the AU-United Nations partnership. My country thus
remains firmly committed to supporting the AU and the
United Nations in promoting peace efforts in Africa.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.

09-27223

Mr. Wetland (Norway): Let me join others in
thanking the Libyan presidency for organizing this
open debate and in welcoming to the United Nations
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security; and Mr. Romano Prodi.
Norway welcomes the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel on African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813). The report
points to a number of critical issues for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in general, and underlines the
challenges in managing conflicts and maintaining
peace and security on the African continent in
particular.
The AU has a commendable record on mediation,
crisis management and peacekeeping. But we know it
is challenging to sustain such work over time. That is
why the international community needs to assist in this
effort, be it with funding, logistics, equipment or by
other means. Norway supports the idea of establishing
a multi-donor trust fund to finance long-term capacitybuilding of the African Union. We also favour a
mutually agreed and standardized system of reporting
for the fund. Such a fund could encourage greater
support and better coordination of donor contributions.
However, one key issue here is the need to differentiate
between projects that qualify as official development
assistance (ODA) and projects that do not. This could
be done by creating a separate window in the trust fund
for ODA funding for non-military and civilian
purposes.
Norway has also taken note of the panel’s
recommendations on the use of assessed contributions
in support of United Nations-authorized AU peace
operations. We believe that such support should be
given on a case-by-case basis. The go-ahead given by
the Security Council to use assessed contributions to
finance a logistics support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia could be an interesting test
case.
When further developing funding mechanisms,
we must also address the need to develop the AU’s
institutional structures for financial management. This
is important to ensure AU ownership and
accountability to donors.
Norway supports the idea of establishing a joint
United Nations-AU team to examine the detailed

13

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

modalities to support the recommendations made by
the panel. One of the first tasks of that team could be to
define the strategic relationship between the two
organizations. The role of other partners is also
important here. Regional organizations, such as the
European Union and NATO, as well as individual
countries all have roles to play in augmenting African
peacekeeping capacity and the emerging African Peace
and Security Architecture.
We believe it is important that regional
organizations
take
greater
responsibility
for
international peace and security, but the primary
responsibility for responding to threats to international
peace and security remains with this Council. When
regional organizations act in crises situations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter, they should always be
mandated and coordinated by the Security Council.
Norway agrees with the panel on the need for a clearer
strategic vision for the relationship and collaboration
between the Security Council and the African Union on
issues concerning peace and security.
We also fully support the efforts undertaken by
the African Union to develop a new African Peace and
Security Architecture, including the establishment of
an African Standby Force, and to enhance its capacity
for conflict prevention and mediation and for
addressing post-conflict situations. Norway remains
committed to supporting the African Union in all these
fields.
Military capability must be supplemented by
non-military means to build a lasting peace. Civilian
and police components are increasingly important in
peacekeeping operations, not least with regard to the
protection of civilians. Appropriate training is key
here, and for the past 14 years, Norway and African
partners have run the successful Training for Peace
programme capacity-building to enhance civilian and
police capacity for African peacekeeping. Norway is
also planning to support civilian capacity in the AU
Peace Support Operations Division.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway’s strong
commitment to supporting the AU in its peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We appreciate the panel’s
important contribution to the discussion on how to
proceed from here, and hope that today’s debate will
open the path to new and better ways to help the large
number of people in Africa who are in urgent need of a
more robust peacekeeping effort.

14

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
commends the initiative of the Libyan presidency of
the Security Council to convene this crucial discussion
on peace and security in Africa. We appreciate the
statements made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma. We wish to express
profound gratitude to Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations,
for his able leadership, commitment and succinct
briefing. His panel deserves our full appreciation for its
dedication, hard work and well-articulated report
(S/2008/813).
The
broad
agreements
and
recommendations contained in the report attest to the
collective commitment of the panel to strengthening
peacekeeping efforts in Africa.
Nigeria believes firmly that the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security remains with the Security Council.
However, more than ever we recognize the importance
of
regional
organizations
as
integral
and
complementary components of a broader global
strategy for maintaining and strengthening global
peace and security, within the ambit of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. For this reason, we have
been steadfast in our commitment to the United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.
Indeed, Africa has assumed its role and
responsibility in peacekeeping operations with utmost
seriousness, recognizing that peace and stability are
precursors of social and economic development. With
deployments to Somalia, Darfur, Burundi, Sierra Leone
and Liberia, Africa has demonstrated sufficient
political will to tackle the challenges confronting the
continent. During these deployments, our peacekeeping
forces have engaged in a variety of missions, including
protection of humanitarian aid, disarming of factions,
cantonment, mediation and peace enforcement. They
have also undertaken capacity-building and electionmonitoring activities in these countries.
If Africa is to continually undertake these
responsibilities effectively and efficiently, it needs

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

robust support for its existing peace and security
architecture, which consists of the Peace and Security
Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
Peace Fund. Africa also needs sustainable, flexible and
predictable funding of peacekeeping operations. In
addition, support is required to facilitate the building of
the continent’s peacekeeping capacity and institutional
pedestals.
It is in this regard that Nigeria fully supports the
recommendations of the Prodi panel. We acknowledge,
as does the panel, that its proposals will not address all
the peacekeeping challenges on the African continent.
However, the recommendations constitute a very useful
starting point, a concrete basis for immediate action
and a foundation for the future. Overall, the report
reflects the need for greater United Nations action,
African peacekeeping self-sufficiency and the
development of indigenous conflict-management
capacities, within the context of shared responsibility.
The use of United Nations-assessed funding to
support United Nations-authorized AU peacekeeping
operations and the establishment of a voluntarily
funded multi-donor trust fund have been canvassed,
over a long period of time, as panaceas for the
lingering problems of peacekeeping in Africa.
Similarly, the proposed capacity-building development
of the AU’s logistics capacity and establishment of a
joint United Nations-AU team to examine the
implementation of the panel’s proposals are needed to
revitalize the AU’s capacity to implement peace and
security on the continent.
Nigeria hopes that today’s discussion will help us
to forge a new consensus and support for these
proposals. We urge the Security Council to take up the
responsibility and the challenge of implementing the
report within a reasonable period of time in order to
enhance the AU’s capacity to respond to the evergrowing peacekeeping and security challenges in the
region. We also hope that a more strategic relationship
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council, on the one hand, and
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission on the other, will eventually emerge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this

09-27223

important meeting of the Security Council to consider
the report (S/2008/813) of the African Union-United
Nations panel led by Mr. Romano Prodi, who is present
among us. The panel has been charged to consider indepth the modalities of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the conduct of United
Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations. We
warmly congratulate Mr. Prodi on his work.
We also welcome the notable presence here of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro.
The report before the Security Council today is in
line with Benin’s untiring efforts during its
membership of the Council in 2004 and 2005 to focus
the attention of the international community on the
need to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in order to promote
stability throughout the continent.
In this regard, I would like to recall that the first
building blocks of this structure were the presidential
statement on institutional relations with the African
Union (S/PRST/2004/44), adopted in Nairobi on
19 November 2004 by the Security Council, and
resolution 1625 (2005), adopted at the high-level
meeting of the Council held in this Chamber on
14 September 2005.
I must also refer to resolution 1631 (2005) and
resolution 1809 (2008), which was an initiative of the
Republic of South Africa, represented here today by its
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I recall that in
implementation of resolution 1631 (2005), Benin,
which then chaired the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, held a seminar, on 15 December 2005, on the
very topic of cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union in the field of international
peace and security.
The ongoing commitment of Benin to this subject
is made evident by a happy coincidence: this debate is
taking place at a time when Benin is chair of the AU
Peace and Security Council. In this regard, I welcome
the participation in this debate of His Excellency
Ambassador
Edouard
Aho-Glele,
Permanent
Representative of Benin to the AU in Addis Ababa,
through the explicit decision of that body of the Union.
Having said that, Benin largely shares the
assessments of the panel. These are part of a realistic
and promising approach that has enabled us to discard

15

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

the concept of subcontracting peacekeeping operations
to the African Union and adopt the principle of
subsidiarity, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Such an approach will take full advantage of
AU rapid response capacities and of their comparative
advantage in terms of knowledge of the realities on the
ground. This approach presupposes that cases that
exceed the capacities under development by the AU
can be rapidly taken on by the United Nations.
We fully adhere to the principle that a
peacekeeping operation initiated by the African Union
and that must extend beyond six months can be put
under United Nations command. From this perspective,
the financing of these operations from United Nations
assessed contributions for a period of six or more
months is fully justified.
We wish to underscore the importance of the
coordination and synergy that must be developed
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the one hand and Africa’s regional economic
communities on the other hand. The African Peace and
Security Architecture is established on the basis of
such coordination and synergy.
Assistance aimed at strengthening these
communities, which are essential elements in the
region, should be fully taken into account in efforts
undertaken by the international community to
strengthen African peacekeeping capacities in the
context of implementing the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme. This is part of the clear strategic
relationship to be drawn up between the United
Nations and the African Union, with strict respect for
the Security Council’s primary responsibility for
international peace and security.
We fully support the proposal by the panel that a
special multi-donor trust fund to support the African
Peace and Security Architecture be set up. That
proposal accurately reflects the primary responsibility
of the international community. In our view, it would
be very useful to include the regional economic
communities on the board of this fund. This special
trust fund should devote particular attention to setting
up standing logistic capacity — through the acquisition
of a critical mass of equipment that can be mobilized
on a short-term basis — in order to validate the rapid
response capacity of the standby force and to avoid
privatization measures in the area of logistics. Of
course, this question should be studied in greater depth.

16

In addition, Benin fully supports the
strengthening of the African Union complementary
mechanisms for conflict prevention, which will
ultimately help it avoid having to resort to
peacekeeping operations. This is all the more important
in this period of crisis, in which the risk of social
conflicts degenerating into major political crises cannot
be dismissed.
My delegation would like to recall that resolution
1625 (2005) set forth a pragmatic approach that
advocated enhancing the monitoring of States where
the risks of conflict are clear, in order to contain crises
and ensure that they do not become entrenched and to
deal effectively with the underlying causes of the
conflicts.
Sufficient human and financial resources must be
mobilized to this end. The recent measures that were
adopted to strengthen the Department of Political
Affairs will, in our view, enable us to develop a
cohesive strategy for the use of early warning and
mediation mechanisms and peacebuilding and
development efforts. We hope that the follow-up to the
implementation of that resolution will once again lead,
this year, to a report by the Secretary-General, as was
the case in January 2008 (see S/2008/18), and take into
account the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund. Emergency actions by
those bodies have allowed us to quickly address
situations of concern.
In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
this debate. Benin hopes that the recommendations of
the panel will enjoy meticulous follow-up and that a
joint team tasked with studying the implementation of
these recommendations will be set up as soon as
possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your very timely call for an open
debate on peace and security in Africa. This is a
necessary debate, and my country is closely following
its course.
The report we are studying (S/2008/813)
originated in an initiative of the Secretary-General, laid
out in resolution 1809 (2008), on cooperation between

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

our Organization and regional organizations, which set
up a panel to study and recommend modalities to
improve the support to — and the predictability and
sustainability of funding for — peacekeeping missions
under United Nations mandates.
The panel’s report contains valuable observations
and a number of action-oriented proposals, which I will
briefly highlight, as they closely coincide with our own
analysis of the matter.
First, we agree that the armed conflicts and the
very political instability prevailing in some regions of
Africa are clear obstacles to the economic development
of those countries. The vicious cycle of poverty and
violence that we see in many parts of continent, where
conflict is almost constant, is a trap. This trap impedes
progress in societies and clearly causes the effects of
such conflicts to be even more harmful and deeprooted than the conflicts themselves.
Security is thus a prerequisite for long-term
sustainable development. It is clear that we must face
these challenges with a comprehensive approach. In
such an approach, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation is a response when necessary, but prevention
of conflicts before they begin would make a
comprehensive approach that also encompasses
response capacity.
Ever-increasing participation by the African
Union in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and postconflict reconstruction efforts is therefore essential.
More than ever before, threats to security require a
collective approach based on various types of
cooperation. In turn, that requires close coordination
with regard to both strategies and programmes. At the
same time, there is a need to optimize the advantages
that the regional organizations could bring. In that
regard, we believe it is essential to establish the
necessary capacities, including in subregional
organizations, to arrive at coherent responses that are
part of a joint strategy that encompasses the widest
possible range of conflict-prevention, peacekeeping
and post-conflict reconstruction efforts.
Finally,
with
regard
to
the
report’s
recommendations on financing issues, we agree with
what the Secretary-General said this morning in his
intervention, that such issues call for thorough
consideration, especially by the relevant bodies of the
Organization.

09-27223

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all,
Mr. President,
please
accept
my
country’s
congratulations on your appointment to your very high
office. Thank you also for this opportunity to address
the Council on the report of joint African Union-United
Nations panel on support for African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813).
At the outset, I would like to commend the panel
for their comprehensive, thorough and realistic report.
The panel has raised a number of recommendations for
strengthening the United Nations-African Union (AU)
relationship with regard to peacekeeping and for
developing the AU’s structural, procedural, logistical
and human resources. The report has also raised some
interesting proposals regarding the establishment of a
new financial mechanism aimed at strengthening the
AU’s capacity, both for peacekeeping and capacitybuilding. These recommendations demand further
reflection by Member States, both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly.
Australia commends the AU for its increasing
engagement in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction activities. The challenges
are significant, especially for a relatively new regional
organization that is trying to address operational
imperatives while simultaneously developing its own
peace and security architecture. In addressing these
operational and institutional challenges, we would
encourage the AU to learn from the experiences, both
good and bad, of the United Nations and other
comparable regional organizations.
With Africa remaining home to 40 per cent of
global peace operations, the need to strengthen the
AU’s capacity for peacekeeping, both in terms of
responding to crises and promoting long-term stability,
is self-evident. We support the provision of assistance
by the United Nations to develop the AU’s conflictprevention and peacekeeping capacity, and we
encourage the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission to explore ways in which their
relationship can be further developed.
With more than 70 per cent of the United Nations
military personnel and more than 50 per cent of its
police personnel deployed to missions in Africa, we
also support the report’s call for the establishment of a
more effective strategic relationship between the

17

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

United Nations and the AU. We need to recognize that
those United Nations resources are scarce and need to
be used in a cost-effective and efficient manner.
I would like to emphasize that the Australian
Government is keen to strengthen our engagement with
Africa and the AU in the field of peace and security
and to cooperate where appropriate with African
Member States in addressing many of the challenges
raised in the report. This was outlined by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Smith, when he addressed the
African Union Executive Council meeting in Addis
Ababa on 29 January.
During his visit to Addis Ababa last month, the
Australian Minister for Defence announced that a
number of places would be made available for AUnominated officers to undertake training in Australian
defence courses on vital military skills to help increase
the effectiveness of peace missions. The Defence
Minister also announced that Australia would cosponsor, together with the AU and United Nations, a
peacekeeping symposium in Africa later this year to
allow for an exchange of expertise and experiences.
Furthermore, he undertook to explore the possibility
that Australia may be able to provide some modest
training and mentoring assistance to the Eastern
African Standby Brigade to help build the capacities
and capabilities of the AU for peacekeeping and peacesupport and prevention activities.
Australia also looks forward to continuing our
support for the E-Learning for African Peacekeepers
programme, known as ELAP. We have been a proud
supporter of this programme since its inception, in
2006. In that time, the programme has attracted over
168,000 enrolments, at no cost to the participants, in
distance training across some 22 peacekeeping courses.
As noted throughout this report, military
capabilities can never substitute for long-term political
solutions to crises. Australia has been pleased to
contribute to United Nations initiatives aimed at
strengthening the relationship between the AU and the
Organization and at developing more effective conflictprevention mechanisms in Africa, both at the regional
and subregional levels.
In conclusion, we look forward to working with
members of the Council and members of the African
Union in the coming months as we further consider this
important report.

18

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
complimenting the leadership of Libya in stewarding
the Council’s deliberations during the current month. I
would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to organize this open debate on peace and
security in Africa pursuant to the landmark resolution
1809 (2008).
We commend the African Union-United Nations
panel, in particular Chairperson Romano Prodi, for
presenting to the Council the report on modalities for
support to African Union (AU) peacekeeping
operations (S/2008/813), now before the Council. The
report has raised some interesting ideas and points that
we believe need further exploration, both by the
Council and the General Assembly.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba, which
currently holds the Chair of the Coordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Movement. However, we would
like to highlight some issues and to add a few points.
Bangladesh welcomes the complementary role
played by regional organizations in United Nationsmandated peacekeeping operations. Their role,
however, must not be seen as a substitute for that of the
United Nations in maintaining peace in conflict areas.
United Nations peacekeeping forces must maintain a
true
international
character
to
uphold
the
Organization’s universality, impartiality and neutrality.
We are pleased to note that cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU has grown over recent
years. The partnership in the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a
case in point. Notwithstanding the need for enhanced
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, Bangladesh
supports the recommendation contained in the panel’s
report — which was further subscribed to by the
Non-Aligned Movement in a statement made earlier
today — that, in defining the division of
responsibilities, it is imperative to avoid creating the
perception that the United Nations is subcontracting
peacekeeping to the African Union. The prime
objective of this strategic partnership should be to
maximize the African Union’s strengths in terms of its
contribution to conflict prevention and mediation and

09-27223

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

its capacity to undertake peacekeeping operations in
conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The African Union must be provided with the
necessary support in developing its institutional
capacities, thus enabling it to implement its mandate in
a coordinated and appropriate manner, including in
areas of building integral capacities to plan, manage
and support both conflict prevention and peacekeeping
activities in Africa in close cooperation with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
As a leading troop-contributing country,
Bangladesh attaches utmost importance to the safety
and security of troops in the field. We welcome the
various steps taken by the Secretariat. However, more
actions are needed for better safety and security of
peacekeepers. In this context, Bangladesh would like to
stress upon the deployment forces should be
commensurate with the mandate and the situation on
the ground in a particular mission. Moreover,
contingents should only be tasked to cover areas of
responsibility that lie within their capabilities and
agreed mandates based on memorandums of
understanding.
Bangladesh
recognizes
United
Nations
peacekeeping to be an indispensable and cost effective
tool in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Based on this principle, we support United
Nations peacekeeping operations and we have full
commitment to them. Bangladesh had been providing
approximately 10 per cent of the total troops for
peacekeeping for more than a decade. Besides,
currently, we are the largest contributor of police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping. These
statistics are a true manifestation of our commitment
and contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
My delegation will maintain this commitment,
and we will continue to coordinate our collective peace
and security efforts under the auspices of the United
Nations. In this vein, we shall continue to support the
Security Council in fulfilling its Charter mandated
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): After
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

09-27223

“The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility
for
the
maintenance
of
international peace and security, and recalls that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of peace and security and consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations can improve collective security.
“The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements which
underscore the importance of developing
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and the relevant statutes of the
regional organizations, in particular the African
Union.
“The Security Council welcomes the
continuing important efforts of the African Union
to settle conflicts in the African continent, and
expresses its support for peace initiatives
conducted by the African Union.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1809 (2008), which recognizes the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate.
“The Security Council recognizes that
regional organizations have the responsibility to
secure human, financial, logistical and other
resources for their organizations.
“The Council underscores the importance of
supporting and improving, in a sustained way, the
capacity of the African Union, and welcomes
recent developments regarding cooperation
between the United Nations, the African Union
and international partners, including the
enhancement of the African Union capacities.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the African Union-United Nations panel in
producing a report on modalities to support
African
Union
peacekeeping
operations
(A/63/666-S/2008/813). The Security Council
notes with interest the panel’s report.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report, no later

19

S/PV.6092 (Resumption 1)

than 18 September 2009, on practical ways to
provide effective support for the African Union
when it undertakes peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations, that includes a
detailed assessment of the recommendations
contained in the report of the African UnionUnited Nations panel, in particular those on
financing, as well as on the establishment of a
joint African Union-United Nations team.
“The Security Council further requests the
Secretary-General to take into account in his
report the lessons learned from past and current
African Union peacekeeping efforts, in particular
the African Union-United Nations mission in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the efforts to provide a
logistical support package for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and the
establishment of a trust fund called for by
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of implementing the Ten-Year
Capacity Building Programme for the African
Union on peace and security, in particular the
operationalization of the African Union Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System.
The Council stresses its support for ongoing
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and
Security Architecture and reiterates its call for the
international community, particularly donors, to
fulfil their commitments in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document.

“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of establishing more effective
strategic relationships between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, and encourages further joint efforts
in this direction, focusing on issues of mutual
interests. The Security Council calls on the
Secretariat and the African Union Commission to
further collaborate on issues of mutual interests,
including through developing a list of the
military, technical, logistic and administrative
capacities that need developing, supporting
regular follow-up missions, experience sharing,
staff exchanges, and in financial and logistical
areas.
“The Security Council expresses its
intention to further consider this issue following
the report of the Secretary-General.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/3.
Before I adjourn this meeting, I wish, on behalf
of all the members of the Council, to express my
gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Romano Prodi and
the other members of his panel for their valuable
efforts and for the report before the Council. We are
grateful to Mr. Prodi for having come to New York to
present the report to us.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

20

09-27223
