VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

( b) To promote and facilitate by all means in
their power the implementation of the relevant international instruments and the adoption of bilateral agreements designed, inter alia, to eliminate the illicit traffic
in alien workers;
(c) To adopt, pending the conclusion of such
agreements, the appropriate measures to ensure that
the fundamental human rights of all migrant workers,
irrespective of their immigration status, are fully respected under their national legislation;
3. Invites Governments of host countries to make
arrangements for information and reception facilities
and to put into effect policies relating to training,
health, housing and educational and cultural development for migrant workers and their families, and to
guarantee the free e~ercise by them of activities calculated to preserve their cultural values;
4. Further invites Governments of countries of
origin to give the widest possible dissemination to
information calculated to pre-advise and protect migrants;
5. Invites all States to intensify efforts to enlighten
public opinion in host countries on the importance of
the contribution made by migrant workers to economic
and social development and to raising the level of living
in such countries;
6. Calls upon all States to give consideration to
ratifying the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975, adopted by the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation;
1. Calls upon the United Nations organs and specialized agencies, including the International Labour
Organisation, concerned with the question of migrant
workers to continue devoting their attention to this
question;
8. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights and the Economic and Social Council should
consider this question at their next sessions on the
basis of the instruments adopted and the documents
and studies prepared by the United Nations and the
specialized agencies, including the study by the Special
Rapporteur on the exploitation of labour through illicit
and clandestine trafficking 55 and the report of the Seminar on the Human Rights of Migrant Workers, held
at Tunis from 12 to 24 November 1975.116
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/128.

Human rights and scientific and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2721 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
3026 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3150 (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973 and 3268 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Recalling the Declaration on the Use of Scientific
and Technological Progress in the Interests of Peace
and for the Benefit of Mankind, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384 (XXX) of 10
November 1975,
55 E/CN.4/Sub.2/L.640.
56 ST/TAO/HR/50.

107

Convinced that the application of scientific and technological progress in the interests of peace and for the
benefit of mankind is an important factor for the observance of fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Noting that the achievements of scientific and technological progress have a great influence on the course
of social and economic development in both the developed and the developing countries,
Expressing its concern at the fact that scientific and
technological achievements may be used to the detriment of fundamental human rights and freedoms, the
dignity of the human person, international peace and
security and social progress,
1. Calls upon Member States, in their programmes
and plans, to take account of the provisions and
principles contained in the Declaration on the Use of
Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests
of P,eace and for the Benefit of Mankind;
2. Requests the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and other
specialized agencies to take fully into account, in their
programmes and activities, the pertinent provisions of
the Proclamation of Teheran57 and the provisions of
the Declaration;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
its consideration of the question of scientific and technological progress and human rights, to give special attention to the implementation of the provisions of the
Declaration;
4. Decides to consider at its thirty-second session
the question of the implementation of the provisions
of the Declaration under the item entitled "Human
rights and scientific and technological developments".
I 02nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/129.

Policies and programmes relating to
youth

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2447 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2497
(XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2633 (XXV) of 11
November 1970, 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971,
3022 (XXVII) and 3023 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972 and 3141 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Noting with satisfaction that, in the eleven years
since the promulgation of the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples, substantial progress has been made in implementing its principles,
Reaffirming the principles inscribed in the Declaration and the importance of their universal implementation,
Emphasizing that efforts to educate youth in those
principles must be closely related to programmes for
their active involvement in all aspects of economic and
social life,
5 7 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2),
chap. II.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

108

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1923 (LXIII) of 6 May 1975, in which the Council
approved the recommendations concerning the establishment of a co-operative arrangement among youth
research and information centres, 58
l. Requests Member States, the United Nations
organs and specialized agencies concerned to give
greater attention to the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples, especially when establishing their policies and programmes regarding youth;
2. Addresses a solemn appeal to all States, as well
as to intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, to take appropriate action to foster among youth respect for all people, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, regard
for human values and devotion to the ideals of peace,
freedom and progress and to the cause of human rights;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to promote international awareness of the situation and needs of youth and practical action to ensure
the full participation of youth in the life of society,
through United Nations activities in the field of youth
and, as appropriate, with the co-operation of the
specialized agencies concerned;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the measures that have been taken to implement the Declaration to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council, with recommendations on how that process may be
strengthened;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
progress report on the establishment of a co-operative
arrangement among youth research and information
centres to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Policies and
programmes relating to youth".
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/130.

Role of youth

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the profound importance of the role of
youth and the necessity of its participation in shaping
the future of humanity,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the
energies, enthusiasm and creative abilities of youth in
the task of nation-building, the economic, social and
cultural advancement of peoples, the preservation of
world peace and the promotion of international cooperation and understanding,
Noting that the dynamic and active involvement of
youth can be a very powerful factor in influencing in a
positive manner the response from other sections of
society for accelerating the process of reform and development,
ns E/CN.5/503, paras. 5-12.

Conscious of the enormous sacrifice made by youth
and the sufferings inflicted on it in wars of all kinds,
Convinced of the necessity of meeting the legitimate
needs and aspirations of youth in this age of great
scientific, technological and cultural progress and of
opportunities for education,
Bearing in mind the valuable contribution that youth
can make to the evolution of co-operation among
States on the basis of equality and justice and to the
ushering in of the new international economic order,
Appreciating the active participation of youth in the
global movement to promote peace, disarmament and
national liberation and in the struggle against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, foreign domination
and alien occupation,
Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on the
Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 2037 (XX)
of 7 December 1965,
I. Considers that the development process as well
as the promotion of international peace and security
would benefit greatly by the integration and involvement of youth in all related activities;
2. Considers it necessary to disseminate among
youth, through appropriate education, ideas of peace,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
human solidarity and dedication to the objectives of
progress and development;
3. Urges all States, to that end, to undertake such
further steps as may be necessary and appropriate to
ensure the full and effective participation of youth in
the process of development and co-operation;
4. Invites all relevant organizations within the
United Nations system to give special attention to
programmes connected with education and the participation of youth in development;
5. Invites States to promote international exchanges
between youth and youth organizations of their respective countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to collect from
the Governments of Member States and relevant organizations in the United Nations system the latest
information concerning the present and future role and
the participation of youth in the development and
nation-building process, as well as in the promotion of
international co-operation and understanding, and to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session a preliminary report for further consideration
of the role of youth in promoting the objectives of the
United Nations.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/131.

United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2659 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2770
(XXVI) of 22 November 1971, 3022 (XXVII) of 18
December 1972, 3125 (XXVIII) of 13 December
1973 and 3140 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Ta king note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1966 (LIX) of 30 July 1975 on youth policies
