United Nations

A/RES/55/109

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 March 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 114 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

55/109. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/181 of 17 December 1999, taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/70 of 26 April 2000 on the
enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights, 1 and recalling
also Assembly resolution 54/113 of 10 December 1999 on the United Nations Year
of Dialogue among Civilizations,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as
relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 for enhancing genuine
cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and
non-selectivity of the consideration of human rights issues, and underlining the
importance of the promotion of dialogue on human rights issues,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the
field of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international
cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and encouragement
of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, in particular,
international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all the activities for
the promotion and protection of human rights,
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

00 56593

A/RES/55/109

Recalling the adoption of resolution 1999/25 of 26 August 1999, entitled
“Promotion of dialogue on human rights issues”, by the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-first session, 3 and noting its
consideration of the question of a dialogue among civilizations at its fifty-second
session,
1.
Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2.
Considers that international cooperation in this field, in conformity with
the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent
task of preventing violations of human rights and of fundamental freedoms for all;
3.
Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality,
non-selectivity, objectivity and transparency, in a manner consistent with the
purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
4.
Calls upon Member States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for
the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations
to contribute actively to this endeavour;
5.
Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
6.
session.

Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-sixth
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

3

2

See E/CN.4/2000/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/54, chap. II, sect. A.
