V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1980s, together with measures that may be required
for the realization of those objectives;
5. Invites the regional commissions and other
bodies concerned within the United Nations system
to make a contribution on the basis of their experience
in order to assist the Secretary-General in his study
of the role of the public sector in promoting the economic and social development of developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
32/179, taking especially into account the role of the
public sector in promoting the secure economic and
social development of developing countries and bearing
also in mind the evaluation of activities in public
administration and finance;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to take the present
resolution into account in preparing a comprehensive
and detailed report in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/179.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/145.

Sixth replenishment of the International
Development Association and recapitalization of the World Bank

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 197 4 containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 31/181 of 21 December 1976 on the recapitalization of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and replenishment of the International Development Association,
Taking into account the greatly enlarged external
financing requirements of the developing countries,
particularly for long-term capital,
Realizing that considerable lead time is required for
contributing Governments to take the necessary legislative action with respect to the replenishment of the
International Development Association and bearing in
mind that the commitment authority for the fifth replenishment of the International Development Association expires in June 1980,
l. Calls upon all contributing countries to take the
steps necessary for the urgent commencement and conclusion of negotiations for the sixth replenishment of
the International Development Association;
2. Calls upon all contributing countries to initiate
the necessary action for the sixth replenishment of the
International Development Association so as to ensure
an adequate increase in real terms in the resources of
the institution, taking into account to the fullest extent
possible the rapidly growing requirements of the developing countries for such resources and the effects of
world inflation;

lll

3. Calls upon the members of the World Bank to
take early action to support an increase in the Bank's
capital of sufficient magnitude to ensure that its lending
to the developing countries increases adequately in real
terms.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/146.

Assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the tragic loss of life and
the immense damage to the economic structure and to
property, and about the disruption of society in
Lebanon resulting from the hostilities during the past
four years,
Aware of the magnitude of the unmet needs for the
relief of the Lebanese people and the reconstruction
and development of Lebanon,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member
States about the grave situation in Lebanon and their
interest in its return to normal conditions of life and
its reconstruction and development,
Affirming the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of Lebanon in its efforts for
relief, reconstruction and development,
Noting the appeals of the Secretary-General for
relief and other forms of assistance to Lebanon and
the creation of a special fund for this purpose,
Noting also resolution 65 (V) of 6 October 1978 118
of the Economic Commission for Western Asia in
which the Commission considered that the needs of
Lebanon exceeded the means within the capacity of
the Commission,
1. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General
for international assistance to Lebanon;
2. Urges all Governments to contribute to the reconstruction of Lebanon, either through existing bilateral and multilateral channels or, in addition,
through a special fund to be established by the Secretary-General for this purpose;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to establish at
Beirut a joint co-ordinating committee of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system to co-ordinate their assistance
and advice to the Government of Lebanon in all
matters relating to reconstruction and development;
4. Decides that the Committee on Assistance for
the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon,
headed by a co-ordinator appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, shall also assist the Government of Lebanon
in the assessment, formulation and phasing of aid and
ensure its implementation within the framework of the
needs of Lebanon;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
possible assistance to the Committee in discharging its
duties and to establish, in the manner he deems appropriate, a mode of consultation with representatives of
the countries providing assistance;
118 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1979, Supplement ,Vo. 14 (E/1979/49), chap. III.
