United Nations

S/PV.4164

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4164

th meeting
Friday, 23 June 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Levitte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Fowler
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Ward
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Theron
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
Briefing by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-49721 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4164

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Iraq,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey, requesting to be invited to participate in the
debate on the item on the Council’s agenda under rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council.
The Council is also called upon to decide on the
invitation to Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans, and on the request,
transmitted by the Permanent Representative of
Portugal, representing the Presidency of the Council of
the European Union, to authorize Mr. Javier Solana,
Secretary-General of that Council and High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, to participate in the
meeting under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, document
S/2000/615.
Finally, I have received a letter from
Mr. Jovanović in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the debate on the agenda item. No
reference is made to either rule 37 or rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council in this
request.
Prior consultations with the members of the
Council have not made it possible to reach an
understanding on how to respond to these requests. I
therefore propose that the Council decide successively,
first on the requests for participation under rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, next on those
referring to rule 39 and, finally, on Mr. Jovanović’s
request, which refers to neither rule 37 nor rule 39.
I shall thus proceed in three stages. During the
first stage, I shall ask if there are any objections to
giving a favourable response to the requests referring

2

to rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure —
namely, those submitted by the representatives of
Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Greece, Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal,
Slovenia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Turkey.
During the second stage, I shall ask if there are
any objections to inviting Mr. Carl Bildt and Mr. Javier
Solana to participate in the debate on the agenda item
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council.
During the third stage, I shall ask if there are any
objections to giving a positive response to
Mr. Jovanović’s request, which refers to neither rule 37
nor rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.
If there is an objection to any of the requests to
be invited to participate, I shall submit the request to a
vote of the members of the Council.
May I take it that the Council agrees to proceed in
this manner?
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You will recall, Mr. President, that when we
discussed this matter yesterday in the consultations, I
proposed that we take a positive view of all requests
that we have received for participation in today’s
meeting. That was the first proposal, and I would be
grateful if we could take a decision on it.
The President (spoke in French): I note that the
procedure I have proposed to follow is not acceptable
to the delegation of the Russian Federation.
I have proposed that the Council should not take
a decision, whether positive or negative, on all the
requests as a whole.
Bearing in mind that disagreements arose during
the prior consultations on one of the requests, I have
proposed that the Council should decide, successively
and separately, on the requests under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, next on
those referring to rule 39 and, finally, on
Mr. Jovanović’s request.
The delegation of the Russian Federation has
proposed another method, which consists of taking a
single decision on all the requests, considered as a
whole. Under this method, the Council would be called

S/PV.4164

upon either to accept all the requests or to reject all of
them.
In the present circumstances, I feel it is necessary
to put the proposal of the Russian Federation to the
vote.
I therefore request the Council to determine
whether it wishes, as proposed by the Russian
Federation, to take a single decision on all the requests,
considered as a whole, which would mean that the
Council would either accept all the requests or reject
them all. If the Russian Federation’s proposal does not
receive the required number of votes, I will follow the
procedure that I myself have proposed.
If no member wishes to take the floor, I shall take
it that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
proposal of the Russian Federation.
It was so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Namibia, Russian Federation, Ukraine
Against:
Argentina,
Bangladesh,
Canada,
France,
Malaysia, Mali, Netherlands, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Jamaica
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 4 in favour, 10 against and 1
abstention. The proposal of the Russian Federation has
not been adopted because it has failed to obtain the
required number of votes.
As I announced before the voting, I shall now
invite the Council to consider successively the requests
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council, next those referring to rule 39 and, finally,
that of Mr. Jovanović.
First, do I hear any objection to giving a positive
response to the requests to be invited to participate
submitted by the representatives of Albania, Austria,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Slovenia, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council?

There being no objection, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, Japan, Norway,
Pakistan, Portugal, Slovenia, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Sychov
(Belarus),
Mr.
Sacirbey
(Bosnia
and
Herzegovina), Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr.
Gournaris (Greece), Mr. Kobayashi (Japan), Mr.
Johansen (Norway), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Petrič (Slovenia), Mr.
Čalovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Mr. Vural (Turkey) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): Secondly, do I
hear any objection to extending an invitation to Mr.
Carl Bildt and Mr. Javier Solana under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure?
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Carl Bildt to take a seat at the
Council table.
I now invite Mr. Javier Solana to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
Do I hear any objection to our giving a
favourable response to the request for participation
submitted by Mr. Jovanović?
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): My
delegation must object to the proposal to allow Mr.
Jovanović, or anyone else purporting to represent his
Government, to address the Council. We would like to
request a vote on this invitation.
He represents a Government whose senior
leadership has been indicted for war crimes and other
violations of international humanitarian law. The
Tribunal that indicted their leaders was established by
the Council itself, with the full support and
participation of every member of the Council —
including those supporting his participation today.
Allowing any representative of that leadership to
participate in this or any other meeting of the Council
flouts the indictments, undermines the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and sets
us on a dangerous moral and legal course that sends the

3

S/PV.4164

wrong message to the world about what this great body
is doing here today and eliminates and undermines the
seriousness of this gathering, at which I am particularly
grateful to see Mr. Bildt, Mr. Solana and other major
representatives of the world community.
There is no room in this debate for a
representative of this regime, which continues its
repressive tactics at home and its policies of nationalist
extremism abroad and which helped fuel four Balkan
wars over the last decade. It would be inappropriate to
allow a representative of that Government to use the
Council, in a discussion about where we stand on
Kosovo and Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
to support the very policies that forced the United
Nations to intervene.
We recommend that the Council state clearly and
unequivocally that it rejects the policies of hatred and
war espoused by the Belgrade regime; that it does not
tolerate abuses of human rights; and that it fully
supports the efforts of the International war crime
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to prosecute all — I
repeat, all — those who have been indicted.
For this reason, my delegation requests that the
proposed invitation be put to the vote. Of course, our
country will vote no.
The President (spoke in French): We shall now
proceed to the vote. Does any delegation wish to speak
before the vote?
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): Since the beginning
of this year, we have witnessed quite a number of
important new developments in the Council’s working
methods and procedures, the most important of which
is the tendency towards the increased participation of
non-members of the Council in the discussions of this
body. Let me recall one of the latest events in support
of this assertion: the meetings of the Council with the
participation of the members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement, held on 15 and
16 June. I would like to emphasize that this was the
first time in the history of the United Nations that the
Security Council had at its table representatives of
rebel movements, who participated in the Council’s
discussions.
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Ukraine attaches particular significance to this
important tendency. I am deeply convinced that the
Security Council as a whole derives considerable

4

benefits from this tendency, which enhances its actual
influence on the situation on the ground. In this regard,
my delegation sees an inconsistency between this
tendency and the request for a vote on the participation
in the Council’s meeting of the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
First of all, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
remains a participant in the peace process in the
Balkans. It is a signatory to the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. It is a host country of the international
presence in Kosovo. It is a party to the settlement of
the Prevlaka dispute. We believe this provides
sufficient grounds to allow this country to participate
in the discussion of the Security Council on the
situation in the Balkans as a whole.
Furthermore, I must recall the important
provisions of Article 32 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which any State that is a party to a
dispute under consideration by the Security Council
has to be invited to participate in the discussion
relating to the dispute. It is impossible to deny that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia de facto remains a
party to every track of the peace process in the
Balkans.
Since September 1992, the Security Council has
adopted a special form of invitation when faced with a
request for participation from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. According to that formula, the President of
the Council — in response to a written request from the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia —
invites that representative by name to address the
Council in the course of the discussion of the item
before it. At the current stage, we do not see any
grounds to abandon this practice, which has been in
existence for nearly eight years.
These are the reasons why my delegation will
vote in favour of the participation of Mr. Jovanović in
today’s open meeting of the Security Council.
Finally, I would like to place on the record that
this position of Ukraine is without any prejudice to the
status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The President (spoke in French): If no other
member of the Council wishes to speak before the
voting, I shall take it that the Council is now prepared
to vote on the request submitted by Mr. Jovanović.
It was so decided.

S/PV.4164

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Namibia, Russian Federation, Ukraine
Against:
Bangladesh,
Canada,
France,
Malaysia,
Netherlands, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 4 in favour, 7 against and 4
abstentions.
The request made by Mr. Jovanović has not been
approved because it failed to obtain the required
number of votes.
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation expresses its deep regret with
regard to the decision just made by the Security
Council. The Chinese delegation is of the view that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an important country
of the Balkan region. It is also a State that is directly
concerned and a party to the Dayton Agreement. It
does not matter whether or not we agree with the
policy of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia;
excluding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the
Security Council and not allowing it to speak will not
contribute to resolving the Balkan problem.

agrees with everything, or nearly everything, just said
by the Permanent Representative of the United States.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of France.
France voted against the request presented by Mr.
Jovanović, to participate in this Security Council
meeting. We believe that Mr. Jovanović’s participation
in this meeting is inappropriate. We do not dispute the
general principle of Mr. Jovanović’s having an
opportunity to participate in a Security Council
meeting. This vote is unrelated and has no effect on the
status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
United Nations, which is a matter of substance
governed by the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is with great regret that I assess what has
just happened in the Council — the direct application
of the policy of certain countries to exclude the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from participation not only in
today’s meeting, but generally, in the settlement
process for the Balkans. This goes against the letter and
the spirit of the United Nations Charter and its
purposes and principles, and hinders the Security
Council and the international community in the
performance of their tasks.

Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina’s abstention is based on my delegation’s
serious doubts regarding the underlying reasons for
denying participation in this debate to Mr. Jovanović,
particularly bearing in mind previous instances in the
Council in recent months especially during the month
of December.

It is awkward for me even to recall in this
Chamber that, according to Article 31 of the United
Nations Charter, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has the right to participate in this discussion on an
equal footing with other United Nations Member States
that have made such requests. It is embarrassing for me
to have to note that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
is a country whose interests are directly affected by the
item under discussion in today’s meeting. If this is not
sufficient reason for anyone here, members can recall
that, according to Article 32 of the Charter, even a
State that is not a Member of the United Nations has
the right to participate in the discussion by the Security
Council of a situation in which that country is involved
as a party.

I wish to fully clarify that this vote in no way
implies support for, endorsement of or sympathy for
the Belgrade regime, in respect of which my delegation

To discuss the Balkan problem without the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is nonsense. We are
concerned with the fact that the International Tribunal

The Security Council should not deprive a
sovereign State of its right to state its position when it
wants to do so. This kind of action runs counter to the
spirit of the United Nations Charter. Therefore, we
would like again to express our deep regret with regard
to the decision just made by the Security Council.

5

S/PV.4164

for the Former Yugoslavia continues to be used as a
political instrument, which was recently demonstrated
once again when the Prosecutor of the Tribunal, Ms.
Carla Del Ponte, refused to consider the flagrant use of
force and violations of international humanitarian law
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Russia
cannot support this destructive attempt to isolate the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, both from the
standpoint of a political settlement in the Balkans and
of the damage such attempts do to the United Nations
as a universal Organization.
A very dangerous precedent is thus being created
when States that are unpalatable for political reasons
are excluded from participation in the work of the
United Nations. Gagging people’s mouths is not the
best way to discuss acute international problems. Even
a defendant has the right to defend his or her position.
The Security Council meeting on the Balkans,
without the full participation of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, loses its practical meaning, since one of
the key parties is being eliminated from the discussion
of the problem of a settlement, which could have a real
impact on the development of events in that region.
The President (spoke in French): If there is no
objection, the Permanent Representative of Portugal
and Mr. Solana will speak immediately after Mr. Bildt
and before the members of the Council.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now consider the item
on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
statement by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans. I now call on Mr.
Bildt.
Mr. Bildt: Let me start by expressing my
appreciation for this opportunity to come back to the
Council on the important issue of the search for selfsustaining stability in the Balkans. Let me also express
my appreciation for the opportunity to do this when the
High Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, will
also be addressing the Council on these same issues. In
very many ways, the efforts of the United Nations and
the European Union in that region are complementary,
and this discussion here today demonstrates this.

6

The search for self-sustaining stability in that part
of Europe is certainly not a new one. When I spoke in
this Chamber in late February, I noted the high priority
that has been given to this by the international
community ever since the start of the dissolution of the
old Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
early 1990s. I also then noted that we are far from the
goals that we have set. Looking only at the United
Nations, we now have no fewer than three
peacekeeping operations in the area. There have
previously been four other large United Nations
missions. The wider international community has
approximately a quarter of a million young men and
women in uniform either serving in peace operations,
just having come out of such operations or actively
preparing to go into them. And we know that if these
troops were to be withdrawn today there would, in all
probability, be war tomorrow.
This is the reality of the situation in the region
today. Self-sustaining stability can be achieved only
when a firm political framework has been established
for the region as a whole. This will be the case only
when the different national and other communities in
the area have accepted such a political framework and
when it has also been fully recognized by the
international community at the end of the day under the
auspices of this Council.
Historical experience shows that when such a
firm framework is in place the peoples and the nations
of the region can live peacefully together in the same
way as in other parts of Europe or, indeed, the world.
But historical experience equally shows that whenever
the political framework of the region is, or is seen as,
unclear, fragile or open, there tends to develop a cycle
of fears on the one hand and expectations on the other,
often driven by extremists, nearly always resulting in
conflict, in war and in massive violations of human
rights.
This was the case during the slow collapse of the
Ottoman Empire. Again it was the case during the
inter-ethnic and national carnage in the area during the
Second World War and, once again, this has been the
case over and over again since the early 1990s.
Today, most of our attention is focussed on
Bosnia, where we are making slow but steady progress
with the implementation of the 1995 Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement, and Kosovo, where the United
Nations, in the absence of a proper peace agreement, is

S/PV.4164

engaged in one of its most demanding and difficult
missions ever.
But the region is larger than this. It can be argued
the Bosnia and Kosovo are just the most acute fracture
zones where the different national agendas of the
regions most clearly meet. I am stressing this in order
to underline that we will never succeed in either
Kosovo or Bosnia if we fail in the wider region south
of Slovenia and north of Greece.
Stability in Kosovo and in Bosnia is obviously
vital for the region. Such stability is hardly achievable
in the long run if there is not a stable structure for the
region as a whole — and I would add, without a firm
place for the region in the wider process and the wider
structures of European integration. Only thus will a
self-sustaining stability be possible.
In Kosovo, the Council has been recently
informed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner, of the efforts under
way to move towards the setting up of structures of
self-government and substantial autonomy. I consider
this to be of critical importance for wider stability in
the region also. But these efforts are undertaken — let
us be clear on this — in a climate that is far from
satisfactory in a number of respects.
There is a climate of terror against minorities in
Kosovo, primarily the Serb one, and this is repulsive.
There is still far more of the rule of thugs than the rule
of law. Although the local Kosovo Albanian leadership
has condemned acts of violence, there is still a climate
of tolerance of terror that we must never accept.
This can never be an argument for giving up or
postponing our efforts to develop the structures of selfgovernment and autonomy. On the contrary, in the long
run — and it might indeed be a long one — there is no
other way. The elected representatives of Kosovo will
soon learn that neither Europe nor the rest of the
international community will accept a political system
that does not clearly address issues of human rights and
the protection of minorities.
In Bosnia, the international efforts are now
focused on the three priorities of the High
Representative:
accelerated
minority
returns,
functioning common institutions and the necessity of
economic reforms. Let me also note the particular
importance of the latter.

For far too long, far too little has been done in
Bosnia in this respect. We are now faced with an aiddependent economy in a situation where aid is starting
to decline, with the result that a severe economic and
social crisis might be unavoidable. This will threaten
the future of the country.
We will press on with minority returns. But in the
absence of a functioning economy there is a risk that
Bosnia could become a country where the old return to
end their days where they were born, but the young
leave because they do not see prospects for the future.
The elected leaders of Bosnia must take action on this.
If we broaden our horizon from Kosovo and
Bosnia, I believe that the most pressing issue in the
region is the question of the future of the present
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We cannot have selfsustaining stability in the region if we do not have selfsustaining stability in its different parts. In this respect,
the situation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
gives cause for concern. In my opinion, the present
structures of the present Yugoslavia are unsustainable.
This is primarily due to the acute constitutional
crisis between the Republic of Montenegro and the
Federal authorities in Belgrade, where the federal
institutions of Yugoslavia have been grossly misused in
order also to exclude the representatives of the elected
authorities of Montenegro. They are today on a slow
but steady course towards a collision. This might not
be imminent, but the trends are very clearly there. I
believe that it is of key importance that we all give
support to the elected authorities in Montenegro in
their efforts to pave the way for the new deal which
they are seeking.
Added to this acute constitutional crisis, there is,
of course, also the unresolved issue of the future status
of Kosovo. Although on paper still an integral part of
the Republic of Serbia, the reality is different. I fail to
see any circumstances under which a peace agreement
will not have to include a clear constitutional
separation between the two.
Thus, we have a situation where the present
structures of the present Yugoslavia are unsustainable.
If we do not recognize this and try to pave the way for
sustainable solutions, there is an obvious risk of further
conflict and disintegration with potentially grave
consequences for the region as a whole.

7

S/PV.4164

When I go around the region, I note that most of
its leaders see the continued territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as important both for
wider regional stability and for the internal stability of
the different countries. They are alarmed by the present
situation in Yugoslavia, but they do not favour a further
disintegration of the region.

the present Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The issue
of the Prevlaka peninsula is small but significant. The
succession negotiations have been ongoing for nearly
10 years without any result whatsoever. And there are
issues connected with the establishment of full, normal
relations among all States in the region that have not
yet been solved.

We are undoubtedly handicapped in our search
for peace by the fact that key persons in key public
positions in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
refusing to respect indictments that have been issued
by the International Tribunal, thus creating a situation
where we cannot deal with them.

I see all of these issues coming together at some
point in time in a comprehensive regional settlement of
the outstanding political issues. Such a settlement will
not only pave the way for the full and speedy
reintegration of a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into
the region; it will also be even more important for the
entry of the region into the process of integration with
the rest of Europe and with the international
community. Such a comprehensive political settlement
will not be possible if we do not have a consensus in
the international community, reflected in the Security
Council, on what we are trying to assist the region to
achieve. And it will not be possible if there is not a
recognition that a true deal for true peace must meet
the minimum demands of everyone but is unlikely to
meet the maximum demands of anyone.

This situation is dangerous primarily for the
Federal Republic itself, but also, of course, for the
wider region. I believe it is important to recall that in
the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia subscribed to the position that persons
indicted by the Tribunal and not cooperating with it
cannot hold public office.
What we are demanding of them today is thus no
more than what they themselves have previously
agreed to demand of others as part of the search for
peace in the region. And the sooner the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its entire
political system see the logic of this, the sooner we can
all work together to create self-sustaining structures —
within its borders as well — as part of the search for
self-sustaining stability in the region as a whole.
We cannot wait too long. We know from bitter
experience that as long as there is a feeling that
arrangements are not final and that core issues remain
open, tensions are likely to persist and there will be the
ever-present risk that the forces of nationalism, of
revanchism and of revolt will surface again with
devastating consequences. That is the situation we are
in today.
There are certainly positive as well as negative
trends in the region. We are trying to strengthen the
former — and let me note the positive political changes
in Croatia — and to dampen the latter: let me note the
rise of organized crime in large parts of the region. But
as long as the core issues of the core conflicts are open,
the danger of the forces of disintegration driving the
region into new conflict will always be there.
And there are numerous open political issues
apart from those connected with the unsustainability of

8

The dialogue with, and within, the Council is thus
an essential part of creating that consensus that will
make us ready to move towards a comprehensive
political settlement when the conditions for it are in
place.
This is a year of important elections in the region.
The Croatian parliamentary and presidential elections
are behind us; so are the Bosnian local elections and
the local elections in part of Montenegro. Ahead of us
are further important elections. We are moving, as I
mentioned, towards local elections in Kosovo, and
there will also be local — and fiercely contested —
elections in adjoining Albania and in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. There will later on
be parliamentary elections in Bosnia. And there will
have to be local elections in Serbia as well as federal
elections in Yugoslavia; although it is difficult to see
that these will be free and fair, they could nevertheless
represent an opportunity for the people of Serbia and
Yugoslavia to make their voices heard. Their choice is
between isolation and integration.
There are possibilities for positive change, but
also for disruptive conflicts, in several of these
elections. I believe that the message that the
international community sends will be important for all

S/PV.4164

of them. Here, the position of the European Union is
obviously of particular importance. I firmly believe
that it is in paving the way for integration into Europe
that we must seek the long-term solutions to the issues
of the region. The forces of disintegration in the region
will finally be overcome only on the day when the full
conditions exist for them to be subject to the forces of
integration in Europe as a whole. Then we can achieve
not only self-sustaining stability, but also the
conditions for self-sustaining economic growth in the
region, without which we will not overcome the
horrible legacy of the many years of war, of
destruction, of sanctions and of isolation.
With the exception of the Middle East, there has
been no other region of the world, throughout the
history of the United Nations, where so many peace
operations have been deemed necessary as the region
south of Slovenia and north of Greece. We thus not
only have an interest in creating the conditions for the
success of the present United Nations missions in
Kosovo and in Bosnia; we have a strong interest in
assisting a region where the peace is kept by others to
become a region where the peace is kept by the region
itself. But we must all recognize that we have a long
way to go.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Portugal. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Please permit me, Sir, to express my pleasure at seeing
you presiding over the work of the Security Council
this month and to congratulate you on having organized
this historic debate.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area — Iceland and Liechtenstein — align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union listened with great
appreciation to the briefing that Mr. Carl Bildt, the

Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, gave the Security Council today. We welcome
this opportunity to take stock of the situation in the
area from a regional perspective. It is a given that for
peace and security to be restored in the region and for
democracy and respect for human rights to flourish,
they must do so in every part of the Balkans.
The European Union is, by far, the largest
contributor to the international efforts to help bring
peace and stability to the region. Between 1991 and
1999, the European Union has contributed more than
17 billion euros in development, budgetary and
humanitarian assistance to South-eastern Europe. The
European Union is offering stabilization and
association agreements to five South-eastern European
countries with the prospect of eventual membership of
the European Union. Allow me to draw the attention of
the members of the Security Council to a paper
prepared by the European Commission that has been
made available; it provides greater detail on the
European Union contributions to the Western Balkans
region.
There can be no doubt that the European Union is
committed — heavily committed — to efforts to bring
about a peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans. The
European Union considers the recent ethnically
motivated violence in Kosovo to be intolerable and that
it must be stopped. All Kosovars, irrespective of their
ethnic origin, must be able to stay in or return to
Kosovo, and to live there in peace without harassment
or intimidation of any kind. The leaders of all ethnic
communities, in particular the Kosovo Albanian
community, must take responsibility for achieving this
and must act vigorously and urgently to promote
tolerance and mutual respect in Kosovo.
This week, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina was extended for
another year, demonstrating clearly the commitment of
the international community to making the ParisDayton Peace Agreement work. Five years later, much
has been accomplished, but much still remains to be
done, as was made clear to the Council by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, only last week.
The recent Peace Implementation Council
meeting set priorities for a new, accelerated phase of
peace implementation in three key strategic areas:
economic reform, accelerated return of displaced

9

S/PV.4164

persons and functional and democratically accountable
common institutions.
A crucial aspect of the process of national
reconciliation in Bosnia, and in the Balkans as a whole,
is a sense among all communities that justice has been
served and, in this context, the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal (ICTY) for the Former
Yugoslavia must continue to be pursued vigorously.
The European Union urges that persons accused of war
crimes who are still at large be brought to justice. The
Bosnian authorities and all other relevant Governments
of the region must cooperate with the ICTY fully and
unambiguously to this end.
The peace process in Bosnia, and the prospects
for peace and security in the region as a whole, depend
very much on whether democracy will be allowed to
breathe in Serbia. The European Union is deeply
concerned at the continuing deterioration of the
political situation in Serbia and condemns the
escalating repression of the democratic opposition and
independent media by the Belgrade regime. The
European Union’s policy is not directed against the
Serbian people, but against President Milosević's
regime, which is violating basic human rights in the
most flagrant manner. The European Union is
committed to strengthening its dialogue with Serbian
civil society and to supporting democracy and freedom
of expression in Serbia; to continuing its support for
the democratically elected Government of Montenegro,
and to helping re-establish peaceful coexistence in
Kosovo.
The way forward has been shown by the people
of Croatia. The election in February of a Croatian
Government committed to comprehensive reforms
marked the beginning of a new era for the country, and
the European Union is committed to working very
closely with the Croatian authorities in their quest for
making Croatia a full-fledged member of the EuroAtlantic community. This surely is the ultimate goal for
all the countries of the western Balkans — to be
participating members of free and democratic Europe.
The peace, prosperity and stability of South-Eastern
Europe are a strategic priority for the European Union,
and its overall objective remains the fullest possible
integration of the countries of the region into the
political and economic mainstream of Europe.
After this brief look at the European Union's
positions on the current developments in the western

10

Balkans region, allow me now to pass the baton to
Mr. Javier Solana, High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy
and Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Union. He will elaborate further on the leading role of
the European Union in replacing the Balkans’ past of
war and destruction with a future of peace, prosperity,
democracy and human rights.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Portugal for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the SecretaryGeneral of the Council of the European Union and
High Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier Solana. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table, and I welcome
him very warmly to speak for the first time before the
Security Council.
Mr. Solana (spoke in French): As you can
imagine, it is an honour for me and a great pleasure to
be here in the Council today to discuss a topic to which
the European Union attaches particular importance.
I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council and you, in particular, Mr. President,
for the efforts you have made to organize this
important meeting.
(spoke in Spanish)
Allow me also to recall a very moving moment
that occurred in this very same Chamber in September
1994, when, the Security Council met to discuss Haiti.
I, in my capacity as Foreign Minister of my country,
had the tremendous honour and pleasure to preside
over that important meeting, which, I believe, had
some significant impact on the destiny of our beloved
Haiti.
(spoke in English)
I would like first of all to thank all the members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address the Council. I would like especially to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, Mr. Carl Bildt, for his opening remarks,
which have set the scene for this morning’s discussion.
I would also like to thank my good friend Ambassador
Monteiro for his statement as representative of the
Presidency of the Council of the European Union.

S/PV.4164

The European Union has for many, many years
been an important voice in many areas of United
Nations work, in particular in fields such as human
rights, social and economic issues and development.
Increasingly, this is also the case on security issues.
The European Union is developing faster than ever
before into an organization with access to the full range
of external policy instruments, from economic relations
to crisis management. This makes our relationship with
the United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council, even more important. The principles that
underlie the European Union’s common foreign and
security policy reflect the objectives of the United
Nations as set out in the Charter. It is therefore not only
an immense honour for me to address the Security
Council, it is also a historic step in the development of
the European Union’s foreign policy.
This morning’s debate is not a response to a
specific crisis in the Balkans. Such crises in the past
have been an inevitable part of the evolution of the
Balkans. There is no guarantee that we will not face
further crises in the future. But I have no doubt that, as
in the past, such crises will be overcome.
My intervention this morning is by way of
explanation as to why I remain optimistic over the
future of the Balkans despite the many, many problems
and difficulties which we continue to face. It is not by
chance that I have been called upon to spend much of
my time, in the nine months since I took up my current
post, focusing on the Balkans and, of course, on the
situation in Kosovo in particular. It is, rather, a
reflection of the importance that the European Union
attaches to a region with which it shares common
borders and with which it has so much in common.
The European Union, which was founded with
the very objective of avoiding future conflict, cannot,
and has not been prepared to, sit back in the face of
conflicts on its doorstep and do nothing. This is not
simply a matter of sentiment. Long-term stability in the
Balkans will bring greater security and greater
prosperity for Europe as a whole. This is why the
European Union has made a long-term commitment to
the region. It is a commitment in which the member
States, and of course the European Commission, have a
vital role to play. And, it led to me being asked
specifically by the European Union’s heads of
Government to address the issue of the coordination of
the policies of the European Union in the Balkans and
to give greater visibility to its efforts.

Our objective is the fullest possible integration of
the countries of the region into the political and
economic mainstream of Europe. This is already
happening as a result of the historic decision taken by
the European Union at the end of last year to extend its
existing process of enlargement. Enlargement is our
most important tool for guaranteeing the continued
stability of the whole of the continent of Europe. The
process itself is already binding countries such as
Slovenia, Bulgaria and Romania into the mainstream of
Europe, with positive spillover for the whole region.
Enlargement is proving to be a catalyst for greater
regional cooperation. It is, for example, encouraging
the countries of the region to address in a positive
manner the sensitive issue of minorities.
The enlargement process is a key element of the
comprehensive regional approach that lies at the heart
of the European Union’s policy towards the region. But
it is not the only one. We have established a
stabilization and association process that aims at
integrating the countries of the region into European
structures. This process encourages internal reform, as
well as the development of relations between countries
in the region.
The Stability Pact is another key tool for
supporting economic development throughout the
region. It also encourages internal reform and provides
support for the integration process. But one of its most
important elements is the promotion of regional
cooperation. For the European Union, this is one of the
most important challenges for the Stability Pact.
We have of course been the main provider of the
financial support that is necessary to underpin this
policy. The figures speak for themselves. Since 1991,
the European Union and its member States have
contributed to the Balkans as a whole over €17 billion,
which makes it by far the biggest donor. In Kosovo
alone, we have spent more than €3 billion on
non-military programmes. This is in addition to our
substantial military commitment, which includes the
provision of 28,000 troops for the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). The European Union has also deployed 1,430
policemen, with a further 270 set to arrive before the
summer.
These figures testify to our engagement in the
Balkans. They are the instruments of an inclusive
policy encompassing the whole region. Of course, there
are specific situations that call for quite specific

11

S/PV.4164

responses. Kosovo is the obvious example. But we
have to maintain an overall comprehensive approach to
the region if we are to hold out any hope of achieving
our objective of bringing the Balkans into the European
family of nations. The alternative would merely
reinforce the divisions and the tensions that lie at the
heart of the problems that have already caused so much
suffering.
There is one major obstacle to pursuing a
genuinely comprehensive approach to the whole
Balkan region. That obstacle is the resistance to
political change in Belgrade. Our hope for the region is
that it achieve lasting stability. But stability is not an
isolated ideal. It depends also on democracy, respect
for human rights and the rule of law, and the prosperity
that comes from openness and engagement with one’s
neighbours. These values are being systematically
violated by the actions and policies of President
Milosević. The European Union is not prepared to
stand idly by in the face of continuing repression. This
is why we are actively supporting democracy and
freedom of expression in Serbia and developing links
with representatives of Serbian civil society. We are
ready to extend our economic assistance programme to
Serbia once it has embraced those same values that
underpin the European Union. We want to help the
Serbian people, but for the moment the current regime
in Serbia remains an obstacle to that objective.
Elsewhere in the region, Croatia in particular has,
through its recent successful democratic transition,
given cause for optimism and has helped increase the
potential for widening regional cooperation. In parallel
to this, we are committed to continuing our support for
the democratically elected Government of Montenegro.
We shall also continue to support Bosnia, both
politically and economically, in its own transition
process, in which the forthcoming elections will play a
key role. Much still remains to be done, and this
process will continue to require sustained commitment
by the international community and Bosnia itself.
My firm conviction is that the best chance for
realizing long-term stability in the Balkans is through
the steady integration of the region into the European
mainstream. This will not happen overnight; it is a
long-term process. But it is very important. The Irish
politician John Hume once described the European
Union as the best example of conflict resolution in the
history of the world. The European Union has
successfully maintained peace and stability in Western

12

Europe for half a century. It is now inconceivable that
member States of the European Union would settle
their differences by anything other than peaceful
means. The European Union offers a model for
regional integration as a guarantee for peace. It is a
powerful and effective symbol of reconciliation. It also
provides protection for minorities within an
overarching regional framework. No other solution
offers such hope for the Balkans.
In order to achieve this long-term objective, we
have set ourselves a number of priorities for the
months ahead.
First, we shall concentrate our energies on the
various elections taking place in the region in the
autumn — as has already been mentioned by Mr. Carl
Bildt — in Kosovo, Albania, Bosnia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and, hopefully, also
in Serbia. They present a major opportunity to
strengthen democracy and the rule of law in the region.
We will support as full a participation as possible in
these elections, and we shall unambiguously stand by
those who genuinely stand for democratic reform.
Indeed, we shall lend our support only to those parties
and individuals that are uncompromising in their
commitment to ethnic tolerance, democracy and the
rule of law.
Secondly, we shall continue to support civil
society. This is of particular relevance with regard to
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but it is also
important throughout the region. A vibrant and strong
civil society is the key both to economic and political
development and to bringing these countries closer to
the European Union. We are placing particular
emphasis on working with local authorities, the media
and non-governmental organizations to help them in
their contacts with counterparts in the region and the
European Union.
Thirdly, we shall pursue our policy of bringing
the countries of the region closer to the European
Union. We shall concentrate on developing the
stabilization and association process, which is the
foundation of our policy towards the region.
Negotiations are currently underway with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and are expected to
begin soon with Croatia. We are also working closely
with Albania and Bosnia to ensure that the conditions
for beginning such negotiations are met as soon as
possible. For the moment, the Federal Republic of

S/PV.4164

Yugoslavia remains outside this important process. I
look forward to the day when it will join its neighbours
on the same path to European integration.
Finally, we shall remain committed to promoting
regional cooperation. This is still much less developed
in the region than in many other parts of Europe. It is
the key to the economic success of the region and will
accelerate its integration into the European Union.
Progress in this area is one of the key objectives of the
Stability Pact. I have just received a mandate from the
European Council to press for better cooperation in
combating organized crime and illegal immigration in
the region. I am also sure that the summit meeting to be
held this autumn between the European Union and the
countries of the western Balkans proposed by President
Chirac will give a strong impetus to reform and
cooperation in the region.
I would like to close by looking specifically at
our priorities in Kosovo. The full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains our
key objective. The overall positive development of the
situation over the past month has been overshadowed
recently by the flare-up of inter-ethnic violence and the
subsequent decision of the Serb National Council to
suspend its participation in the interim institutions.
Together with United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and with the Member
States I have been working very hard in the last few
days to address the legitimate concerns of the Serbs
and to encourage them to return to interim institutions.
The municipal elections to be held in autumn this
year are intended to lay the foundations of democratic
development and political consolidation in Kosovo.
The registration process is advancing, and a multi-party
structure is gradually taking shape. We shall, however,
need to work very hard to ensure a positive
environment for the elections.
Successful municipal elections will, in turn, pave
the way for the establishment of an interim
administration structure, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). These structures need
to be prepared under the authority of the Special
Representative of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral in an open and inclusive process, with the
active involvement of all the major groups of Kosovo’s
population. UNMIK will be able to properly fulfil its
mandate during this critical period only if we give it
the necessary resources. The shortages of high-quality

police officers, notwithstanding recent improvements,
and of judges and prosecutors, as well as the overall
shortfall in staffing, continue to hamper UNMIK’s
work in key areas. Today the European Union is
already bearing carrying the lion's share of the
international community's efforts in Kosovo. We will
continue to do our utmost to make this Mission a
success.
Let me close by recalling the commitment of the
European Union to the region. The experience of the
Balkans has been a sobering one, but it has also
provided us with an opportunity. We have dedicated
ourselves to the region, to a wider Europe and to a
more outward and mature common foreign security
policy. We all stand to gain from that.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Solana for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
want to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this very
important meeting. You have had a very intensive
presidency this month, as did Ambassador Wang of
China last month. I wish to point out that at this time
last week you said there would be a five-minute
meeting on Saturday, and it was 11 hours. I hope you
have a better weekend than you had last week. I
congratulate you on your stewardship.
I particularly want to thank you for inviting today
statements by the European Union, as given by
Ambassador Monteiro, and presentations by my friends
and colleagues and our esteemed visitors, Carl Bildt
and Javier Solana. I have had the pleasure of working
with both of them now for many years. They have both
played seminal roles in the history of the Balkans and
in European matters. Their statements are extremely
important, and although I was unable to hear Carl
Bildt’s, I am very familiar with it. I have read it. I
talked to Carl in advance, and I endorse everything that
both men said.
Before I turn to my own remarks, I would like to
make one additional comment about the procedural
vote that just took place. The outcome was correct
from every standpoint — legal, political and moral. In
addition to my remarks preceding the vote, I need to
make one additional point, and I hope that the countries
that voted in favour of Mr. Jovanović’s speaking would
please note what I am about to say.

13

S/PV.4164

I wish to remind everyone that in Security
Council resolutions 777 (1992) and 821 (1993), it was
decided that the State known as the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia had ceased to exist and that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should apply for
membership. Therefore, I do not understand, leaving
aside the specifics which led to the vote today, how this
situation exists. Tito’s old flag is still flying on First
Avenue, despite these two resolutions. I consider that a
travesty of the United Nations spirit; a flag that
represents a nation that the United Nations itself
decided did not exist. Yugoslavia is not a member of
the General Assembly. We have long urged Belgrade to
apply as one of the successor States to the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Four others —
Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina — did apply. They were accepted. The
reason for this — and I have spent many hours talking
with the leadership in Belgrade about this, as has Carl
Bildt — is that the Belgrade authorities assert that they
are the sole legitimate successor State to the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the United
Nations has rejected that claim. So the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia should — and this has nothing
to do with the war crimes issue — follow the request of
the Security Council, and they should not be invited to
speak when they purport to speak for a successor
regime that does not exist. That was the unanimous
view of the Dayton signatories, even though Belgrade
did sign the Agreement, because they had to make it
work. That was the view of the Security Council. That
was the view of the European Union, under the
Badinter Commission. I would just reaffirm that today.
I consider this discussion a continuation of one of
the most important events in recent European and
world history, and I think it is a solemn obligation of
the Security Council to continue to discuss the
Balkans.
On the positive side of the ledger, we have recent
events in Croatia, where a new democratic
Government, headed by people fully dedicated to
democratic principles, is moving Croatia rapidly into
the community of nations, oriented towards openness
and democratic principles. Their commitment to
transparency with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and their dealings with the
Croatian Democratic Union in Bosnia and their support
for dealing with refugee returns have all made a
tremendous and positive difference in the region. I

14

wish again today to use this occasion to express our
Government’s high respect and admiration for the
Government in Zagreb. I will be visiting Zagreb next
month, and I look forward to having these discussions
directly with the Croatian authorities.
Let me turn briefly to Bosnia, where we have
recently heard in this Chamber reports from the Special
Representative, Jacques Klein, and the High
Representative, Carl Bildt’s successor plus one,
Wolfgang Petritsch. I think we need to recognize that
in the midst of difficulties progress can be made, and
as Javier Solana just said in a characteristically upbeat
and positive manner, we are making progress.
The world’s press has long since turned away
from Bosnia, so the world does not realize how much
progress is being made. But let us recognize that the
press turned away from Bosnia because good news is
old news, and that is why they are not giving it as
much attention as they should. I think all of us should
take every occasion to point out that refugee returns to
minority areas are up 400 per cent this year and
movement is being made.
Nonetheless, the forces of darkness still exist in
Bosnia. Mostar is still a tragically torn city. Karadzic is
still at large — one of the most dangerous men in the
world — and he needs to be brought to justice, as do
all the other indicted war criminals. The criminal
element is threatening the social fabric of all of Bosnia.
So I do not wish to say that progress is undiluted, but I
think we should acknowledge it.
In Kosovo we face a much more complicated
situation as we have heard from our speakers. Now, as
we mark the one-year anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK,
under the brilliant leadership of Bernard Kouchner, has
made impressive progress in building an administrative
structure responsive to the needs of the people to
replace a repressive state structure dominated by the
Belgrade authorities.
But I do not wish to gloss over the serious
security problems which we discussed in our last
meeting with Mr. Kouchner present. I am deeply
distressed, more than anything else, at any attempt by
either ethnic group to impose its will through
intimidation and force on the other. I need to repeat, as
I said here last time we met on this subject, that, while
we condemn unreservedly the Albanian attacks on the
Serb minorities now in Kosovo and while we recognize

S/PV.4164

fully what the purpose of this is — a reprehensible
purpose — it is not a one-sided story. We must have a
full accounting of the 4,000 Albanians who are
missing, many of whom I assume are no longer alive,
and we must have a resolution of these problems.
Those who resort to violence on either side of the
ethnic line in Kosovo must be forced to stop. We have
the means to do it if we have the will. A lot of what is
happening in this Chamber undermines that will by
diversionary discussions, such as an attempt to
reinterpret resolution 1244 (1999) or the hour that we
spent on the procedural discussion just resolved.
I support Mr. Kouchner’s repeated calls for
progress on the missing and detainees. We also need to
establish a more representative set of structures of
government. The critical step is to give the people
more authority over their own destiny. I therefore
warmly support the statements of Javier Solana and
Carl Bildt that the municipal elections should stay on
schedule for October. If they are delayed, it jeopardizes
the rest of the structure in Kosovo and we will lock
ourselves into a worse situation. The people arguing for
delay are arguing it for no reason related to the needs
of the people of Kosovo, but solely to argue the
question of international sovereignty. That is not what
municipal elections are about. That is not what they are
about, and I hope we can move forward in that regard.
I regret that the Serb community has not
participated in the registration process, but we cannot
allow that process to be held hostage by one group or
by people in Belgrade. All the people of Kosovo —
there are many ethnic groups there — will have
representatives in their administrative governmental
structure. If they do not choose to participate, seats will
be set aside to protect their interests until they are
ready to return as full partners in the political process. I
underscore the importance of these events.
Let me conclude with some comments about
Serbia and Montenegro. My delegation continues to
believe that the issue of Kosovo’s security will never
be truly solved and long-term peace and stability not be
possible until the current regime in Belgrade is
replaced by one that is more open and more
representative. Meanwhile, Belgrade continues to
threaten democracy in its sister Republic of
Montenegro. These efforts are unacceptable and, in that
regard, I am delighted that the Foreign Minister of
Montenegro, Minister Lukovac, is here with us today. I

met with him this morning and I urge all those who
have time to meet with him. He has important ideas
and thoughts which all of us should hear. I salute the
courage of President Djukanovic’s Government and I
recommit the United States to our support of
Montenegro’s efforts to build a peaceful democratic
society.
In regard to the war crimes issue, we should
remember that the Tribunal for Yugoslavia, like that for
Rwanda, is not some arbitrary institutional creation. I
repeat again here today our Government’s view that the
umbrella of that process should be extended over
Foday Sankoh and his henchmen in the Revolutionary
United Front in Sierra Leone. These Tribunals and their
possible extension to Sierra Leone are created by
decisions of this body in this very Chamber. They are
vested with the enormous authority of the United
Nations. We have a profound responsibility to
ourselves, to this institution and to innocent victims
everywhere to support them and give them the power
they need. I am distressed that countries that supported
their establishment now attack them.
The combination of justice with political
freedom, expressed through free and fair elections, is
the key to stability and peace in the Balkans. Justice
with freedom: these principles make up the foundation
of all democratic societies. They are principles that we
are committed to upholding.
I want to stress in closing that the Council’s
efforts in the Balkans have relied heavily on the
strength and support of other organizations, including
the European Union (EU), the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Peace
Implementation Council — which Carl Bildt was so
deeply involved and helped to establish — and the
military contribution made by the Stabilization Force
and the Kosovo Force. The EU has played and will
continue to play a particularly crucial role. I hope that
High Representative Solana will convey to the
European Union our deep appreciation of their efforts.
As all know, I have been critical frequently about
the operational structures in Kosovo, and I continue to
be critical because I do not think they are efficient
enough and I think the system was not adequately
conceived and structured from the outset. However,
those criticisms, which I make openly, are the
criticisms of somebody who is deeply grateful to the
EU and to the United Nations for their efforts; who is

15

S/PV.4164

mindful of the fact, as Carl Bildt pointed out, that the
bulk of the money has come from the European Union
and not from our own Government; and who deeply
appreciates these efforts and makes these comments in
a spirit of total commitment to their goals. Thus, I hope
that Mr. Solana will convey to Brussels our
Government’s high appreciation for his being here
today and for the efforts of the European Union.
With that, Mr. President, I want to thank you
again for holding this very important meeting. I hope
that we can revitalize the effort, in addition to simply
hearing these important reports today.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation wishes to express
its dissatisfaction and deep regret over the fact that the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
cannot attend today’s meeting. Allowing him to make a
statement would not impair any country’s position,
while, by not allowing the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia a voice, the Security Council has deprived a
sovereign country of its right to express its views.
This contravenes the spirit of the Charter and we
find it very difficult to understand. If we wish to settle
the problems in the Balkans, we must maintain
dialogue with all sides. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is an important country in the Balkan
region. When we discuss the Balkan issue, isolating
and excluding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
narrow-minded, short-sighted and a denial of reality. It
does not help the search for a solution to the Balkan
problem. We deeply regret this discriminatory decision,
which is wrong.
We thank Mr. Bildt for his briefing, but,
regrettably, we have not read his report, as expected.
We commend Mr. Bildt for his tireless efforts to find a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Balkan
question. The Chinese delegation will continue to
support Mr. Bildt in his endeavours.
We thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
today’s open debate. I take this opportunity to express
some of the principal positions of the Chinese
delegation.
Since ancient times, the Balkan region has
experienced very complex ethnic, religious and
territorial conflicts, which are interconnected. Some
important recent events have made the situation more
precarious yet. China is deeply concerned by the

16

development of the situation in the Balkans, including
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
With regard to the question of Kosovo, I would
stress that the grave situation there is the result of
various factors. Ethnic conflicts are domestic concerns,
while the wilful interference of foreign forces is an
external factor that has exacerbated the conflict. Last
year, on March 24, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) bombed the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia indiscriminately and set a bad precedent of
using force against a sovereign country with the excuse
of humanitarian questions. It undermined the basic
norms of international law and the principles and
purposes of the Charter and the credibility of the
United Nations and the Security Council.
NATO’s bombing of civilian facilities and a
foreign diplomatic establishment also violated the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations as well as
the Fourth Geneva Convention and its Additional
Protocol. China has expressed its strong opposition to
this. China has made a tremendous effort to bring
NATO’s ceasefire and to bring the Kosovo question
back to the Security Council.
NATO’s use of force has caused a greater
humanitarian crisis. As a result ethnic disputes have
become ethnic hatred. This wound will need a very
long time to heal. Historical lessons must be learned.
The tragedy of NATO’s military intervention into
Kosovo cannot be repeated.
The evolution of the Kosovo situation as well as
the entire Balkan situation, deserves our in-depth
reflection. The majority of the countries in the world,
especially the countries in the Balkans, are multi-ethnic
and multi-religious. Differences among different
religions and ethnic groups should be settled through
peaceful means, rather than deepening their
differences.
There have always been two forces in the Balkan
region, one for unity and one for separation. The
international community should suppress the separatist
forces and extremists. Only in this way can the Balkans
achieve long-term stability and development.
Otherwise, if separatist forces and extremists are
condoned and encouraged, conflicts and wars will erupt
again and the Balkans will be deprived permanently of
peace.

S/PV.4164

Furthermore, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations should not encourage and support any
activity of changing a Government of a country
through foreign interference.
We always advocate equality, unity, harmonious
co-existence and common development for the people
of countries with a multi-national character. We are
against any prejudice, oppression and killing based on
ethnicity. We are also opposed to any effort to create
ethnic division or to sabotage national unity.
Fundamentally speaking, the Kosovo problem can
be resolved only within the framework of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, through substantial autonomy
and a good ethnic policy that guarantees the rights and
interests of all ethnic groups and protects and promotes
the human rights of all ethnic groups. Achieving
autonomy should be done by way of negotiations and
solutions acceptable to both sides. The Chinese
delegation believes that only by restoring the national
harmony that the Balkan region once enjoyed can
genuine and lasting peace and prosperity be achieved.
Other than this there is no way out.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks Mr.
Bildt for his briefing of the Security Council on the
positive developments in the Balkans and on the
difficult issues still faced by the region.
We take note of these positive developments in
the region, which we believe auger well for the
achievement of sustainable peace. There are ongoing
regional initiatives aimed at reconciliation and
reintegration, and these are commendable. It is for this
reason that my delegation attaches great importance to
the Stability Pact process, to the Central European
initiative and the working community of the Danube
regions. The relations between States continue to
evolve, and we encourage and support attempts at
regional cooperation, integration and development.
We have seen the induction of new leaders in
Croatia following elections, and the continuation of
policies that foster stability, not only in Croatia but in
the entire region. Their recent accession to the
partnership for peace at the recent North Atlantic
Treaty Organization(NATO) meeting in Florence is a
positive step forward. We also note the recent signing
of an agreement between Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina on financial assistance to the federal
Ministry of Defense. The holding of local elections

recently in Montenegro is also a positive development
for the region.
In light of these positive developments, my
delegation regrets the necessity for the procedures the
Council was forced to employ today in determining
participation in our discussions of the Balkans region.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to be
further isolated from full participation in the progress
being made in the region, for reasons which have been
stated here today. This dilemma remains, and it is
difficult to move forward without a solution. Our
decision here this morning provides glaring proof of
the magnitude of this problem. This exclusion affects
stability in the region, and we are hopeful that a
solution will be found soon.
The United Nations continues to work diligently
in Kosovo to bring stability to that territory as quickly
as possible on par with the countries of the region, both
economically and politically. Ongoing efforts to reduce
the level of violence and the discrimination against
minorities are crucial to this process. The recent
discovery of a cache of arms in Kosovo is a major
concern.
We have noted reports in the media that Mr.
Kouchner intends to establish a hybrid court in Kosovo
to try cases related to war crimes and other related
crimes in Kosovo.
While we recognize this to be in response to the
climate of criminality prevailing in Kosovo and the
admitted failure to establish an impartial judiciary in
Kosovo, it is not clear to us the extent of jurisdiction
that is contemplated. The reach of that jurisdiction will
require careful consideration. The concurrent
jurisdiction with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) over certain
criminal acts must be appropriately defined so as to
avoid duplication and conflict. This takes on added
significance in the context of expansion of the ICTY
that is currently being considered by the Security
Council.
My delegation views this decision by Mr.
Kouchner as very significant for the region. Because
this decision is imminent, we have to assume that this
matter has been under consideration for some time.
However, the Council has not been briefed on this issue
in recent reports. I also note that Mr. Bildt made no
mention of this, and my delegation would welcome his
comments.

17

S/PV.4164

The progress made recently in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly to ensure the full
implementation of the Dayton accords and to ensure
membership in the Council of Europe, also constitutes
a positive development. We are concerned, however,
that, for all those positive developments, the refugee
situation throughout the region remains to be solved.
We hope that this matter will retain priority status in
regional talks aimed at reconciliation.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me express my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We cannot fail to
observe that the procedural problem we had to face this
morning had to do with an uneasiness — indeed, a
reluctance — on the part of many members of the
international community to deal with the regime in
Belgrade. We trust that the procedural decision we took
this morning has settled this issue once and for all. We
hope also that the procedural question will not deflect
us from discussing the substantive aspects of the issue
before us today.
We are grateful for the very useful briefing by
Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Balkans. We would also like to welcome to the
Council Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council of the European Union and High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, and to thank him for his
statement, which has certainly contributed to enriching
our discussion.
My delegation is aware that discussions of this
issue have not been limited to the Security Council but
have also taken place in various other forums, in
particular the European Union, as Mr. Solana just
described. We, however, believe that the Council has
an important role to play, given its responsibilities
under the United Nations Charter; indeed, as Mr. Bildt
has stressed many a time, continued international
consensus and support are crucial to the overall efforts
to promote peace in the Balkans.
At the meeting the Council had with Mr. Bildt
last February, my delegation emphasized four core
areas that are vital to the success of the international
efforts to achieve self-sustaining peace and stability,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo.
Those areas relate to, first, the return of refugees and
displaced persons; secondly, the reconciliation process
and the important role of the International Criminal

18

Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in contributing to
the process; thirdly, the need for unstinted international
support for and active engagement in the current peace
process; and last but not least, the role of the leadership
of countries of the region.
We have paid particular attention to what
Mr. Bildt has said on these areas, because we believe
that progress on these issues will have a positive
impact on the peace process and on the overall
stabilization of the Balkan region. In addition to these
core areas, the success of the international involvement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo must be
based on a long-term comprehensive approach
encompassing many other aspects of the problem. We
have taken careful note of Mr. Bildt’s analysis and
assessment, as well as of the proposed framework for a
comprehensive peace, especially in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo, and in the Balkan region
as a whole. We were also gratified to hear from
Mr. Solana the perspective and priorities of the
European Union relating to these critical issues.
Clearly, the strengthening of democratic
institutions and economic and social rehabilitation are
crucial factors for self-sustaining peace in all postconflict situations. That is where the international
community’s efforts must be matched by a strong
commitment and a constructive attitude on the part of
local leaders. At the same time, good-neighbourly
relations, close cooperation and integration between
and among all the Balkan countries through appropriate
regional frameworks and structures are also important
ingredients in the consolidation of peace and
sustainable development. The early resolution of the
issue of succession of the countries of the former
Yugoslavia will certainly contribute to the attainment
of that goal. We share the views expressed this morning
by Ambassador Holbrooke of the United States on the
issue of the status of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in the context of the United Nations, which
predicated our position in the procedural vote taken
this morning.
Any meaningful discussion of the future of the
Balkans cannot but address the issue of the Belgrade
regime and how to deal with it. Indeed, the procedural
problem faced by the Council at the beginning of this
morning’s meeting was symptomatic of that problem
and brought into sharp focus the uneasiness — indeed,
as I said, the reluctance — of the larger part of the
international community to deal with the regime in

S/PV.4164

Belgrade and its representatives. This conundrum of
how to deal with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
cannot be resolved so long as its Government continues
to be led by people who have been indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We entirely agree with what Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein said when he addressed the Council last
week:
“The Milosević regime in Serbia remains
the fundamental obstacle to improved regional
peace and stability and a better life not only for
Serbs but for all people there”. (S/PV.4154, p. 7)
We also share the views expressed by Mr. Bildt, who
directly addressed the issue this morning.
The return of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to a mainstream regional and international life will
clearly be facilitated by the trial of those indictees, by
the proper readmission of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into the United Nations and by the
settlement of the outstanding issue of successor States
to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In that regard, my delegation commends the position
taken by Ms. Carla Del Ponte, the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, opposing any move towards an
accommodation with Mr. Milosević with respect to his
indictment by the Tribunal. Such a deal would make a
mockery of the entire international tribunal process and
would be a travesty of justice for those on trial and
those already sentenced by the court. Only the meting
out of justice to those indicted by the Tribunal and
those to be indicted in the future, representing the
forces of extremism and disintegration as Mr. Bildt has
so eloquently called them, would strengthen the
process of tolerance and integration around which the
search for self-sustaining stability in the region as a
whole will revolve. It is the forces involved in that
process which should be embraced and strongly
supported by the international community, including
the Council, not those negative forces of
obstructionism.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We welcome
once again Mr. Carl Bildt, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans. We thank him for
his thorough and engaging statement. We commend his
efforts and his initiatives for self-sustaining peace and
stability in the Balkans. We are aware of the vastness

of the task ahead of him and of the complexity of the
issues in the region.
The statement by Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, was very enriching to our
consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Balkans is a region where disintegrative
forces are still dominant and where the international
political equation is not always fully supportive of
cohesion or of the implementation of peace objectives.
The issues there are different in different areas, but
some common threads run through all of them. While
we need to take individual approaches to deal with
specific problems, there is also a need to view them
from a regional macro-perspective. There have been
some such initiatives, the most important being the
Stability Pact initiative of last year, sponsored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We note that its efforts range from economic
reconstruction to political reform and closer regional
integration. However, further regional efforts, with
firm support from the Security Council, could
contribute much to settling the long-term issues of
achieving peace in the Balkans.
The United Nations should continue to focus on a
number of areas in this region. First, the general
security situation needs improvement. The region has
been involved in war and inter-ethnic conflict for too
long. Human rights have been grossly violated, and
justice has been denied. There has been too much
violence from attacks and counter-attacks on
minorities. The situation is particularly disturbing
where there is a minority presence.
The international community has been putting up
its best efforts, and considerable progress has also been
achieved, but much more remains to be done.
Secondly, the issue of missing persons and
detainees is important, particularly in Kosovo. There
should be an early settlement of the fate of people who
remain lost or held captive. Protracting this problem
will work against attempts to build trust and confidence
between and among the different communities.
Thirdly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons is one of the chief concerns in the
region. In Kosovo, a large number of refugees have
returned; displaced persons are also settling into their
own places. But this is also accompanied by an outflow

19

S/PV.4164

of Serbs from many areas. Although large-scale return
has taken place, the refugee problem is still one of the
main concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack of
adequate security assurance, compounded by painful
memories of the recent past, are problems to overcome.
We need to invest further in confidence-building
measures.
Finally, speeding up economic development and
reconstruction in the region is a key factor which can
rekindle hope among people. It will be a natural
deterrent to violence. The international community has
made a good deal of investment, but it still remains
inadequate. A massive plan of post-war economic
recovery and reconstruction is needed to give the
region a thriving economy.
We must actively seek change in the region, and
we are very encouraged by the recent initiation of the
democratic process in a number of countries in the
region. We believe it is important to seize that
democratic energy and build on it to create a region of
peace and development. Any attempts without an allout commitment on the part of the international
community or international political consensus will be
detrimental to the region, where peace can be achieved
and should be achieved.
We should concentrate on rising above political
differences in order to achieve peace in a region which
has long been in the grip of conflicting forces, at a
tremendous cost to the broader interests of the people
of the region.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): Mr. President, thank you
for organizing this open debate on a matter of
enormous importance to all Members of the
Organization. I would also like to warmly welcome
both Mr. Bildt and Mr. Solana to our meeting this
morning. Their presence and their remarks make a
vitally important contribution to the Security Council’s
consideration of this difficult and complex matter.
This morning I would like to comment on a few
of the points which Mr. Bildt highlighted in his
briefing. We agree with his observation that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia remains a key to sustainable
peace in the Balkans. It is a point which may sound
trite, but we believe it bears repeating. We have seen
time and time again that any possibility of constructive
engagement is blocked by the current regime in
Belgrade. We have seen no glimmer of recognition
from Belgrade of the need to re-examine the policies

20

that have created such hardship, instability and abuse
of people throughout the region over the last decade.
If anything, recent events in Yugoslavia provide
ample evidence that Belgrade has no intention of
putting an end to its repression of independent media,
political
opposition
and
non-governmental
organizations, and that it has no intention of putting an
end to its systematic use of violence in pursuing its
political objectives.
It is crucial for the international community to
monitor Belgrade’s performance closely and to act in a
coordinated fashion to promote broad democratic
development. The international community has a role
to play, despite the obstructionism in Belgrade. For
example, we should examine regionally based
measures to encourage Montenegro to continue to
pursue a prudent process of democratic and economic
reform. We can also take measures to support
independent, reform-minded voices in Serbia. We
would be interested in Mr. Bildt’s thoughts on how best
to achieve these goals in the interest of stability
throughout the region.
A great part of that stability depends, in our view,
on the effective management of the situation in
Kosovo. However, Kosovo’s final status cannot be
resolved until there are viable prospects for a genuine
and productive negotiation between a responsible
Government
in
Belgrade
and
democratically
accountable representatives in Pristina. It is important
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to proceed with the interim
development of Kosovo’s political institutions, as
foreseen in resolution 1244 (1999), including early,
free and fair elections at the municipal level, in which
we should be encouraging all parties to participate.
In order to implement resolution 1244 (1999)
fully, and to establish a climate conducive to
reconciliation, it is up to Belgrade to make constructive
gestures on such matters as war crimes prosecution,
facilitating the preparation for elections, including
allowing the participation of Kosovar Serbs in the
upcoming municipal elections in Kosovo, and
addressing the issue of missing and detained Kosovars.
We welcome UNMIK’s lead in bringing these issues to
the forefront.
Turning to other parts of the region, Canada
strongly supports the three priorities — strengthening
common institutions, refugee returns and economic

S/PV.4164

development — set out by High Representative
Petritsch at the recent Bosnia Peace Implementation
Council ministerial meeting in Brussels. These areas
remain critical for accelerated implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and for self-sustaining peace
to take root in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Further south, Canada is encouraged by the
efforts undertaken by the Government of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to reform its
economy and political structures and to maintain its
ethnic balance. In this regard, we are happy that
negotiations between the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the European Union on its future status
as an associate member are progressing smoothly.
We welcome the recent granting of access to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s Partnership for
Peace to Croatia. It is a clear recognition of the recent
responsive attitude Croatia has adopted towards its
international obligations. The new Croatian authorities
are now making a real contribution to the peacebuilding process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
to stability throughout the region, by reducing and
making more transparent its assistance to Bosnian
Croats and by undertaking initiatives aimed at fostering
refugee returns. This should be fully supported by the
Council for the important impetus it provides to peace
implementation elsewhere in the Balkans.
Lastly, we agree with Mr. Bildt that lasting peace
in the region can best be achieved by the integration of
the Balkans into European structures and through
continuing the cooperation and achieving the consensus
of the international community. In the latter task, the
Security Council has an important role to play.
Fortunately, there is wide, if not unanimous, agreement
within the Council that repression and obstructionism
must not be tolerated in the search for stability in the
Balkans.
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
warmly welcome both Mr. Bildt and Mr. Solana, and to
thank Mr. Bildt for his comprehensive briefing.
Mindful of the concept to hold today's meeting in
the form of an interactive dialogue with the Special
Envoy, I would like to limit my remarks to the
following several points.
After decade-long efforts to bring about lasting
peace and reconciliation to the Balkans, the situation in
this part of Europe still requires constant international

attention and involvement. In responding to different
conflicts in the Balkans over the years, the
international community — with the United Nations at
the forefront — has acquired a long record of both
successes and failures. What we have just heard from
Mr. Bildt reinforces my delegation’s conviction that the
establishment of a lasting and self-sustaining peace in
the Balkans can be achieved only by addressing all the
existing problems of a regional dimension, and with the
participation of all the countries of the region. We
totally agree with Mr. Bildt’s view on the need for a
political framework that provides stability for the entire
region, since to contain or to solve the tensions in one
part of the region will not suffice.
Today it seems that all of us are largely satisfied
with the remarkable progress achieved by the postconflict peace-building efforts in Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the absence of inter-ethnic
violence in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. At the same time, the dangerous
developments in the situation in Kosovo remain a
source of grave concern to us, and are a constant threat
to international achievements towards peace in the
whole region. My country is deeply disturbed by the
increasing upsurge of ethnically related violence
against non-Albanians. This must be stopped by any
means.
We cannot be satisfied with Kosovo’s steady
movement towards independence.
We were pleased to take note of Mr. Bildt’s
remark made at the South-East Europe high-level
conference held in Tokyo last May. We can affirm the
similarity of our assessments that a regional political
framework for Kosovo is possible only if there is an
international consensus on what we are trying to
achieve there. It is difficult to disagree with Mr. Bildt
that the future of Kosovo should one day be settled
through an arrangement and agreement between Serbia
and Kosovo, thus making peace in the region possible.
This is the only viable scenario.
At the same time, we are not convinced that there
cannot be any dialogue to that end with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia under its current leadership.
Such a dialogue should be sought for the sake of peace
in the region and for the future of this country. In our
view, the increasing tendency to exclude and isolate the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the regional
framework is counter-productive, because this country

21

S/PV.4164

remains a key player in a final settlement of any
existing problems and disputes in the Balkans.
We agree with the point that the future structure
of the entire region can be substantially affected by the
future of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. What we
should therefore avoid now is putting this country in
such a position that will impede it from becoming
democratic and integrated into the European family of
nations.
I would also like to reiterate our support for Mr.
Bildt’s view that any long-term strategy for stability
and peace in the region is based on the successful
pursuit of the comprehensive reform of all societies
devastated by conflict, the reintegration of the region
into the European and global infrastructure, and
reconciliation between all the States and nations of the
region.
Undoubtedly, the issues of refugee returns and
economic reconstruction remain central to the entire
process of ensuring regional stability. In this context,
factual accounts of increased returns of refugees and
displaced persons to Bosnia are encouraging. The
commitment of the new leadership of Croatia to
solving the existing problem of refugee returns to that
country should also be acknowledged. At the same
time, we believe that much more has to be done to
create the conditions for solving the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and for reversing the continued
mass exodus of national minorities from Kosovo as a
result of systematic acts of violence against them.
My delegation again emphasizes the significance
of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe as a
basic document that provides a solid regional
framework for the economic reconstruction of the
Balkans as a whole, and reiterates Ukraine’s interest in
becoming closely associated with this process.
I must now raise another point that seems to be of
the utmost importance. That point is the lack of
established dialogue between the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General
and
the
Security
Council.
Unfortunately, the Council does not have at its disposal
sufficient information about Mr. Bildt’s activities in the
Balkans and his regional approaches. We are grateful to
Mr. Bildt for his presentation today, but even an
excellent briefing cannot substitute for a written
document containing concrete recommendations for the
Council’s consideration. We are disappointed by the

22

fact that in the last three months the Secretariat has
failed to prepare and to submit a report to the Council
on Mr. Bildt’s activities and regional approaches for
the Balkans. In our view, such a document is
indispensable. We also see the merit of defining the
time-frame for submitting such reports to the Council
on a regular basis, say every six months.
My delegation is of the view that Mr. Bildt’s
broad mandate can allow him to address some Balkan
issues that for different reasons are outside the focus of
the Security Council. We also deem it important for
Mr. Bildt to play a more active role in the coordination
of efforts between the international actors on the
ground, including all the United Nations missions in
the Balkans. Therefore the establishment of the usual
practice of such briefings in the form of an interactive
dialogue between the Council and the Special
Envoy — such as the one we are having today — along
with the submission of the Secretary-General’s report
on a regular basis, will be quite beneficial. It will
obviously enable the Council to have a better grasp of
Mr. Bildt’s activities and, when necessary, to extend its
political support to him or use his good offices.
Back in February, my delegation also asked the
Secretariat to provide additional information about the
activities of the second Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Balkans, Mr. Kukan. Unfortunately, no
briefing has been delivered. I would therefore like to
repeat that request again.
Finally, let me reiterate the readiness of my
country to continue its contribution to our joint
endeavours to restore peace and security in the Balkans
from the regional perspective advocated by Mr. Bildt.
We look forward to positively considering his new
ideas presented to the Council today.
In conclusion, I wish Mr. Bildt every success in
his activities in the Balkans.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin my statement by welcoming the
presence here of Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy and Secretary-General of
the Council of the European Union. I would also like to
thank them for their messages.
Because of its past — but also because of its
present — the Balkan region seems to be synonymous

S/PV.4164

with war and inter-ethnic conflict. However, we do not
believe that this situation is irreversible. Although it
may sometimes appear very difficult or even
impossible to do, we think it will be possible to achieve
a stable and peaceful region if the members of the
region share the principles of pluralism, respect for
human rights and the rule of law — in a short, an
attachment to the institutions and values considered to
be indispensable for representative democracy. In our
opinion, it would also be necessary for the States of the
region to achieve a level of economic and social
development that they do not have today, and for their
peoples to have the hope of achieving it.
A quick glance at the current situation in the
Balkans demonstrates that positive changes are taking
place in Croatia, while there is still a long way to go in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The future of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is unknown. There are
encouraging signs in Kosovo, thanks to the efforts of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Stabilization Force,
although those signs are sometimes clouded by the
behaviour of those who continue to encourage division
and extreme nationalism.
In this connection, allow me to recall that a few
days ago, when discussing Kosovo, my delegation
pointed out that when Argentina voted in favour of
resolution 1244 (1999), it did so to protect a people
who were being victimized by ethnic cleansing, in
violation of the most basic human values. But this was
in no way meant to permit or encourage those who
were victims of violence at the time to become the
victimizers of another minority on which they were
called on to protect.
Montenegro is in a difficult situation, and its
relationship with Serbia is extremely worrisome. So far
we have seen a totalitarian regime in Serbia that does
not respect human rights. These situations are not
isolated from each other; rather, there is a natural
interrelationship at work between them. The
international community must try to enable the positive
changes we are seeing in Croatia, for example, to have
a positive influence on the other countries of the region
in which there are conflicts, and try to promote a
collective awareness that the peoples and the countries
of the Balkans share a common destiny that transcends
immediate, individual short-term interests.
The
transition
from
authoritarianism
to
democracy and a market economy, from being gagged

to freedom of expression, from discrimination to equal
opportunity and from taking justice into one’s own
hands to the rule of law can be achieved only through
great effort and sacrifice. These efforts and sacrifices
are not the sole responsibility of the international
community, which gives human and material resources.
They are also the fundamental responsibility of the
Balkan people themselves; the desire for reconciliation
must come from them. Reconciliation can be
encouraged, but it cannot be imposed.
The goal of achieving a stable and peaceful
Balkan region will become a reality when the idea of
that common destiny prevails over ethnic and religious
differences, when corruption and crime cease to be a
way of life, when respect for one’s neighbour becomes
more important than hatred and violence and when the
justice of judges becomes more important than the
justice of revenge. We have hope that the countries and
peoples of the Balkans will be able to achieve
coexistence in the framework of the democratic values
that prevail today in Europe, a region to which the
Balkans belong because of geography, culture and
history.
To this end, the totalitarian obstacles that still
exist will have to be eliminated. This seems to be a
sine qua non for the beginning of the process of
reconciliation and tolerance.
Before concluding, I wish to reaffirm the support
for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia that we expressed when Judge Jorda and
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte were here with us.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on having convened
this meeting to consider the situation in the Balkan
region. I also wish to address thanks to Mr. Carl Bildt,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Balkans, for his full and informative briefing. I wish to
express to Mr. Solana my Government’s appreciation
for the commitment shown by the European Union in
that part of the world and in many other regions in
order to restore peace and stability.
Aware of the specific characteristics of each
country of the region, we think that a joint,
comprehensive and targeted initiative is the way to
move towards the restoration and consolidation of
peace in the Balkan region. Indeed, the problems in the
Balkan region are to a certain extent similar and are
closely linked. Any solution advocated here can

23

S/PV.4164

succeed only if we take into consideration the general
environment, and it would run the risk of practical
difficulties of implementation. Geographical unity, the
human component and the common past of the Balkans
militate in favour of a comprehensive approach. The
fragile yet stable situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the passing of the urgency phase in Kosovo,
are positive signs that give hope for the future
prosperity of the entire region.
There are several problems seriously affecting
peace and stability in the region that could be resolved
by taking a joint approach. I refer in particular to the
question of refugees and displaced persons, which,
because of its transnational nature, requires the
cooperation of all the parties concerned.
The same goes for economic matters. We think
that increasing economic contacts between the Balkan
countries is not only a factor for prosperity and
stability, but it is also a way to strengthen confidence
among the peoples of the region. Interregional
cooperation could also be extended in order to combat
illegal activities in the region that imperil the security
and well-being of citizens.
In order to obtain the cooperation of all parties
concerned, we think it is necessary to offer all the
countries in the Balkans a grand plan in a regional
context. That is why we think the Stability Pact for
South-East Europe, proposed by the European Union,
is an opportunity for the Balkan region to promote
peace and security. This is an appropriate framework
that should be implemented promptly so that it can be
manifested in real terms through the promotion of
political and economic reform and the strengthening of
regional security. The adoption of the Charter on good
neighbourly
relations,
stability,
security
and
cooperation in South-East Europe, adopted by the
summit of South-East European countries on 12
February 2000, as well as the new regional integration
process, the Adriatic-Ionian initiative, launched
recently in Italy, are actions that attest to the
commitment of the parties to respond positively to the
international community’s efforts to restore confidence
to the region.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a real pleasure to have Carl Bildt with us this morning
and to hear his important analysis of the overall scene
in the Balkans and what we need to do in the stage
ahead. It is also a marvellous occasion to have with us

24

today the High Representative for the European Union
Common Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier
Solana. He has made a powerful statement of the
European Union’s input into Balkans policy. It was,
after all, time that the European Union’s role in the
Balkans should be comprehensively stated in the
Security Council, and it is good to see the
representative of the United States acknowledging that.
I have nothing whatsoever to add to what Mr.
Javier Solana has said. The United Kingdom obviously
supports his statement 100 per cent. But, Mr. President,
you asked us to be interactive this morning, and I want
to pick up one or two things from statements and
events from earlier in the day.
First of all, the fuss about the status of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: it was a train wreck
waiting to happen. The current position of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in this Organization is wrong
and unsustainable. It is no good their continuing to ask
to speak at events like this, when the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia should be seeking to establish its status
in this Organization. I hope that many of us will try to
make that happen. The United Kingdom is for
universality in this Organization. It is not just a matter
of the unacceptable policies of Belgrade at this stage.
There is a status problem here that needs to be sorted
out.
Second is a point about security. Carl Bildt’s
statement to us this morning amounts in some its
aspects to an early warning on Montenegro, on the
unsustainability of security in the Balkans while
Belgrade takes its present approach to regional matters
and on the persistence of tensions there anyway.
Not many people have referred this morning to
the important role of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
Kosovo. Like Jamaica, we welcome the recent seizure
by KFOR of a large cache of weapons in the Drenica
valley. KFOR is leading the ongoing task of finding
and confiscating illegal weapons with increasing
success. These actions are actually fundamental to
undermining extremist minorities that prefer violence
and intimidation to tolerance and cooperation, and we
must keep them going.
There are times when the judicious use of force is
necessary to set the limits of brutal behaviour. That
includes last year and this in Kosovo.

S/PV.4164

Then there is the action of the Tribunal, which
this morning has been called “politicized”. Well, when
political leaderships are involved in the brutality that
we see in the Balkans, of course there are going to be
political aspects, but when there is such substantial
evidence that those political leaderships have been
involved in crimes against humanity, difficult decisions
have to be made and those decisions should be
supported by this Council, which created the Tribunals
in question.
Thirdly, I just want to mention Bosnia. General
elections are coming up in Bosnia in November and it
is time — and I think Carl Bildt pointed to this by
expressing concern about the aid dependence of
Bosnia — for political leadership there to begin to take
a responsibility for the future of the people of Bosnia.
It would be wonderful if Bosnia could show an
example to Kosovo in this respect and take up again
the responsibility of political leadership that has been
so sadly lacking in this particular region.
I return again to the important role of the
European Union (EU) in this whole question. I think
that, with the greater regional cooperation that we are
seeing now in the Balkans and the dynamic
engagement of the EU, we can encourage all the people
of the Balkans to resolve their differences
pragmatically and peacefully. That is the way to go and
I hope this Council can support it.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We, too, are
grateful to Special Envoy Carl Bildt for his
comprehensive statement. In response, we will be brief,
as the European Union has spoken on our behalf.
It is appropriate that the European Union as such
should participate in this debate on the Balkans, for we
should once and for all be finished with the notion that
the countries which constitute the European Union are
naturally blessed with peace, whereas those which lie
in the Balkan peninsula are predestined for trials and
tribulations. Let us not forget that the concept of the
European Coal and Steel Community, the forerunner of
today’s European Union, was based on the belief that a
new economic and political framework was needed if
future Franco-German conflict was to be avoided. That
was a totally self-evident fear when Robert Schuman
launched his plan exactly half a century ago. We
believe that what has been possible in Western Europe
should also be achievable in the Balkans.

In 1991, the Netherlands assumed the presidency
of the European Union — which was not yet called
“Union” at the time — less than a week after the
declaration of independence by Croatia and Slovenia.
This may explain why my delegation feels so deeply
involved in everything that has happened in the region
since. Throughout our presidency, until the end of
1991, our attempts to develop a common Balkans
policy were repeatedly hindered by fanciful stories in
the media about hidden historical ties between France
and Serbia or between Germany and Croatia, or about
Britain’s insular lack of interest in either of them. At
the time these stories were written, they were already a
bit of a caricature, but today all these special ties are
completely a thing of the past. The European Union has
really succeeded in forging a common Balkan policy.
That is why it is my pleasure to stop here and
subscribe to everything that has been said by the
Permanent Representative of Portugal and by
Mr. Solana as the High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Mr. Theron (Namibia): We, too, would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Carl Bildt, for his informative briefing this
morning. We should also like to thank and
acknowledge the positive statements made by
Mr. Solana and Mr. Monteiro of the European Union.
Namibia remains concerned about the unsettled
political situation in the Balkans, in particular Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the province of Kosovo.
However, for today, we think it worthwhile to reflect
on reasons for optimism over the future of the Balkans,
despite the many problems and difficulties that face the
region.
In this regard, the Stability Pact programme put
forward by States members of the European Union and
others outside Europe is an important programme for
reviving the socio-economic situation in the Balkans.
However, we would like to see the programme applied
to cover the entire region. Namibia believes that the
idea behind the Stability Pact was and remains an
excellent concept to bring stability to the region and to
allow these regional States to join the rest of the
European family.
With regard to some of the specific areas of
concern, my delegation supports the forthcoming
municipal elections in Kosovo and commends the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration in

25

S/PV.4164

of

statement made by Mr. Bildt, for which we thank him
once again.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, we agree with
Mr. Bildt that the road ahead is still long and
precarious. Therefore, the role of the international
community is essential because refugees, inter alia,
must be given the opportunity to return to their homes
and internally displaced persons must be afforded the
dignity and freedom to reclaim their right to
citizenship.

My second point is that this meeting of the
Security Council is an unprecedented one. For the first
time, and I welcome this wholeheartedly, the SecretaryGeneral of the Council and High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy,
Mr. Solana, as well as the Presidency of the European
Union, spoke in this Chamber. This reflects the
institutional evolution of the European Union being
brought into the work of this Council. France about to
take over from Portugal at the head of the European
Union, is pleased that an agreement was able to emerge
so that Mr. Solana could speak today, in accordance
with our wishes.

Kosovo command,
Mr. Kouchner.

under

the

leadership

In order to provide momentum for peace and
stability efforts in the Balkans, my delegation still
believes that it is incumbent upon the international
community to invest in the possibility of organizing a
conference for dialogue and reconciliation to
complement the elements of regional cooperation very
well articulated today in the Stability Pact programme.
This indaba must bring members of the political
leadership, civil society and the private sector together
to deliberate on their region and devise appropriate
solutions to the problems that have bedevilled the
region for decades, if not centuries. This, in our view,
will consolidate the situation and provide appropriate
strategies for the way forward, and might prevent
further crises in the future.
In conclusion, I once again wish to express our
appreciation for the briefing by the Special Envoy and
my delegation wishes to encourage him to continue the
good work of engaging the leaders of the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
I shall confine myself to making four brief
remarks. First of all, this meeting of the Security
Council was necessary and is taking place at the right
time. In the course of this month of June, the Council
has been able to address in some depth the situations in
Kosovo and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has also
heard the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, thereby demonstrating
its commitment to international justice.
It is good that the Security Council now has an
overall vision for the future of the Balkan region, the
very subject of the consistently clear and precise

26

My third point is that these statements were
particularly important and necessary, in that the
European Union is very strongly involved in the
Balkans in restoring what has been destroyed, in
bandaging the wounds that are still open and, above all,
in giving a vision of the future to the States of the
region.
My last point is that in this spirit, France has
proposed the holding of a summit between the
European Union and the countries of the western
Balkans, which, although they are at different stages,
are the furthest along in their democratic evolution.
The European Council, meeting on 19 and 20 June in
Santa Maria da Fera welcomed this idea. The Council
of Europe recognized that such a summit would
provide an opportunity for the countries of the region
to receive further assurances of the solidarity of Europe
and would provide an opportunity to study with them
ways of speeding up the process of democratic and
economic reform. The meeting could be held in Zagreb
and would provide the European Union with an
opportunity to bring even more influence to bear in
encouraging the recent democratic developments. This
would also help create new momentum.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker on my list is the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Johansen. I welcome him and I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

S/PV.4164

Mr. Johansen (Norway): Norway would like to
express its appreciation for the briefing made by the
United Nations Special Envoy Carl Bildt as well as its
concurrence with the assessment made by the European
Union and Mr. Javier Solana.
Developments in South-East Europe are of vital
importance to the stability of Europe and the
integration process on the European continent. As a
partner in this process, Norway has been engaged all
over the Balkans, as a major donor to the efforts to
promote lasting peace and development in the region,
providing peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel
and financial support.
Norway remains firmly committed and engaged.
Assisting the people and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the peace implementation process has
naturally been a primary focus of our efforts. Important
progress has been achieved since Dayton, and we
encourage the Bosnian authorities to continue to pursue
the priorities set by the Peace Implementation Council
with determination.
Developments in Serbia and Montenegro are of
vital importance to stability and security in the region.
Norway has strongly condemned the Serbian
Government’s recent action against independent media
and the systematic campaign of repression against the
democratic opposition. These actions only serve to
further isolate Serbia from the rest of Europe. The
Milosević regime is becoming increasingly totalitarian.
It is moving to effectively block assistance to
opposition forces.
Norway has developed close cooperation with
several opposition-led municipalities and will continue
to provide assistance to them, as well as to independent
media and civil society.
The continued violence in Kosovo is cause for
great concern. The upsurge in ethnically motivated
violence is totally unacceptable and must be stopped.
The recent killings of Kosovo Serbs seem to be aimed
at forcing remaining Kosovo Serbs to flee, as well as at
preventing the return to Serbia of those already
displaced. Improved security for all citizens of Kosovo
is, in our view, a prerequisite for sustainable
development in Kosovo.
Norway welcomes the commitment to farreaching reforms shown by the Croatian Government.
We believe it is important to ensure that the Račan

Government succeeds. A democratic Croatia will be a
catalyst for reform throughout the region.
Norway has become a full-fledged participant in
the Stability Pact for South-East Europe. This reflects
Norway’s commitment to continue to participate in and
contribute to the processes of bringing peace and
stability to the region. We have set aside $15 million
for specific Stability Pact projects. Our total assistance
to the region will reach approximately $100 million
this year.
In addition, Norway offers improved trading
conditions for the countries of the region, either
through free trade agreements, together with our
European Free Trade Association partners, or
unilaterally by granting General System of Preferences
treatment.
In the view of the Norwegian Government,
Macedonia deserves special attention and increased
support from the international community. In a region
otherwise marked by turbulence and violence,
Macedonian leaders have skilfully and peacefully
managed the transition to an independent State, now
seeking integration in Euro-Atlantic structures.
It is now our duty to support the Macedonian
people and the Government in their efforts. This will
be an important contribution to stability for and
peaceful coexistence between the nations of South-East
Europe.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I would like to express
my delegation’s gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this very timely meeting on the Balkan
region. I also appreciate the Council’s decision to
enable Japan to express its views on this issue of
critical importance for international peace. As Mr. Carl
Bildt, the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the
Balkans, has stated on various occasions, in addition to
responding to problems specific to the situation in
various parts of the Balkan region, it is important to
consider the region as a whole, in a comprehensive
manner.
Sharing this perception, Japan has sought to
develop the discussion on how the stability of the
entire Balkan region might best be realized. This past

27

S/PV.4164

May, for example, it convened in Tokyo a high-level
conference on South-East Europe, which was attended
by representatives of countries in the region and by
many other dignitaries, including Mr. Carl Bildt and
Mr. Bodo Hombach, Special Coordinator of the
Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe. At that
meeting, Japan’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Yohei Kono,
stressed the importance of building a community where
different ethnic groups can live in harmony and the
importance of developing a peace-oriented society. The
ensuing discussion focused on how to promote
reconciliation among diverse ethnic communities
through cultural activities, education, independent
media, environmental protection and a market-based
economy.
As we survey the Balkan region, positive
developments are clearly discernible in certain areas.
As to Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the ministerial
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council that was
held at Brussels in May, the importance of economic
reform, the repatriation of refugees and displaced
persons, and the establishment and strengthening of
common institutions was reaffirmed. In that
connection, I wish to express my delegation’s support
for the active efforts which Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, has
made in each of these important areas.
Although there continues to be an international
military and civilian presence in the region, as again
authorized by the Security Council on 21 June, it
cannot remain there indefinitely. Japan shares with Mr.
Petritsch the view that it is important for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves to make greater
efforts to assume “ownership” of the peace process.
Only in that way can lasting peace and security be
achieved.
In Kosovo, although Japan appreciates the
progress which the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has so far achieved,
several problems still remain. Japan cannot condone
the acts of intolerance by nationalistic extremists
against other ethnic groups. Japan attaches great
importance to the municipal election planned for this
autumn in order to establish a democratic, multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo, and it calls upon the Serb
community to cooperate. We also call upon the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate in registering the

28

Serbian population to enable them to participate in the
election.
Finally, concerning the situation in Croatia, we
welcome the victory in the recent election by political
parties that emphasized cooperation with the
international community, and we earnestly hope that
this development will have ramifications in the
neighbouring countries.
Japan has contributed to the stability and
development of the Balkan region through its financial
assistance. In 1996, Japan pledged about $500 million
for economic rehabilitation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and has been working steadily to implement that
assistance. In addition, Japan has already disbursed a
total of approximately $177 million for assistance to
Kosovo and has also pledged $60 million to
neighbouring countries. We intend to continue to
remain actively engaged in international efforts to
enhance peace and stability throughout the Balkan
region.
I cannot conclude my remarks without
commenting on the situation in the Republic of Serbia.
Despite the progress that has been made in various
parts of the Balkan region, it must be recognized that
the further development of those areas cannot be
attained without the democratization of Serbia. I
believe, therefore, that it is incumbent upon the
international community to cooperate in fostering
democracy in Serbia; only then will lasting peace and
stability prevail throughout the Balkan region.
The President (spoke in French): Ten speakers
remain to be heard, which is evidence of the
importance of this debate. I propose to suspend the
meeting now, and to resume our consideration of the
item on the agenda at 2.30 p.m. sharp.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.
