General Assembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

50

34 / 78.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in South Asia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/73 of 10 December 1976, 32/83 of 12 December 1977 and 33/65 of 14 December 1978 concerning
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in ~arious regio!1s of the
world is one of the measures which can contnbute most
effectively to the objectives of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and general and complete disarmament,
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in South Asia, as in other regions, will
strengthen the security of the States of the region against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the declarations issued at the highest level by
Governments of South Asian States reaffirming their undertaking not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons
and to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively to
the economic and social advancement of their peoples,
Recalling that in the above-mentioned resolutions it
called upon the States of the South Asian region and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
might be interested to make all possible efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia and to
refrain, in the mean time, from any action contrary to
this objective,
Further recalling that, in its resolutions 3265 B
(XXIX), 31/73 and 32/83, it requested the SecretaryGeneral to convene a meeting for the purpose of the
consultations mentioned therein and to render such assistance as might be required to promote the efforts for
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraphs 60 to
63 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly 20 regarding the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones, including in the region of
South Asia,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia, 21
1. Reaffirms its endorsement, in principle, of the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia. and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to continue to make all possible efforts
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia
and to refrain, in the mean time, from any action contrary to this objective;
3. Calls upon those nuclear-weapon States \Yhich
have not done so to respond positively to this proposal
and to extend the necessary co-operation in the efforts to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the efforts for
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
· South Asia and to report on the subject to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
ao Resolution S-10/2.
A/34/527.

11

5. Decides to consider this item at its thirty-fifth
session.

97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

34/79.

Prohibition of the development and manufac•
ture of new types of weapons of mass destruc•
tion and new systems of such weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34 79 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/74 of 10 December 1976, 32/84 A of
12 December 1977 and 33/66 B of 14 December 1978
concerning the prohibition of new types of weapons of
mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 39 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 22 according to which quali~ative and
quantitative disarmament measures are both important
for halting the arms race and efforts to that end must
include negotiations on the limitation and cessatio!1 of
the qualitative improvement of armaments, especially
weapons of mass destruction, and the development of
new means of warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77 of
the Final Document to the effect that, m order to help
prevent a qualitative arms race and so that scientific
and technological achievements might ultimately be used
solely for peaceful purposes, effective measures should
be taken to prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction based on new scientific principles and achievements, and that efforts should be appropriately pursued aiming at the prohibition of such
new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction,
Expressing its firm belief, in the light of the decisions
adopted at the tenth special session, in the importance
of concluding an agreement or agreements to prevent
the use of scientific and technological progress for the
development of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
Noting with satisfaction the submission on 9 July
1979, for consideration by the Committee on Disarmament, of the joint proposal by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
on major elements of a treaty prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological
weapons, 23 agreed upon during the negotiations between
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America,
Noting that in the course of its session in 1979 the
Committee on Disarmament considered the item entitled
"New types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons; radiological weapons",
Taking into consideration the part of the report of
the Committee on Disarmament relating to this question, 24
1. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, in the
light of its existing priorities, actively to continue negotiations, with the assistance of qualified governmental
experts, with a view to preparing a draft comprehensive
agreement on the prohibition of the development and
Resolution S-10/2.
See CD/53/ Appendix Ill/Vol. II, documents CD/31 and
CD/32.
24 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), sect. m.B.
22
28

m.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of lhe Finl Committee

manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons and, where necessary, specific agreements on particular types of such
weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly for consideration at its thirty-fifth session;
3. Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed at
working out an agreement or agreements to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the consideration of this item by the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Prohibition of
the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of the Committee on Disarmament".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 / 80.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions
2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3080 (XXVIII)
of 6 December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3468 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/88 of
14 December 1976, 32/86 of 12 December 1977,
S-10/2 of 30 June 1978 and 33/68 of 14 December
1978,
Encouraged by the continued support extended to the
Declaration by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, 25
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the intensification of greatPower military presence, conceived in the context of
great-Power rivalry, leading to an increase of tension
in the area,
Considering that the continued military presence of
the great Powers in the Indian Ocean, conceived in the
context of great-Power rivalry, with the danger of a
competitive escalation of such a military presence, gives
greater urgency to the need to take practical steps for
the early implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace
in the Indian Ocean requires co-operation among the
regional States to ensure conditions of peace and security within the region, as envisaged in the Declaration,
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral
and hinterland States,
Further considering that, at its tenth special session,
it noted the proposal for establishing the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace, taking into account its deliberations
25

See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 142-151.

and its relevant resolutions and the need to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security in the region, 20
Noting that talks were initiated between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean, and that the two countries have kept the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean informed of the
current situation concerning those talks,
Regretting, however, that the talks remain suspended,
Encouraged by the holding of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, which
provided an opportunity for the further harmonization
of the positions of the littoral and hinterland States,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Oceani· and the report of the Meeting
of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian
Ocean; 28
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the issues on
which the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States
of the Indian Ocean succeeded in harmonizing a common position;
3. Expresses the hope for the early implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace;
4. Urges that the talks between the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
regarding their military presence in the Indian Ocean
should be resumed without delay and that the parties
should refrain from any activity prejudicial to the implementation of resolution 2832 (XXVI);
5. Renews the general mandate of the Ad Hoe
Committee as defined in the relevant resolutions;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a full report
on its work;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendations contained in paragraphs 34 and 35 of the report of the Meeting of the
Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 29
1. Decides to enlarge the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Indian Ocean by the addition of new members to be
appointed by the President of the General Assembly on
the recommendation of the Ad Hoe Committee;
2. Invites the permanent members of the Security
Council and major maritime users of the Indian Ocean
referred to in paragraph 12 (c) of the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian
Ocean that have not yet done so to serve on the expanded Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Decides to convene a Conference on the Indian
Ocean during 1981 at Colombo for the implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace, contained in General Assembly resolution 2832
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971 ;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to undertake the
preparatory work for the convening of the Conference,
26
27

Resolution S-10/2,,ara. 64 (b).
Official Records o the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/34/29).
2 s Ibid., Supplement No. 45 (A/34/45 and Corr.I).
2 9 Ibid.
