11.

33/3.

Resolutions adopted without rcference to a Main Committee

Report of the lnternational Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the ye ar 1977, 5
Noting that the statement of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency of 2 November 1978 6 provides additional information on the
main developments in the Agency's activities,
Considering the important role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency in the field of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which is at present
the main alternative source of energy readily available,
and therefore the increasing tasks which the Agency
will be called upon to undertake,
Appreciating the contribution of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the assessment of uranium
resources, its current study on the international management of plutonium and spent fue], its assistance in
the negotiation of a text for a convention on the physical protection of nuclear material, its technical and
administrative support to the ongoing nuclear fuel
cycle evaluation and its important work in nuclear
safety and environmental protection,
Bearing in mind the intention of the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency to convene in t 981 or 1982 a
second major international conference on nuclear
power and its fue! cycle, similar to the one held at
Salzburg from 2 to 13 May t 977,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the realization of the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 7 and other international treaties,
conventions and agreements designed to protect mankind from the misuse of nuclear energy,
Bearing in mind the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the International
Atomic Energy Agcncy in order to benefit from the
contribution of nuclear cnergy to their economic development,
Noting with appreciation the inclusion in the statement of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency of the substance of the discussion which took place at the twenty-second regular
session of the General Conference of the Agency, held
in September 1978, concerning the proposed increase
in the representation of the arcas of Africa and of
the Middle East and South Asia on the Board of
Governors,
l. Takes note of the report of the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Urges all States to support the endeavours of
the International Atomic Energy Agency in furthering,
pursuant to its statute, the peaceful uses of atomic
energy, in developing and applying safeguards and in
assisting Member States, particularly developing counií International

Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report

13

--------------

tries, to plan and carry out programmes in the field
of energy and various applications of nuclear techniques;
3. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to strengthcn its activities in the field of technical assistance to developing countries and urges
Member States to help the Agency to achieve this
goal by increasing their voluntary contributions;
4. Notes with interest the intention of the International Atomic Energy Agency to hold another major
international conference on nuclear power and its
fuel cycle, similar to the one held at Salzburg in
May 1977, and requests the Agency, bearing in mind
General Assembly resolution 32/50 of 8 Decemher 1977, to consider broadening the scope of the
conference to include the consideration of measures
to promote international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy for economic and social development, particularly in the developing countries;
5. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to give thorough, prompt and fair consideration to
the proposals for an increase in the representation of
the arcas of Africa and of the Middle East and South
Asia on the Board of Governors, with a view to reaching an early decision;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the thirty-third session
of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's
activities.
42nd plenary meeting
2 Novemher 1978

33/4.

Peaceful use of nudear energy for economic ami social rlevelopment

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1977, 8
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/50 of 8 December 1977, 9
Recognizing the importance of enhancing the role
of the International Atomic Energy Agency in the
promotion of the application of nuclear energy for
pcaceful purposes and of augmenting its rcsources for
technical assistance to the developing countrics in this
field,
Having in mind the significance of nuclear energy
for cconomic development and, in particular, its important role in accelerating the development of developing countries,
Recalling the principies and provisions of its resolution 32/50 concerning international co-operation for
the promotion of the transfer and utilization of nuclear
technology for economic and social development, especially in the dcveloping countries,

far 1977 (Austria, July 1978); transmitted to the members of

the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/33/145).
6 Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thirty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 41st meeting, paras. 2-40.
7 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

1' International Atomic Energy Agency, The A11nual Report
for 1977 (Austria, July 1978); transmitted to the members of
the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/33/ 145).
n A/33/332.

General Assemhly-Thirty-third Session,

14

Recalling also the contents of the relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 10
1. Invites all States to continue to consider the
convening, at an appropriate stage, of an international
conference or conferences, under the auspices of the
United Nations system, aimed at promoting international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy in accordance with the objectives of General
Assembly resolution 32/50;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to urge all
States to communicate to him their views, observations
and suggestions on such a conference and requests
him to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
42nd plenary meeting
2 November 1978
33/9.

Credentials of representatives to the thirtythird session of the General Assemhly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.11
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.12
99th plenary meeting
24 May 1979
33/15.

Question of Cyprus 13

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and its subsequent resolutions,
Greatly concerned over the prolongation of the
Cyprus crisis, which continues to constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
. Exp~essing deep concern over the lack of progress
m the mtercommunal talks,
Deploring the continued presence of foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel on the territory
of the Republic of Cyprus and the fact that part of
its territory is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring also all unilateral actions that change the
demographic structure of Cyprus,
10 Resolution

S-10/2.

11 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/33/350.
12 lbid., document A/33/350/ Add.1.
18 See also sect. I, foot-note 4, and sect. X.B.3 decision
33/402.
'

Mindful of the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Reiterates its full support for the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for
the cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Demands the immediate and effective implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX), unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly and endorsed by
the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of
13 December 1974, and of the subsequent resolutions
of the Assembly and the Council on Cyprus, which
provide the valid basis for the solution of the problem
of Cyprus;
3. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military presence from
the Republic of Cyprus;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Calls for respect of the human rights of all
Cypriots and the instituting of urgent measures for
the voluntary return of the refugees to their homes
in safety;
6. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful
and constructive manner of the negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General between the representatives of the two communities, to be conducted
freely on an equal footing on the basis of comprehensive and constructive proposals of the parties concerned with a view to reaching as early as possible
a mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
7. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
any unilateral action which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem
of Cyprus by peaceful means and to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the performance of his
task under the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council as well as with
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
8. Recommends that the Security Council should
examine the question of the implementation, within
a time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider
and adopt thereafter, if necessary, all appropriate and
practica! measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for ensuring the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations on Cyprus;
9. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
sessi~m and requ~sts the Secretary-General to follow up
the 1mplementat1on of the present resolution and to
report on all its aspects to the General Assembly at
that session.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 1978
33/17.

Third United Nations Confereiwe on the
Law of the Sea14

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
14 See also

sect. X.B.7, decision 33/405.
