A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/165
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/607)]
49/165.

Violence against women migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations reaffirms faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in
the equal rights of men and women,
Reaffirming the principles set forth in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the
General Assembly by its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
Stressing that the promotion of the human rights of women constitutes an
integral part of the human rights activities of the United Nations, as
reaffirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights, 1/
Welcoming the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development, 2/ held at Cairo from 5 to 13 September 1994,
which called upon all countries to take full measures to eliminate all forms
of exploitation, abuse, harassment and violence against women,
Noting the large numbers of women from developing countries and from
some economies in transition who continue to venture forth to more affluent
countries in search of a living for themselves and their families, as a
consequence of poverty, unemployment and other socio-economic situations in
their home countries, while acknowledging the primary duty of States to work
for conditions that provide employment to their citizens,

1/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

2/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

95-76969

/...

A/RES/49/165
Page 2
Recognizing that it is the duty of sending countries to protect and
promote the interests of their citizens who seek or receive employment in
other countries, to provide them with appropriate training/education and to
apprise them of their rights and obligations in the countries of employment,
Aware of the moral obligation of receiving or host countries to ensure
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons within their
boundaries, including migrant workers, and in particular women migrant
workers, who are doubly vulnerable because of their gender and because they
are foreigners,
Noting with concern the continuing reports of grave abuses and acts of
violence committed against the persons of women migrant workers by some of
their employers in some host countries,
Stressing that acts of violence directed against women impair or nullify
the enjoyment by women of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Convinced of the need to eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women and the need to protect them from gender-based violence,
1.
Expresses grave concern at the plight of women migrant workers who
become victims of physical, mental and sexual harassment and abuse;
2.
Recognizes with appreciation the efforts exerted by some receiving
countries to alleviate the negative situation of women migrant workers;
3.
Recalls, in this context, its resolution 48/104 of 20 December
1993, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women;
4.
Welcomes measures to strengthen the human rights of women and the
establishment of closer ties between the organs dealing with women’s issues
and rights in the United Nations, through a special programme of activities,
as envisioned in the proposed revision to the medium-term plan for the period
1992-1997;
5.
Invites States concerned, specifically the sending and receiving
States of women migrant workers, to conduct regular consultations for the
purpose of identifying problem areas in promoting and protecting the rights of
women migrant workers and in ensuring health and social services for them,
adopting specific measures to address those problems, setting up as necessary
appropriate mechanisms to implement those measures, and, in general, creating
conditions that foster greater harmony and tolerance between women migrant
workers and the rest of the society in which they reside;
6.
Calls upon the countries concerned to take appropriate measures to
ensure that law enforcement officials assist in guaranteeing the full
protection of the rights of women migrant workers, consistent with
international obligations of Member States;
7.
Urges both sending and host countries to help ensure that women
migrant workers are protected from unscrupulous recruitment practices, if
needed by the adoption of legal measures;
8.
Encourages Member States to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; 3/

3/

Resolution 45/158, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/165
Page 3
9.
Invites trade unions to support the realization of the rights of
women migrant workers by assisting them in organizing themselves so as to
enable them better to assert their rights;
10.
Calls upon relevant bodies and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to inform the Secretary-General of the extent of the problem and
to recommend further measures to implement the purposes of the present
resolution;
11.
Requests treaty-monitoring bodies and calls upon non-governmental
organizations concerned with violence against women to include, where
appropriate, the situation of women migrant workers in their deliberations and
findings and to supply relevant information to United Nations bodies and
Governments;
12.
Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights
on violence against women to continue to include among the urgent issues
pertaining to her mandate the violence perpetrated against women migrant
workers;
13.
Calls upon relevant intergovernmental bodies, specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations concerned, in cooperation with both the
sending and the host countries, to conduct seminars and training programmes on
human rights instruments, particularly those pertaining to migrant workers;
14.
Invites all States to adopt, with the support of relevant
non-governmental organizations, appropriate measures to provide support
services to women migrant workers who have become traumatized as a consequence
of violation of their rights by, inter alia, unscrupulous employers and/or
recruiters, to provide resources for their physical and psychological
rehabilitation and to facilitate their return to their countries of origin;
15.
Invites the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World
Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace and the Ninth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders to consider including in their respective programmes of action the
subject of the traffic in women and girls, as well as youth;
16.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session on the implementation of the present resolution,
including, in particular, on the report of the Special Rapporteur on violence
against women.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
