A /75/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

62nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 28 April 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 136
Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets
The President: Today’s discussion is a direct
response to Member States’ concerns around the issue of
rapid technological change and sustainable development
and builds on yesterday’s high-level thematic debate on
digital cooperation and connectivity. Together, those
discussions cap off a concerted effort by Member
States and the United Nations system to elevate the
discourse around this important topic ahead of the sixth
Multi-stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and
Innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, to
be held in May.
As was emphasized at yesterday’s debate, rapid
technological change is, first and foremost, a good
thing. It is, however, one that must be well managed
and accessible to all. Employed the right way, with
policy instruments to guide development and facilitate
access, technological advances can fuel action across
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda.
Take for example the pressing need to address
environmental issues. Rapid technological innovations
offer the opportunity for low-carbon solutions to be
mainstreamed and introduced into new areas. The same
can be said across the entirety of the SDGs. From new
health-care technologies to safer air transport, to new
data-driven policies for urban housing or biodiversity

conservation, technological advances can help usher
in faster and more profound progress on sustainable
development. Yet there is understandably uncertainty
and confusion around these issues, particularly when
we are faced with both fast-paced change and deepseated inequalities.
It goes without saying that for many people across
the globe, rapid technological change equates to rapid
job change. A major concern globally is that emerging,
frontier technologies are replacing human workers, with
direct effects on jobs and livelihoods. That includes
technologies that take advantage of digitalization
and connectivity, including artificial intelligence, the
Internet of things, big data, blockchain technology,
fifth-generation
technology,
three-dimensional
printing, robotics, drones, gene editing, nanotechnology
and renewables.
While workers and the population at large tend
to expect those new technologies to reduce job
opportunities, the opposite is often the case. New
technologies can create new jobs in innovative,
emerging sectors and lead to a better-equipped and
better-connected workforce. For that to benefit all,
however, efforts must be made to support retraining,
and national and local capacities for adaptation must be
supported. In that regard, I commend Member States
and partners such as Microsoft for their announcements
and statements of support at the high-level debate.
Such efforts will help to strengthen economic growth
in less developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, as well as
empowering young people globally.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-10521 (E)

*2110521*

A/75/PV.62

As I have emphasized during the past two days,
closing the digital divide must be a priority as we
emerge from the global pandemic. There is no path
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
that does not include rapidly scaling up access to
technologies and digitization globally. According to the
Sustainable Development Goals Report of 2020, only
54 per cent of the global population uses the Internet,
with the vast majority of the disconnected residing in
least developed countries. If we are to maintain our
commitment to leaving no one behind and to regain
the momentum lost during the global coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, kick-starting action on
the digital divide must be front and centre. The global
pandemic has accelerated the use of digital tools and
underscored the starkness of the digital divide. It is now
more urgent than ever that we ensure that our recovery
efforts are marked by inclusion, equity, resilience and
sustainability, and that we employ all the tools at our
disposal to do so.
For Governments and the multilateral system, rapid
technological change must be seen as an accelerator
and a tool to bridge the divide in order to usher in a
new industrial revolution across the globe, connecting
billions of people who until now have been disconnected
and disenfranchised. The Technology Facilitation
Mechanism is one piece of the puzzle, as it endeavours
to address new and emerging technologies and their
impact on the SDGs. Similarly, the Interagency Task
Team on Science, Technology and Innovation for the
SDGs remains a crucial element in collecting data
and channelling it into the Science, Technology and
Innovation Forum, enabling Member States, United
Nations entities and civil-society groups to make
evidence-based decisions that have a direct impact on
the delivery of SDG efforts. I am pleased to note that the
Interagency Task Team has also prepared findings on
the effects of rapid technological change on the SDGs
that were presented in dedicated sessions of the Forum
in 2018 and 2019, per General Assembly resolutions
to that end. Looking ahead, an expert group will be
presenting new findings during a dedicated session
of the 2021 Forum on 5 May. It is hoped that those
findings will assess rapid frontier technologies in the
light of the COVID-19 pandemic, while acknowledging
lessons learned by countries that employed them in
their pandemic response.
As was said during yesterday’s debate, we are at an
inflection point in history. How we choose to undertake
2/17

28/04/2021

recovery will shape the world for generations to come.
Technological advancements are a strong and everchanging tool in our efforts to combat poverty, empower
women and girls and bring peace and stability to those
in need. We must learn to leverage and harness those
technologies everywhere if we are to make full use of
them. In that regard, it is important to remember that
technological advances are only as smart as the policies
we have in place to harness them. I therefore urge
Member States to reflect on those pertinent issues and
to come forward with strong proposals and solutions,
and I thank them for joining today’s discussion and for
lending their support, ideas and solutions to the highlevel debate on digital cooperation and connectivity.
Mr. Parajuli (Nepal): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting on the impact of rapid technological changes on
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and targets. My delegation is also grateful for the
very substantive high-level thematic debate on digital
cooperation and connectivity convened just yesterday.
The sweeping changes in technology have been
tremendous, in scope as well as speed. They have
affected all of us, as individuals, societies and nations.
The pace of the fourth industrial revolution has expanded
the avenues for increasing connectedness, bolstering
productivity, realizing prosperity and advancing
sustainable development. Furthermore, the coronavirus
disease pandemic has put science, technology, and
innovation at the forefront of human activities. Ranging
from medical research and breakthroughs in vaccines
to online learning models and adaptation in modes
of work, modern technologies have contributed to
mitigating hardships and containing the crisis to the
extent possible. However, that has further entrenched
already existing inequalities, by exposing the fact that
the transformative impact of technological change has
been a reality for only about half of the developing
world’s population. The challenges facing manual
labourers, service workers and a number of groups of
vulnerable populations are further compounded.
It is an unfortunate irony that the rapidity of
change compares only with the extent of the gaping
technological divide, widening further in the case
of the least developed countries (LDCs), landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States.
In that context, we would like to see the Technology
Bank for the LDCs act as a well-resourced institution
that can truly and massively help member States to
21-10521

28/04/2021

utilize science and technology in their development
endeavours. Against that backdrop, we must remember
that the 2019 Global Sustainable Development
Report recognizes technology as one of the four key
transformative pathways to sustainable development.
We must reverse the trend whereby technology tends to
become a gap creator to turn it into a gap remover and a
tool in achieving sustainable development. We must aim
at narrowing the digital divide, embracing technological
innovation and making technologies affordable and
accessible to all. Advances in new technologies must be
harnessed in order to accelerate SDG implementation,
reduce inequalities among and within countries and
enhance sustainability and the resilience needed to
weather any future systemic shocks.
Science and technology represent an important
pillar in Nepal’s aspirations to achieve sustainable
development. Our 2015 information and communications
technology (ICT) policy and our 2019 Digital Nepal
Framework and national science, technology and
innovation policy all prioritize the use of technologies
in achieving development ends. Those instruments
put the sustainable utilization of natural resources,
the development of human resources, environmental
preservation and disaster reduction at their centre. The
use of ICTs has led to visible progress in the fields of
research, energy, public service delivery, education,
information and communication. It has increased
people’s participation in national affairs, enhanced
their welfare and empowered them. Our Prime Minister
recently launched Mero Kitta, an online service
through which citizens can get land-related services
without having to visit Government offices. Our plan is
to provide 80 per cent of the population with access to
ICT services by no later than 2025.
In line with our plan to graduate from the LDC
category in 2026, efforts are under way to enhance the
use of technologies to bolster productivity, educational
opportunities and health and social awareness, as
well as the effective delivery of services and good
governance. An enhanced level of international support
and cooperation will be critical in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that scaled-up
development cooperation and the transfer of technology
to the developing world to harness the power of
technology are tools for achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.

A/75/PV.62

Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico is taking the floor in today’s debate because the
impact of rapid technological change on the Sustainable
Development Goals has never been greater than it is
now. We would like to take this opportunity to discuss
the progress made in implementing resolution 73/17.
In the past few years there has been increasing interest
from Member States and other interested parties alike
in studying the impact of rapid technological change on
sustainable development. We have held several debates
on technology and a number of reports have been
published on the issue. The most relevant report is the
Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation
(A/74/821), which includes recommendations on global
connectivity, digital public goods, digital inclusion,
digital capacity-building, artificial intelligence and
more, highlighting the challenges and opportunities
in the ongoing technological revolution. We welcome
the fact that the Secretary-General has established the
Office of the United Nations Envoy on Technology and
that its work has already begun.
It cannot be denied that advances in science,
technology and innovation have spurred rapid
technological change in recent years. Developments in
cutting-edge technology have demonstrated immense
potential for sustainable development. They include
artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, biotechnology,
macrodata, three-dimensional (3D) printing, blockchain
technology and the Internet of Things. For example,
when combined with robotics, artificial intelligence
could make production and commercial processes
more efficient, while 3D printing allows for faster and
more economical low-volume production, as well as the
speedy creation of new product prototypes.
All those processes should be viewed from the
perspective of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and their impact on the economy,
environment and society should be measured. During
the pandemic, artificial intelligence and macrodata
were used to examine patients. We were able to trace
and identify cases of the disease, predict its evolution
and assess infection risks. We welcome the fact that
science has already produced coronavirus disease
vaccines. Nonetheless, we also remain concerned about
the lack of equitable access to them.
Countries and people do not adapt to these changes
at the same pace. Not only has the pandemic exacerbated
existing structural inequalities, it has also widened the

21-105213/17

A/75/PV.62

digital divide. A total of 3.6 billion people, more than
half of the world’s population, remain disconnected.
The least developed countries are the least connected,
with a mere 19 per cent of their populations online.
Without cooperation for adapting to the changes, the
digital divide will broaden, in particular in the least
developed countries and among vulnerable people
and marginalized groups. Technological adaptation
is also marked by gender inequalities. Boys and men
have received more encouragement and support than
girls and women in studying technology and science or
engineering and mathematics. Over the past 12 months,
there has been a massive increase in the pace of online
activities. Many of us have been able to adjust, but,
regrettably, many have been left behind. It is therefore
important to consider how we can keep up with the pace
of rapid technological change if a major segment of the
population does not even have access to the Internet.
Today digital inclusion for everyone is more essential
than ever before. Access to the Internet and to devices
must be equitable and secure and requires the necessary
digital skills.
Technologies on their own are not the solution to
today’s ills. They must be used to ensure our collective
well-being. Our delegation listened closely to the
statements delivered during yesterday’s high-level
debate on digital cooperation and connectivity and will
pay similar attention at the Science, Technology and
Innovation Forum next week. Based on those dialogues
and multilateral forums, and in response to the call you
just made, Mr. President, Mexico will submit a draft
resolution entitled “Impact of rapid technological change
on the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets” that seeks to consider progress and
pending issues related to this agenda item within the
United Nations system. Over the past two years, we
have also seen a multilateral response to the issue that
should be led by Member States. The draft text will go
above and beyond technology alone. We will seek to
focus specifically on adapting to rapid technological
change and its overall practical implications for the
2030 Agenda. The negotiations will be open, inclusive
and transparent. In addition, the fact that negotiations
will take place in a virtual format demonstrates how we
have all had to adapt at Headquarters. We encourage
all member States to participate constructively in the
coming days to shape a comprehensive vision on rapid
technological change.
4/17

28/04/2021

Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important and
timely meeting. The pandemic has given fresh impetus
to the digital transformation already under way in
many areas of work, education, innovation and service
delivery. Rapid technological change has played a
key role in managing the impact of the pandemic and
facilitating economic recovery. It is playing a key role
in the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). But at the same time it has also exposed
inequalities and vulnerabilities that are likely to be
exacerbated in the process, due to the digital divide.
In that context, I would like to share three
pertinent points. First, closing the digital divide is
an endeavour that can be accomplished when done
jointly. We need to strengthen international and
multi-stakeholder cooperation to enhance local capacity
and advance digital inclusion. Among other things,
the multi-stakeholder approach should be focused on
developing and improving access to high-quality digital
infrastructure, supporting business models that will lead
to job creation and workforce digitalization, facilitating
digital access for micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises, improving affordable and indiscriminate
access to digital technologies and economies, including
in rural areas, and enabling technology transfers and
the sharing of best practices for business models.
Secondly, we must optimize technology by
promoting and enabling an inclusive science,
technology and innovation ecosystem. As a key
means of implementing the SDGs, such an effective
and inclusive system is indeed crucial. It is therefore
necessary to design policies that improve societies’
adaptive capacities and ensure that the benefits of the
new technologies are enjoyed by all. That includes the
improvement of digital skills and literacy. Appropriate
funding is also needed to build hard infrastructure
and improve digital access through the provision of
electricity and affordable connectivity.
Thirdly, we should mitigate the adverse impact
of technology and promote responsible behaviour in
cyberspace. We must address negative consequences of
technology such as labour displacement and concerns
about inequalities, privacy and cybersecurity. We also
need to overcome the spread of misinformation and
disinformation on the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which can hamper effective public health responses. The
impact of rapid technological change on the achievement
of the SDGs is one of the key areas that Indonesia will
21-10521

28/04/2021

look into during the discussion, as co-Chair of this year’s
Science, Technology and Innovation Forum. Indonesia
is committed to working closely with the Assembly and
other relevant stakeholders to ensure that the discussion
will bring about a constructive and concrete outcome.
Indonesia considers digital inclusiveness to be a vital
tool for optimizing the use of science, technology and
innovation towards the achievement of sustainable
development. I encourage everyone to be actively
engaged in this year’s Forum and its follow-up.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. The General Assembly has
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 136.
I invite the attention of the General Assembly to draft
resolution A/75/L.76, circulated under agenda item 24,
entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development
issues”. Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 24 at its
48th plenary meeting, on 21 December 2020. In order
for the Assembly to take action on the draft resolution,
it will be necessary to reopen consideration of agenda
item 24. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 24?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 24
to the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the document, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 24
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504B).
Agenda item 24 (continued)
Eradication of poverty and other development
issues
Draft resolution (A/75/L.76)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.76.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): On behalf of Ireland,
Bangladesh and 67 other sponsors, I have the honour
to introduce the first-ever draft resolution on global

A/75/PV.62

drowning prevention. Ambassador Geraldine Byrne
Nason and I thank all delegations for their valuable
contribution and support in finalizing the draft text.
The draft resolution is proposed under agenda item 24,
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”,
and is contained in document A/75/L.76.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
67 Member States, as of the latest count, that have
sponsored this important draft resolution, and we
sincerely hope that more will now join them before its
adoption. It is critical to convey a strong message from
the General Assembly about its unequivocal support for
efforts to prevent drowning globally. I would also like
to thank the Group of Friends on Drowning Prevention,
which has provided key support in advancing this effort
over the past two years, while generating awareness and
action on a silent and preventable killer. Furthermore,
I want to place on record our deep appreciation to the
World Health Organization, UNICEF and the Royal
National Lifeboat Institution for their support and
cooperation throughout the process.
In the past decade alone, more than 2.5 million lives
were needlessly lost to water — infants slipping silently
into ponds, fathers never returning from fishing trips,
sisters submerged on their way to school — representing
wasted lives and preventable deaths on an epidemic
scale. Drowning is a major and neglected cause of
global mortality, with 235,000 lives lost every year,
650 every day, 26 every hour. Those are astounding,
staggering figures. Annually, drowning accounts for
more lives lost than maternal mortality or malnutrition.
It is an issue without geographic borders or boundaries.
Anyone can drown, anywhere. It affects every nation
of the world, some more dramatically and inequitably
than others. More than 90 per cent of deaths occur in
low- and middle-income countries. The highest rates
are recorded in Africa and the greatest numbers across
Asia, with children and young people representing a
majority of lives lost — our future.
Despite its global burden, drowning is regarded as
a silent epidemic, unrecognized and underresourced
relative to its impact. The imperative to act on drowning
is not simply moral or political. The economic cost
is equally untenable. The global cost is estimated at
$146 billion annually and affects mostly low-income
countries. Drowning is therefore not just an injury
but an inequity. All is not lost, however. We can still
address the trend if we act now. Every drowning death
is preventable through tested, low-cost solutions, and

21-105215/17

A/75/PV.62

action on drowning presents us with an opportunity to
advance several of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). For example, drowning prevention can catalyse
progress in ending preventable mortality for children
under five, particularly in countries where drowning
is a leading cause of childhood death. Drowning
prevention can protect hard-won gains and investment
in immunization, nutrition and education, which is
sadly lost to the water with every young life. There are
also links to achieving progress on other SDGs if we
take action on this avoidable loss of life, including on
Goals 5, 6, 10, 11 and 13.
My own country, Bangladesh, is on the front lines in
the fight against drowning. Bangladesh’s own journey
of recognition and response to the issue has continued
for well over a decade. I am happy to report that we
are making progress, as are several of our neighbours
in the region that like us have suffered from a serious
drowning burden, especially among our children. We
are making progress with the development of a national
drowning prevention plan and in taking action at the
community level in developing, testing and adapting
interventions that can and do save lives at a relatively
low cost. We are doing it by ensuring that young
children are supervised and kept safe around water by
caregivers; barriers or fencing are installed around open
water sources such as ponds and wells; young children
have the opportunity to learn swimming skills that
may save their lives; community members can perform
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid if the worst
happens and, crucially, that communities are aware that
drowning is preventable and not to be feared. We are
starting to see some success.
More can certainly be done, and we are committed
to acting now. We know others also share that urgency
and ambition, nationally, regionally and internationally,
and the significant support for draft resolution
A/75/L.76 is testament to that. Our joint leadership
on the draft resolution with Ireland, itself an island
nation familiar with both the promise and risk that
water presents, demonstrates that by working together
across regions and risk profiles, progress on drowning
prevention is possible.
The text before us includes some editorial
amendments made by the Secretariat. They do not
affect the content or substance of the draft resolution.
We would like to sincerely thank all Member States for
their constructive approach and flexibility in reaching
this point and for their important contributions
6/17

28/04/2021

throughout the consultation process. The final draft of
the resolution contains 15 preambular paragraphs and
seven operative paragraphs. In the preambular section
we express concern about the magnitude of the problem
and the fact that it has largely remained unrecognized
and note that drowning is a social equity issue. We
recall key agreements such as the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the political declaration on
universal health coverage and the relevant resolutions
of the World Health Assembly, as well as other major
global frameworks, including the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction and the New Urban Agenda.
Among other things, the operative paragraphs
invite and encourage Member States, within the
context of their national condition, to appoint national
focal points for drowning prevention, develop national
prevention plans, policies and programmes, enact and
enforce national laws, generate and amplify awareness
campaigns, support international and regional
cooperation and promote research and development in
the area of drowning prevention. The draft resolution
also decides to proclaim 25 July as World Drowning
Prevention Day, to be observed globally every year
on a voluntary basis. We invite the World Health
Organization to facilitate the observance, which would
provide an opportunity to commemorate lives lost and
accelerate life-saving solutions to bring Governments,
United Nations agencies, civil society, drowning
prevention practitioners and communities together,
while recognizing that drowning is indeed preventable
through collective action.
We would like to reiterate our hope that the draft
resolution will pave the way for increased awareness
about preventing drowning and, most important, for
cooperation and collaboration at national, regional and
global levels. We can no longer bear witness to the
loss of precious lives to water when solutions exist,
and the political will is now evident. Drowning and
its prevention have been entirely absent from the first
75 years of United Nations activity. But this year we
redress that glaring gap. Draft resolution A/75/L.76
represents long overdue recognition of a major cause
of mortality and the solutions and opportunity that
exist to address it. On behalf of Ambassador Geraldine
Byrne Nason and myself, I would like to sincerely
thank everyone for the support, and we hope that the
General Assembly will adopt the draft resolution by
overwhelming consensus today.
21-10521

28/04/2021

A/75/PV.62

The President: We shall now proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/75/L.76, entitled “Global drowning
prevention”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/75/L.76,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Bahrain, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominica, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Fiji, the Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, the Niger, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.76?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/273).

A/75/L.76

was

adopted

The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 24?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Reports of the General Committee
First report of the General Committee
(A/75/250)
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 98 to the First
Committee. In order to enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the report of the Committee
(A/75/250), may I take it that the Assembly wishes to
consider agenda item 98 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504B).
Agenda item 98 (continued)
Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international
security
Draft decision (A/75/L.79)

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like to I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats. I give the floor to the representative of the
United States.

The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 98 to take
action on draft decision A/75/L.79. Before giving the
floor for explanations of vote or position, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Mr. Santiago (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join the consensus on the
adoption of resolution 75/273 on global drowning
prevention. With respect to references to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction, I refer the Assembly to our global
explanation of position delivered 1 September 2015 (see
A/69/PV.101).

Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We reiterate our sincere thanks to Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Open-ended Working Group
on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security, for his guidance on our path towards achieving
a hard-won consensus, which enabled us to endorse the
Open-ended Working Group’s report (see A/75/816) on
12 March. The Working Group made it possible for us

21-105217/17

A/75/PV.62

to arrive at a unique, inclusive and transparent process
whereby all Member States could participate on an
equal footing in the debates on a topic that is becoming
ever more important at the international level.
While we acknowledge the flexibility and
commitment shown by most delegations and the
Chair’s successful efforts to include every point of
view, the report failed to meet all our expectations.
We note the changes made in paragraphs 3, 7 and 9
on the complementarity of specialized forums and in
paragraph 10 on the recognition of States’ fundamental
responsibilities. Furthermore, while we appreciate
the inclusion of references to the development of
information and communications technologies (ICT)
capabilities for military purposes in paragraph 16,
we believe that the topic could be clarified in future
documents, as it represents a real and potential threat.
With regard to rules, norms and principles for
responsible behaviour of States, we consider the
development of new rules a high priority. We note,
however, that some parts of the report place excessive
emphasis on the issue of the application of ICTs. The
development of ICTs and the increasing threats linked
to their malicious use, which are acknowledged in the
report, demonstrate the need for regulatory frameworks
to be developed in parallel with the technological
advances, together with legally binding obligations
and commitments. In that regard, we reiterate the
importance of adopting a legally binding instrument
that will enable us to face the challenges and lack of
legal precedent in the area of cybersecurity.
Although we recognize the inclusion of certain
legally binding obligations in the final observations
section of the report, we would have preferred to have
them reflected in the section on international law. That
is one of many Member States’ expectations that could
be discussed in depth in the new Open-ended Working
Group in its role in addressing cybersecurity. In the
section covering international law, we appreciate the
consistent focus on the need for a common understanding
as a basis for building consensus. However, we were
disappointed by the removal of the only mention in the
text of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. While we appreciate the wording in
paragraph 34 calling on States to refrain from taking any
action not in accordance with international law and the
Charter, we would have preferred that the report make
specific reference to unilateral coercive measures in
8/17

28/04/2021

that section, as they are a reality that faces many of our
countries and limits their technological development.
Despite changes in the section on capacity-building,
no stress was placed on the importance of cooperation
without discrimination in full observance of the
sovereignty of States, which is a priority for developing
countries. Looking ahead to future negotiations in the
new Open-ended Working Group, we must recognize
the interests and requirements of all countries with
genuine proportionality and make conscious efforts
in that regard. To that end, it will be imperative to
conduct negotiations paragraph by paragraph, which
will help to facilitate reaching a consensus within the
Open-ended Working Group established pursuant to
resolution 75/240.
Cuba will remain fully committed to the exclusively
peaceful uses of ICTs. We will therefore reject any
attempt to legitimize the militarization of outer space
and the covert or overt hostile use of information and
communications technologies to subvert the political
and legal systems of States.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
have taken the floor to explain my delegation’s position
on draft decision A/75/L.79, on the final report (see
A/75/816, annex I) of the Open-ended Working Group
on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security. The Islamic Republic of Iran supports this
first-ever multilateral, inclusive, unique, democratic
and historic process on developments in the field of
information and telecommunications in the context of
international security.
Beginning with the Open-ended Working Group’s
first substantive session and during the intersessional
process up to its third and last session, Iran presented
its submissions while explaining the rationale behind its
proposals. During the process, we specified our genuine
concerns and itemized the issues that represented
our red lines, including respecting the sovereignty
of States; refraining from the use of information and
communications technologies (ICTs) to interfere in
the internal affairs of States; ensuring accountability
for platforms and transnational corporations; avoiding
action-oriented
recommendations
without
due
attention to these principles; working to codify and
implement a legally binding instrument and developing
current international law, as well as additional
norms for responsible State behaviour; ensuring
21-10521

28/04/2021

the non-compulsory designation of repositories;
applying ethics and justice to ICT issues; encouraging
responsible behaviour by non-State actors, including
digital platforms, in order to ensure and facilitate
the cooperation of related digital platforms and
transnational corporations with States; ensuring the
application of ICTs exclusively for peaceful purposes;
rejecting any justification for the threat or use of force
using ICTs; and last but not least, ensuring the equal
status of all national initiatives within the next Openended Working Group.
We specified on a number of occasions that Iran
would never consider it admissible to cross those red
lines. Regrettably, however, despite our numerous calls
for ensuring that the final report reflected the views of
all, not just a single group of Member States, it failed
to take our views and demands into account, as was
also the case with the proposals from the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We hoped that the report would satisfy all
Member States and garner an uncontested consensus.
However, viewing the situation from a strategic and
long-term perspective, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
while disappointed with the parts of the report it
finds unacceptable, would be unhappy to see this
global process end up a failure or deadlocked. I would
therefore like to state that our position, as expressed
in the Working Group’s third substantive session,
remains valid, and to say once again that after formally
registering its objection to certain parts of the report
and expressing its grave concern about the causes
underlying that unacceptable situation, my delegation
would like to make it clear that the Islamic Republic
of Iran will not block the consensus on the report.
However, given the unacceptable content of certain
parts of the report, we have no choice but to dissociate
ourselves from any part of the report that does not
match our positions as described in the deliberations of
the current session of the Open-ended Working Group.
The Islamic Republic of Iran therefore has no obligation
under any term, content, paragraph, conclusion or
recommendation of the report that is not in line with its
principled positions.
Mrs. Llano (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like today to acknowledge the valuable
efforts made by Ambassador Jürg Lauber and his
team in leading us on a path to reaching consensus
in exceptional conditions during a two-year process,
which enabled countries large and small to exchange

A/75/PV.62

ideas and proposals on an equal footing and realize
our collective ownership of the Open-ended Working
Group on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security. We would like to give full credit to Russia
and all the countries that advocated the genesis of this
unique, historic, inclusive and transparent platform.
When our delegation began taking an active part in
the Group’s consultative meetings, we knew from the
start that we were undertaking an ambitious process
in which the pursuit of perfection would hinder the
attainment of positive results. But with political will,
we succeeded in finding the balance that enabled a
multilateral achievement that should be emulated
and replicated within the United Nations, given the
significance of a topic that encounters new challenges
every day.
Our delegation, which joined the consensus, is
grateful for the flexibility and commitment shown by
a majority of delegations. It will be crucial to ensure
in future negotiations in the new Open-Ended Working
Group that the proposals by the States of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as Cuba, Russia,
China and Iran, be taken into account, along with the
interests and demands of all countries. We believe that
it will be crucial to conduct negotiations paragraph by
paragraph, which will facilitate consensus-building in
the Open-ended Working Group established pursuant
to resolution 75/240. Our delegation would like once
again to congratulate all delegations on the constructive
spirit that enabled the negotiations to be held in an
inclusive environment, and to commend Ambassador
Lauber for his wise leadership during the process,
despite the complexities involved. Nicaragua reiterates
its commitment to the work of the Group and expresses
its satisfaction with the final consensus result.
Mr. Reyes Hernández (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Venezuelan
delegation thanks Ambassador Jürg Lauber, the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in his
capacity as Chair of the Open-ended Working Group
on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security, and his entire team for facilitating negotiations
in an atmosphere of cordiality, inclusiveness and
transparency. We are also grateful to the Secretariat for
its support throughout the process.

21-105219/17

A/75/PV.62

The work begun in 2018 and concluded today has
demonstrated that the Open-ended Group has served
as a democratic and inclusive platform for advancing
our discussions on information and communications
in the context of international security in a transparent
and equitable manner. Our delegation participated
in the process throughout the deliberations in its
national capacity and as a member of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. Unfortunately, as we said at
the third and last session held in March, the final text of
the report (see A/75/816, annex I) failed to take account
of some of the diverse views of the membership.
With regard to specific issues, I would like to note
that the development of information and communications
technologies (ICT) military capacities could have been
appropriately covered. With regard to addressing the
malicious use of ICTs, we continue to believe that
new norms and principles concerning the responsible
behaviour of States should be established and that they
should entail binding commitments and obligations.
We regret that the report did not include a reference to
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. At a time when the international community
is attempting to establish the norms of behaviour in
cyberspace, the application of international law to
States’ use of ICTs cannot be divorced from various
principles, including the sovereign equality of States,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of States and from
intervening in States’ internal affairs. These constitute
a basic point that must be addressed in the future.
Ms. McGuire (Grenada), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We note with concern that since the Open-ended
Working Group began its work, unilateral coercive
measures related to the use of information and
communication technologies have increased worldwide.
Far from facilitating a peaceful environment in
cyberspace, such misnamed measures are fuelling further
escalation. That is why our delegation regrets that the
report did not include any specific mention of the use of
unilateral coercive measures, despite repeated requests
by various States concerning the issue. Venezuela
joins the group of countries that deem it appropriate
to automatically invoke Article 51 of the Charter in
the area of information and telecommunications in
the context of international security and that advocate
the peaceful use of information and communications
10/17

28/04/2021

technologies. We should create a similar section of the
report with regard to international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
My delegation understands the difficulties involved
in finding a balance among the membership’s positions.
We realize that no balance is perfect. We understand
that all the parties would have preferred more, and we
are aware that we could not include all of the proposals
in the document. Without wanting to compromise our
principled positions, which we have repeatedly voiced
and which are shared by several delegations, we are
therefore committed to achieving a consensus-oriented
outcome. For those reasons, while bearing in mind
the future work mandated by resolution 75/240, the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
decided to support draft decision A/75/L.79.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take action on draft decision
A/75/L.79, entitled “Report of the Open-ended Working
Group on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of international
Security established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 73/27 of 5 December 2018”. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/75/L.79 was adopted (decision
75/564).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/75/L.81)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.81.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.81,
entitled “International Day of Women Judges”, under
agenda item 14, entitled “Integrated and coordinated
21-10521

28/04/2021

implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits
in the economic, social and related fields”. The State
of Qatar facilitated the negotiations on the draft
resolution and drafted its text. Since its introduction
the following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Dominica, the Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Pakistan, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Zambia.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation and gratitude for their contributions
and cooperation to all delegations that participated in the
informal consultations on the draft resolution. I note that
Qatar’s initiative in designating an International Day
of Women Judges originated at the second high-level
meeting of the Global Judicial Integrity Network of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
hosted by Qatar between 25 and 27 February 2020.
The pioneer initiative aims to celebrate the
International Day under the auspices of the United
Nations in order to promote the role of women
in the judicial area in enhancing the rule of law.
The draft resolution notes that 10 March will be
celebrated every year as the International Day of
Women Judges. It represents an annual opportunity
to reassert the importance of women’s participation
in public institutions, including the judiciary, and
the international community’s commitment to taking
participatory and representative decisions at all levels
to require gender balance. The draft resolution also
refers to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and specifically to the issues of gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls, which can
contribute significantly to achieving progress in
realizing all the Sustainable Development Goals and
targets. It also stresses the gender perspective, which
is a significant element in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda.
The draft resolution notes that a relatively small
number of women have been judges, including in
senior positions. It also notes with appreciation the

A/75/PV.62

work of UNODC’s Global Judicial Integrity Network
on incorporating women’s representation issues
into judicial systems. And it stresses that the active
participation of women on an equal footing with
men in decision-making at all levels is essential to
achieving equality, sustainable development, peace
and democracy. The draft resolution also emphasizes
the commitment to implementing suitable and effective
national strategies and plans in order to raise the status
of women in judiciary systems and institutions at
leadership and senior administrative levels. It calls on
all Member States, the entities of the United Nations
system, international and regional organizations, the
international community and relevant stakeholders to
celebrate the International Day of Women Judges every
year in the most appropriate way for enhancing women’s
full participation on an equal footing with men and at
all levels in the judiciary.
In conclusion, I would like once again to express
my thanks to the Member States that took part in
submitting the draft resolution, and we look forward to
seeing every other State join them. We are confident that
the draft resolution enjoys consensus, and we also hope
that it will be adopted by consensus at today’s meeting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.81, entitled “
International Day of Women Judges”. I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.81 and in addition to the delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Cameroon,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Dominica, the Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
the Niger, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom

21-1052111/17

A/75/PV.62

28/04/2021

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.81?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/274).

A/75/L.81

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/75/L.80)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.80 on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): On behalf of
the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.80, entitled “Solidarity with and
support for the Government and people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as neighbouring
countries affected by the impact of the eruptions of
La Soufrière volcano”, under sub-item (a) of agenda
item 73, “Strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
The draft resolution expresses deep concern about
the serious consequences of the explosive eruptions
of the La Soufrière volcano in Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines since 9 April, which have resulted
in the displacement of residents and the loss of their
livelihoods, food security and nutrition, health security
and access to social infrastructure, and about the urgent
need to restore normal conditions for the population. For
more than two weeks, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
has been in the throes of a series of explosive volcanic
eruptions on the island of Saint Vincent, in a crisis of
historic proportions. Nearly one fifth of the island’s
population has had to be evacuated from the immediate
disaster area, which covers approximately one third of
the island. The ongoing explosive volcanic eruptions
12/17

are compounded by the multidimensional challenges
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
come before what has been predicted to be an active
hurricane season, which begins in a few weeks. Those
are all severe shocks beyond domestic control and
a demonstration of the vulnerability of small island
developing States.
The draft resolution presented to the Assembly
today notes the elevated public-health risk of the spread
of the COVID-19 virus among people who have been
offered refuge both within and beyond the national
territory of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. It
further underlines the special needs and challenges of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the neighbouring
countries involved, and welcomes the generous and
immediate assistance that has been provided by
CARICOM members and other neighbouring Member
States, as well as other States and national, regional and
international organizations, particularly those in the
United Nations system.
The draft resolution invites the international
community to continue its relief efforts and increase
its support, and encourages international financial
institutions and organizations to continue to
contribute and respond generously for the duration
of the emergency and the rehabilitation process in
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as in the
neighbouring countries affected. It also requests the
Secretary-General to support the rehabilitation efforts
to the extent of his authority.
Finally, the 14 member States of CARICOM would
like to sincerely thank the 158 delegations that at last
count have sponsored the draft resolution for their
overwhelming support.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.80, entitled
“Solidarity with and support for the Government and
people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as
neighbouring countries affected by the impact of the
eruptions of La Soufrière volcano”. I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.80 and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
21-10521

28/04/2021

A/75/PV.62

Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, the Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.80?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/275).

A/75/L.80

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
delegations wishing to make statements after adoption.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
On behalf of the Government and the people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, I would like to express
our sincere gratitude to all Member States for their
invaluable support for resolution 75/275, entitled
“Solidarity with and support for the Government and

people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as
neighbouring countries affected by the impact of the
eruptions of La Soufrière volcano”, which was just
unanimously adopted by the General Assembly with
some 174 sponsors.
I also want to express our heartfelt appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Guyana, Her
Excellency Mrs. Carolyn Rodrigues-Birkett, Chair of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) caucus, for
introducing the resolution on behalf of CARICOM and
for her personal outreach efforts. I am also very grateful
to you for your efforts, Madam Vice-President, as her
immediate predecessor as Chair of the CARICOM
caucus and as Permanent Representative of Grenada.
We especially thank the entire group of Latin American
and Caribbean countries for their familial solidarity.
Indeed, all of the Americas have rallied to our cause,
and we say thank you.
Since 9 April, as we just heard, our nation has been
confronted by a series of explosive volcanic eruptions
that have wreaked havoc on our way of life and economy.
Nearly one fifth of the island’s population has been
evacuated to safer areas and we are now faced with the
monumental challenge of humanitarian relief, recovery
and reconstruction. Amid those immense challenges,
which are further compounded by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and have emerged on the eve of the
Atlantic hurricane season, the support and solidarity
of the international community are critical to our State
and people.
We welcome the launch of the United Nations global
funding appeal for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
and its neighbours and are profoundly grateful for the
support pledged. Without the immediate and sustained
solidarity of the United Nations, our regional and
subregional organizations, neighbours and countries
near and far, our life and living would be completely
unbearable. We thank them. The United Nations
and its agencies have been actively at work. The
Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States, the Regional Security System, the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America,
the Association of Caribbean States and the allied
regional agencies have been at the forefront with their
magnificent efforts.
We acknowledge and emphasize the support from
the Member States in the Americas that have rallied
and continue to rally to our cause, as have many others

21-1052113/17

A/75/PV.62

in the wider international community. It is important
to note that within 24 hours of the first set of explosive
eruptions, my Prime Minister received a personal call
from Secretary-General António Guterres. Two days
after that, the United Nations Resident Coordinator
for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean, based in
Barbados, 100 miles east of Saint Vincent, arrived by
boat because the airspace was closed, in a credit to the
new reforms.
In conclusion, we again thank the members of the
international community for their solidarity and reiterate
our strong commitment to working with Governments,
intergovernmental
and
regional
organizations,
international financial institutions and the private
sector in the recovery process of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, as well as the neighbouring countries
affected by the impact of the eruptions of La Soufrière.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): When the La Soufrière volcano erupted
with apocalyptic fury two weeks ago, it set off a chain
reaction, spurring a crisis within a crisis. More than
13,000 people were forced to flee. Their displacement
has caused further anguish to a region already
struggling to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic.
And worse, as the Assembly has heard today, the start
of the Atlantic hurricane season raises the possibility of
a triple crisis as the volcano continues to erupt.
We must act now, together, to meet the $29.2 million
fundraising goal of the United Nations and bring relief to
the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We are
proud to be a sponsor of resolution 75/275 and to join the
consensus on it today. We stand with the people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and with their Government,
which is a strong partner in the Security Council. In
addition to our words, we show our solidarity through
action. After United States Ambassador Taglialatela
declared the situation a disaster on 9 April, the United
States Agency for International Development gave an
initial $100,000 to the Red Cross to distribute emergency
food assistance and relief to affected households. Our
National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave
$150,000 in aid and provided expertise, logistics,
analysis and recovery support. The United States also
gave funds to support evacuation efforts and provide
immediate relief, from food and safe drinking water to
volcano monitoring equipment. That is just the start of
what will be a long-term response.
14/17

28/04/2021

Those actions represent our firm commitment to
our friends in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and to
humanitarian action. We support disaster risk reduction
to help countries prevent the worst disasters and
address them when they happen. We support technical
cooperation with other nations to ensure that our efforts
are as efficient and effective as possible. We will always
be ready to provide humanitarian assistance and will
urge others to do the same, based on the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. When we work together, when we
take a multi-stakeholder, multi-hazard approach to
disaster response, we can save lives. We can save entire
communities. That is what we are here to do for our
friends in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and our
hearts go out to the people. We are proud to be part of
this effort.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): It feels particularly
propitious to have you, Madam Vice-President, in the
Chair for this agenda item. I would like to thank the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the CARICOM
delegation for bringing today’s important resolution to
the General Assembly. The United Kingdom is also
pleased to be a sponsor of resolution 75/275. And I thank
Ambassador King for that disturbing but also inspiring
statement. The United Kingdom stands with the people
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines at this difficult
time. The eruption has wrought devastation and human
misery and the situation requires our sustained attention
as the volcano’s state of active eruption continues.
In disasters of this kind, the United Kingdom’s
approach has a key principle at its heart, which is that
early action saves lives. We therefore acted quickly
to provide vital support to the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency, which enabled the
immediate mobilization of regional support teams and
urgent supplies for the initial relief effort. This month
we have given $1 million to the World Food Programme
to help approximately 13,000 people displaced by the
volcano meet their immediate nutrition, hygiene and
other essential needs for the next three months. For
all of us here, the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), to which the United Kingdom is a major donor,
has played a vital role in the initial response, providing
water, sanitation and hygiene support. The CERF works
and we should all contribute to it.
Alongside that emergency support, the United
Kingdom has an ongoing programme of development
assistance to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines totalling
21-10521

28/04/2021

more than $55 million, which will make a critical
contribution to the country’s long-term recovery from
the eruption and which includes funding for critical
infrastructure projects, upgrades of healthcare facilities
and support for disaster management systems, green
energy and youth employment programmes.
As we have just heard from Ambassador King, this
is an overwhelming challenge for the people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. One need only look at the
aerial photographs to understand the devastation and
helplessness that some people must feel at the scale of
that challenge. In particular, with the Atlantic hurricane
season ahead, that could turn to despair, which would
be completely understandable. But when we in this
Hall come together as a global community to stand
with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to face that
challenge, it becomes less daunting. Let us all follow up
our sponsorship with our friendship and a strong show
of financial and expert support.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure to see you presiding over our work, Madam
Vice-President. At the outset, I would like to thank
the member States of the Caribbean Community for
resolution 75/275, which is extremely important.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes its adoption by
consensus and its large number of sponsors, including
Morocco. I would also like to express the Kingdom
of Morocco’s full solidarity with and support for the
Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, as well as those of neighbouring countries,
following the disastrous eruption of the La Soufrière
volcano. Regrettably, this natural disaster continues
to have damaging effects on the life of the people of
Saint Vincent and Grenadines and the other countries
of the region that have been affected, especially in the
areas of economic and social development, population
displacement, access to infrastructure and food security.
The mix of dangerous effects of the natural
disaster, compounded by those of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, will have a serious impact on the
considerable and laudable efforts of Saint Vincent and
Grenadines and other countries of the region to fully
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. In addition,
the Kingdom of Morocco therefore calls for large-scale
multidimensional assistance for Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and the countries of the region to address
the impact of this natural disaster. We call in particular
on the United Nations and its agencies, regional and
subregional organizations, international and regional

A/75/PV.62

financial institutions, development banks and bilateral
donors to make generous and rapid contributions
in support of the efforts of the Government of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines to address the disaster and
ensure economic and social recovery.
Morocco is engaged in multidimensional
partnerships with Saint Vincent and Grenadines and the
countries of the region generally within a productive
and active South-South cooperation framework. We
will remain at their side during this difficult time
and continue to spare no effort in support of their
socioeconomic sustainable development based on
their priorities.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this agenda item. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 73.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/75/L.78)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.78.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): On behalf
of the member States of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) — Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation
and my own country, Tajikistan — I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.78, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization”.
The draft resolution is a technical rollover from
the previous version, resolution 73/331, which was
adopted by consensus on 25 July 2019. We wanted to
accommodate the concerns of member States as much
as possible, because the most important element for us
is consensus, and an overwhelming majority supported
the idea of adopting the draft as a technical rollover from
the previous resolution. That is why the CSTO member
States decided not to include new language. We reached
consensus on the draft resolution and are grateful
to all Member States for their active participation,

21-1052115/17

A/75/PV.62

constructive approach and flexibility in the process
of agreeing on it. We count on their continued support
so that we can again adopt this draft resolution by
consensus, as was the case during previous sessions.
The draft resolution stresses the importance
of continuing to strive for a world free of terrorism,
including through the comprehensive implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Noting the various initiatives by member States and
regional organizations in that regard, it invites the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization to continue their interaction in the interests
of the consistent and comprehensive implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It also invites
increased cooperation and coordination among the
specialized agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system and the CSTO, and the development
of those direct contacts in areas of mutual interest.
Finally, it encourages both organizations to continue
to examine possible ways to further strengthen their
interaction in the area of peacekeeping.
Since the signing of the Collective Security Treaty,
the CSTO has been transformed into a multifunctional
structure with the potential for providing an adequate
response to a wide range of threats and challenges
within the area of its responsibility. It is committed to
continuing to act in line with the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and it
has become an essential organization for addressing
security, in all its dimensions, in the region. We are
convinced that strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization is important for promoting the goals and
objectives of the United Nations.
In conclusion, on behalf of the CSTO member
States, I would like to thank the representatives of all
Member States for their active participation throughout
the process of agreeing on the draft resolution and to
express our appreciation to the delegations that have
already become sponsors. We invite those that have not
yet joined the list of sponsors to do so now.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/75/L.78. Before giving the
floor for explanations of vote or position, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
16/17

28/04/2021

Mr. Mialkovskyi (Ukraine): Today is a very sad
day for international law and international relations.
Today, the United Nations, which was established
to maintain international peace and security and to
develop friendly relations among States, will endorse
its cooperation with the Russian-led military bloc,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
which has become a clear example of the destructive
policy tools that Russia employs in the region. This
is the organization that failed to take adequate steps
to respond to Russia’s full-scale aggression against
Ukraine and Georgia, thereby contributing to Russia’s
imperialistic goals and priorities. It is sad that we must
be reminded of that today, after Russia’s provocative
military build-up on Ukraine’s borders, its most recent
illegal restrictions on freedom of navigation in the
Black Sea and its aggressive actions towards some
members of the European Union.
Ukraine supports cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which is an important tool for the
effective settlement of conflicts and the promotion of
peace and security. The CSTO is not an organization that
serves that purpose. Taking that into account, Ukraine
cannot support draft resolution A/75/L.78 and therefore
dissociates itself from the consensus on the draft. We
will vote against it if a recorded vote is requested.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position. The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.78,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization”. I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
Angola and Senegal have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.78.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.78?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/276).

A/75/L.78

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would again
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
21-10521

28/04/2021

to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We value the cooperation between the United Nations
and the various regional organizations and would
like to thank the representative of Tajikistan for
introducing resolution 75/276, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”.
We believe firmly that such cooperation is more
effective when there is full alignment with the Charter
of the United Nations and with international law. To
ensure consistency in the draft resolutions introduced at
the General Assembly, it is important that the language
used in referring to international crimes be aligned
with that used in the legal instruments that codify those
crimes. In that regard and considering the language
used in operative paragraph 2 of the resolution, Mexico
would like to point to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, as well
as two of its three supplementary protocols — the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air. Using the same verb — “combat” — when
addressing irregular migration and the illicit trafficking
in drugs, weapons and persons is not consistent with
the additional supplementary protocols or recently
agreed international commitments on those issues. It
is therefore important to underscore that the smuggling
of migrants is not the same as trafficking in persons.
The crimes are different, which is why there are
separate protocols.
I repeat that it is important to stress that the
smuggling of migrants is not the same as trafficking in
persons. They are two distinct crimes and, as such, have
separate protocols, which call for different responses.
In addition, not all irregular migration is due to the
smuggling of migrants. That is why Mexico disagrees
with the wording in paragraph 2 of the resolution we
adopted today. Confusing international migration
with the smuggling of migrants places international
migration on the same footing as threats to international
peace and security such as terrorism and the illicit trade
in weapons.

A/75/PV.62

In addition, with regard to references to the world
drug problem, we stress that the outcomes of the special
session of the General Assembly in 2016 also consider
the issue through the prisms of health and full respect
for human rights.
Mexico will continue supporting international
cooperation efforts with regional organizations and
advocating strict adherence to international law.
Ms. Khachidze (Georgia): Georgia would like to
thank the Permanent Mission of Tajikistan for leading
the consultations on resolution 75/276.
Georgia is a staunch supporter of United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations as an efficient
way to promote the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and contribute to international
peace and security. Nevertheless, we believe that the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) has
not become part of the system of regional organizations
acting for a shared purpose. In particular, we believe
that the CSTO’s efforts to provide an adequate response
to a wide range of threats and challenges within the
area of its responsibility do not serve that goal.
As a founding member of our Organization, the
Russian Federation has pursued an aggressive policy
towards its neighbours, violated their sovereignty and
territorial integrity and continued the illegal occupation,
militarization and annexation of parts of their territories.
We nevertheless engaged in consultations on the draft
text in a positive spirit, providing amendments to the
text. It is regrettable that the majority of our proposals,
which are of critical importance, were not reflected in
the final text, and for that reason we wish to dissociate
ourselves from the consensus on the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (t)
of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-1052117/17
