Resolutions adopted on the reports of the :Fourth Committee

demned by the General Assembly in resolutions 1761
(XVII) of 6 November 1962 and 1881 (XVIII) of
11 October 1963,
Observing with profound regret that the Government
of South Africa has persistently and deliberately failed
to fulfil its international obligations in the administration
of the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
Considering that any attempt by the Government of
South Africa to annex a part or the whole of the
Territory of South \Vest Africa would be contrary to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 11 July 1950 7 and would constitute a violation of
that Government's obligations under the J\fandate and
of its other intermtional ob!igations,
Considc1-ing further that the continuing support received by the Government of South Africa from certain
Powers or certain financial groups encourages it to
persist in its attitude and embles it to do so,
Decplv concrrncd at the present critical situation in
South \Vest Africa, the continuation of which constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security,
Takinq into consideration the special responsibilities
of the Pnited Nations with regard to the Territory of
South West Africa,
1. A />frnves the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Grantimr of Jndenendence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples on "'the question of South West
Africa, r;i.rticularly its conclusions and recommendations. and expresses keen appreciation for the work
of the Committee;
2. Solemnly rraffirms the inalienable right of the
people of South \Vest Africa to self-determination and
independence;
.3. Condemns the Government of the Republic of
South .A frir:a for its persistent refusal to co-operate with
tJ-,e United Nations in applying the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and implementing the
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Considers that any attempt to annex a part or
the whole of the Territorv of South West Africa constitutes an act of aggression ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continne his efforts with a view to achieving
the obiectives stated in naragraohs 5 and 6 of General
Assemblv resolution 1805 (XVII);
( b) To invite the Gove1 nment of South Africa to
inform him of its decision regarding the provisions of
those p;iragraphs not later than 30 November 1963;
( c) To report to the General Assembly immediately
after he has received the reply of the Government of
South Africa;
6. Decidrs to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the present critical situation in South West
Africa, the continnation of which constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security;
7. Urges all States which have not yet done so to
take, separately or collectively, the following measures
with reference to the question of South VJ'est Africa:
(a) Refrain forthwith from supplying in any manner
or form any arms or military equipment to South
Africa;
7 foternational status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.

47

( b) Refrain also from supplying in any manner or
form any petroleum or petroleum products to South
Africa;
( c) Refrain from any action which might hamper
the implementation of the present resolution and of the
previous General Assembly resolutions on South \Vest
Africa;
8. Requests the Special Committee:
( u:) To continue its efforts with a view to discharging the t;,sks assigned to it by resolution 1805 (XVII);
( b) To consider, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and the agencies of the United Nations, the
implications of the activities of the mining indttstry and
the other international companies having interests in
South \Vest Africa, in order to assess their economic
and political influence and their mode of operation;
( c) To rerort on these questions to the General
i,ssembly at its nineteenth session;
9. Derides to maintain the question of South West
Africa on the agenda of its eighteenth session and to
n·sume consideration of this question in the light of
the rrn 1v of tlw Government of Sonth Africa, given in
accordance with p;i.ragraph 5 above, and immediately
after receipt of that reply.
1257th f•lenarv meetin(I,
13 ·N uve111bcr 1963.

1900 (XVIII). Petitions concerning the Territory
of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Noting th;i.t the Special Committee on the Situation
with re~ard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Grnnting of Independence to Colonial Conntries
and Peon1es has received nnd examined ninetv-four
petitions 'concerning South \Vest Africa, in acco;dance
with parag-r;i.ph 3 of General Assembly resolution
1805 (XVII) of 14 December 1962,
N otinq further that those petitions dealt, inter alia,
with the general situation .:ind the events occurring
within the Territorv of South West Africa, the establishment of a United Nations presence in the Territory
in accordance with paragr;-,,ph 6 of resolution 1805
(XVII). the attitttde of th" Government of the Republic
of ~ 0uth Africa towards the resolutions of the General
Assembly, the problems frtced by South \Vest Africans,
inclml;ng students, travelling through the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nvasaland, and the consideration of
the question of South ·west Africa in the United
Nations,
Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on South \Vest Africa submitted to
the General Assembly by the Special Committee on the
Situation w;th regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial·
Countries and Peoples, 6 to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on special education;il and training programmes
for South \Vest Africa, 8 and to the resolutions on the
question of South West Africa adopted by the Assembly
at its eighteenth session.
1257th plenary meeting,
13 November 1963.
8 Official .Records of the General Assembly, Eiohtee11th Session, Annexes, agenda item SS, documents A/5526 and Add.l.
