United Nations

A/52/PV.73

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

73rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 16 December 1997, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)
A/52/L.43/Rev.1, A/52/L.44/Rev.1,
A/52/L.46/Rev.1, A/52/L.56, A/52/L.58/Rev.1,
A/52/L.60, A/52/L.61/Rev.1)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tello (Mexico),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

(d) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/159)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance
Draft resolution (A/52/L.45/Rev.1)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

Draft resolution (A/52/L.57/Rev.1)
(e) Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”, in
activities of the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/586)

Notes by
A/52/443)

the

Secretary-General

(A/52/270,
Draft resolution (A/52/L.32/Rev.1)

Draft resolution (A/52/L.48/Rev.1)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual countries
or regions
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/52/297,
A/52/341, A/52/433, A/52/434, A/52/500, A/52/525,
A/52/532, A/52/535, A/52/562, A/52/563, A/52/568,
A/52/678)
Draft resolutions (A/52/L.14/Rev.2, A/52/L.16/Rev.2,
A/52/L.34/Rev.1, A/52/L.36/Rev.1, A/52/L.37,
A/52/L.40/Rev.1, A/52/L.41, A/52/L.42/Rev.1,

97-86752 (E)

(f)

Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/537)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.33/Rev.1)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I give the floor to the representative of Luxembourg to
introduce draft resolutions A/52/L.45/Rev.1 and
A/52/L.57/Rev.1.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour today to introduce two draft
resolutions. The first, draft resolution A/52/L.45/Rev.1,
deals with the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. In addition to the sponsors already listed on the
draft resolution, India and the United States of America
have expressed the wish to sponsor the draft.
The security of humanitarian personnel is an aspect of
humanitarian assistance that, unfortunately, has moved
increasingly to the forefront of current events. The draft
resolution before us reflects the deep concern of the
international community at the growing number of
situations throughout the world in which the security of
such personnel is called into question.
In the draft resolution before us, the General Assembly
would reaffirm the need to respect the principles and norms
of international humanitarian law and would strongly
condemn any act or failure to act that obstructs
humanitarian personnel or prevents them from discharging
their humanitarian functions.
The General Assembly would call upon Governments
and parties to conflicts, as well as those in other emergency
situations, to ensure humanitarian personnel unhindered
access to affected populations and to take all necessary
measures so that humanitarian action can take place in a
safe environment.
It would also call on States to hold responsible any
person committing an act of violence against humanitarian
personnel.
Finally, the Assembly would honour the memory of
those who have given their lives to assist people in distress
and pay tribute to humanitarian personnel for their courage
in continuing to perform their functions often in high-risk
situations.
The sponsors would like particularly to express their
thanks to the Permanent Representative of Austria,
Mr. Ernst Sucharipa, for the very effective way in which he
conducted the consultations this year and to all the
delegations that participated constructively in our informal
negotiations on this draft resolution. We hope that the
General Assembly will be able to adopt the draft resolution
by consensus.
I have the honour to introduce a second draft
resolution, A/52/L.57/Rev.1, on behalf of the sponsors listed

2

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
in the document. India, Indonesia and Norway have also
expressed the wish to be sponsors of the draft resolution.
The peace process is a fragile and vulnerable
construct. Without economic assistance, the Palestinian
people's level of poverty and political frustration would be
much higher. The urgent need to give the Palestinian
people substantial international assistance that takes into
account their own priorities, is increasingly clear.
The sponsors of the draft resolution before us attach
particular importance to assistance to the Palestinian
people. Mindful of the serious economic difficulties and
employment problems that they face, the draft
underscores the importance of urgently improving the
economic and social infrastructure of the occupied
Territory and the living conditions of the Palestinian
people.
The draft resolution expresses appreciation to the
Secretary-General, to the Member States and to
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for
their activities and efforts to provide assistance to the
Palestinian people. In this context, the sponsors stress the
importance of the work done by the United Nations
Special Coordinator in the Occupied Territories, as well
as the action taken by the Secretary-General to set up a
coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities in
that area.
The draft resolution, among other things, calls on
relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system to intensify their assistance in response to the
urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance with
the priorities set forth by the Palestinian Authority, with
emphasis on national execution and capacity-building.
Member States, for their part, are urged to open their
markets to exports from the West Bank and Gaza on the
most favourable terms, consistent with appropriate trading
rules.
Lastly, the sponsors call upon the donor community
to expedite delivery of pledged assistance to the
Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs.
The sponsors would like to thank all the delegations
that were good enough to participate constructively in the
informal negotiations and we hope that the Assembly will
be able to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President: (interpretation from Spanish:
I call on the representative of Sweden to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.48/Rev.1.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations”, contained in document A/52/L.48/Rev.1.
The short procedural draft resolution before the
Assembly responds to the note by the Secretary-General of
8 October 1997, in which he outlined the context of his
further reporting to the General Assembly regarding
coordination of humanitarian assistance.
In his note the Secretary-General recalled Economic
and Social Council resolution 1995/56 of 28 July 1995, in
which the Council decided to undertake a review of the
capacity of the United Nations to respond to humanitarian
emergencies and natural disasters.
The Secretary-General also noted the decision by the
Economic and Social Council last summer requesting the
Secretary-General to present a more comprehensive report
on humanitarian assistance to the Council at one of its
subsequent sessions.
The operative paragraph of the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on
the further progress by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee, chaired by the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
in the strengthening of the capacity of the United Nations
in humanitarian assistance.
The draft resolution before the Assembly was
approved in the informal consultations conducted by
Ambassador Sucharipa of Austria, and I hope that it will be
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus.
Due to the procedural nature of the draft resolution, no
co-sponsorship has been a sought.
Before concluding, I would like to pay special tribute
to Mr. Akashi, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, and to his staff, as well as to the United Nations
agencies involved, for their dedication and unfailing
commitment in addressing human suffering caused by
emergencies and natural disasters.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Liberia to introduce draft

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
resolutions A/52/L.14/Rev.2, L.16/Rev.2 and L.40/Rev.1,
L.42/Rev.1 and L.60.
Mr. Bull (Liberia): In my capacity as Chairman of
the African Group for this month, I am pleased to
introduce for the unanimous endorsement of the General
Assembly five draft resolutions under agenda item 20 (b),
on the strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions.
In draft resolution A/52/L.14/Rev.2, entitled “Special
assistance for the economic recovery and reconstruction
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the Assembly
would recognize that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is encountering severe economic and social
problems which result from its weak infrastructure and
years of mismanagement. It would note that, in spite of
the genuine efforts made by the Government, the country
still faces some difficulties in sustaining its reconstruction
and development programmes. The Assembly would
welcome the 4 December 1997 meeting of the “Friends of
the Congo”, chaired by the World Bank in Brussels, as an
important step in establishing dialogue between the
Government and the donor community. It would invite
Member States, specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as
international development and financial institutions, to
assist the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance with its
national priorities.
Draft resolution A/52/L.16/Rev.2, entitled “Special
assistance to Central African countries receiving
refugees”, expresses deep concern about the massive flow
of refugees, returnees and other displaced persons in
Central Africa and welcomes the prospects for the
voluntary return, repatriation and reintegration of refugees
in safety and dignity and the efforts made to find a
durable solution to their plight. It notes that the flow of
refugees in Central Africa has a negative social,
economic, and ecological impact on the host countries, as
well as on the refugees, and expresses gratitude to the
host countries for their continued sacrifice in
accommodating the refugees. The Assembly would
express appreciation to all governmental and nongovernmental organizations for the humanitarian, financial
and technical assistance provided to refugees and the host
countries and would call upon them to assist in restoring
basic services destroyed in countries hosting refugees.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In draft resolution A/52/L.40/Rev.1, entitled
“Assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Liberia”, the Assembly would commend the concerted
efforts of the Economic Community of West African States,
the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations
for helping to restore peace, security and stability in
Liberia. It would take note of the presidential and
legislative elections which culminated in the installation of
a civilian Government on 2 August 1997. It would express
gratitude to governmental and non-governmental
organizations for their assistance and support for the peace
process. The Assembly would request the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts to mobilize all possible assistance
within the United Nations system to assist the Government
of Liberia in its reconstruction and development efforts, as
well as in organizing a donors' conference early next year
for the reconstruction of the country.
Draft resolution A/52/L.42, entitled “Emergency
assistance to the Sudan”, reflects the developments relating
to the implementation of Operation Lifeline Sudan as
outlined in the Secretary-General's report contained in
document A/52/525. It recognizes the need in emergency
situations to address the continuum of relief, rehabilitation
and development and stresses the need for Operation
Lifeline Sudan to have a tripartite nature — efficiency,
transparency and effectiveness. It takes note of and is
encouraged by the signing in April 1997 of the Peace
Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and rebel
factions for the achievement of peace in that country and
encourages further consultation and negotiations between
the Government and rebel factions so as to establish
durable peace and stability in the Sudan and to facilitate the
delivery of relief supplies. The draft resolution further calls
on the international community to contribute generously to
the emergency needs, recovery and development of the
Sudan.

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
upon all Somali parties to seek peaceful means to resolve
the ongoing political conflict. Noting with concern the
absence of a central authority and the lack of effective
civil institutions in the country, the General Assembly
would emphasize that the Somali people, particularly at
local levels, have primary responsibility for their own
development and for the sustainability of rehabilitation
and reconstruction programmes. Thus, the draft resolution
urges the international community to assist the Somali
people at local levels in all those areas where peace and
security prevail. In addition, it appeals to the international
community to provide emergency disaster relief assistance
to those areas which are affected by the recent severe
floods.
I commend these draft resolutions to the General
Assembly and request their adoption by consensus. I wish
also to congratulate the Permanent Representative of
Austria, who coordinated the consultations and successful
negotiation of the texts.
Finally, I wish to express the African Group's
appreciation to all Member States which supported its
draft resolution A/52/L.37 entitled “Emergency assistance
for the economic recovery and reconstruction of
Burundi”, consideration of which has been deferred to the
resumed session of this Assembly in order to await the
outcome of the summit of member States of the Arusha
Initiative, which is scheduled to be held in January 1998.
Similarly, I wish to convey the Group's appreciation
to all Member States that have supported draft resolution
A/52/L.41 entitled “International assistance for the
economic rehabilitation of Angola”. This draft resolution
is still being discussed, and we request its deferral until
the resumed session of the General Assembly, as
consensus does not exist at this time.

Draft resolution A/52/L.60, entitled “Assistance for
humanitarian relief and the economic and social
rehabilitation of Somalia”, is sponsored by China, India,
Kuwait, Lesotho, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen. The draft resolution is
similar to that adopted on this subject during the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly, except in those
paragraphs dealing with the recent devastating floods that
have worsened an already fragile humanitarian situation in
some parts of Somalia.

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico to
introduce draft resolution A/52/L.34/Rev.1.

In the draft resolution the General Assembly would
appreciate the efforts of the international community in
providing assistance to the Somali people and would call

The preambular part of the draft resolution refers to
the resolutions in which the General Assembly recognized
the importance of international cooperation for El

4

Mr. Albín (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
I am honoured to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors,
draft resolution A/52/L.34/Rev.1, entitled “Assistance for
the reconstruction and development of El Salvador”.
Bolivia and Italy have joined the list of sponsors of this
draft resolution.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Salvador. It also refers to the report of the SecretaryGeneral [A/52/433], which stresses the tremendous effort
made by Salvadoran society to fulfil the commitments laid
down in the Peace Agreements and to promote and
consolidate the profound transformations that have taken
place in the country since 1992.
The draft resolution notes with satisfaction the
renewed expression by the Government of El Salvador and
the Salvadoran political forces of their political will to
consolidate peace and development through specific
programmes and projects. The text recognizes that the
reintegration of former combatants and demobilized
members of the armed forces is a complex task the
sustainability of which is linked to the broader context of
economic, social and institutional development.
It also recognizes that, in spite of the national efforts
and the support given by the international community, the
implementation of priority political, economic, social and
environmental programmes and projects in the process of
consolidating peace continues to be affected by various
factors.
After taking note with approval of the reports of the
Secretary-General, the operative part of the draft resolution
again expresses gratitude to all the members of the United
Nations system, the donor community and the international
development and financing institutions, both governmental
and non-governmental, for the financial and technical
assistance they have provided to El Salvador as a vital
complement to national efforts.
The draft reaffirms the importance of the continuation
of programmes for the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the promotion of development, which
constitute the collective aspirations for advancing the
consolidation of peace, democracy and sustainable
development in El Salvador.
It urges the Government of El Salvador and all
political forces to support the programmes and strategies,
particularly social welfare projects, designed to improve the
lives of the most vulnerable segments of the population.
Recognizing the need for continued international
support and cooperation as a complement to national
efforts, the text reaffirms that external cooperation plays an
important role in the consolidation of the peace process, the
strengthening of democracy and sustainable development.
Consequently, it appeals to the United Nations system, the
donor community and the international financial institutions

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
to continue to provide political, financial and technical
support for the process of transformation to which the
nation of El Salvador aspires.
Lastly, it requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
After more than a decade of bloody armed conflict,
the Salvadoran people opted for peace. The arduous
process of dialogue and negotiation, which required much
resolve and tenacity, culminated in the signing of the
Chapultepec Accord in 1992.
Since that time, five years ago, the Salvadoran
people have begun an extraordinary undertaking of
institutional reconstruction and social and economic
development. This task is being accomplished, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General and the draft
resolution itself, in a context of considerable complexity.
The process of profound transformation to which the
people and the Government of El Salvador are committed
involves, as in any other country in the world,
opportunities and challenges. We, the sponsors, are
convinced that by placing the supreme good of peacebuilding and reconciliation above all other considerations,
Salvadorans will continue to demonstrate their conviction
and strength, as a nation that aspires to the construction
of a freer, more democratic and more just society with
improved living conditions and well-being for its people.
As the Salvadoran people reaffirm day by day their
noble commitment to renewal, transformation and
consolidation, they have received political, financial and
technical support from the international community. It
must be noted, however, that the progressive development
of the process in conditions of certainty and stability over
the medium and long term requires that support to be
maintained and increased. After all, the Salvadoran
process, one of the most successful experiences of the
United Nations, has already demonstrated that it is a good
investment.
For these reasons, we, the sponsors, hope that the
General Assembly will lend renewed political support to
El Salvador, and we urge the international community to
contribute generously to the reconstruction and
development of El Salvador. We trust that the draft
resolution will be adopted unanimously by the Assembly.

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President (interpretation from
Spanish): I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.36/Rev.1.
Mr. Hamdan (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation is honoured to introduce to the Assembly, on
behalf of Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, France, Greece, India, Italy,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Romania, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Yemen,
the draft resolution contained in document A/52/L.36/Rev.1,
entitled “Assistance for the reconstruction and development
of Lebanon”, under agenda item 20 (b).
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolutions
recalls the resolutions previously adopted by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in this
respect.
It also reaffirms the need to be aware of the
magnitude of the requirements of Lebanon and the pressing
need to continue to assist its Government in dealings with
the impediments to national rehabilitation and
reconstruction and the reactivation of human and economic
resources resulting from the extensive destruction of its
infrastructure.
In operative paragraph 1, the draft resolution appeals
to all Member States and institutions to consider
intensifying their efforts with a view to increasing all forms
of support, including financial grants and soft loans given
for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon. In
particular, it calls upon donor countries to consider playing
a full part in the consultative group to be established on the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of Lebanon.
In operative paragraph 2, the draft resolution calls
upon all international organizations to direct their activities
basically towards the implementation of programmes given
priority by the Government concerning rehabilitation and
reintegration of displaced persons and in the reconstruction
and development of Baalbeck-Hermel and the south
Lebanon region.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
We hope that the draft resolution will be adopted
without a vote.

6

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
I should like to announce that the Secretariat has
informed us that copies of the Secretary-General's report
relating to this item, “Assistance for the reconstruction
and development of Lebanon,” are now available.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Honduras to introduce
draft resolution A/52/L.43/Rev.1.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): I am honoured to address the General
Assembly to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.43/Rev.1,
“International assistance to and cooperation with the
Alliance for the Sustainable Development of Central
America,” under item 20 (b) of the agenda. I should like
to express our gratitude to Ambassador Sucharipa of
Austria for having led the consultations that produced a
consensus on this draft resolution.
In addition, I should like to note that the following
countries have joined the original sponsors of the draft
resolution: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Norway, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Sweden
and the United Kingdom.
In recent years the countries of Central America
have succeeded in moving systematically forward towards
the consolidation of democracy, peace, respect for the rule
of law and human rights, sustainable development and
social equity. For the first time, we are enjoying complete
peace and there are democratic Governments in all the
countries of the Central American isthmus. The
commitments embodied in the various accords and
conventions that have resulted from Central American
summit meetings attest to our common efforts and today
constitute a frame of reference for the promotion and
achievement of these regional objectives.
Significant events have taken place in our region in
recent years, among which we might mention the creation
of the Alliance for the Sustainable Development of
Central America, the implementation of the
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor Project, the Treaty on
Central American Social Integration and the Tegucigalpa
International Declaration on Peace and Development in
Central America. We also consider it important to
mention the declaration of Nicaragua, signed by Panama,
Belize and the Dominican Republic this year, which
initiated the construction of the Central American Union
and strengthened subregional integration.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Alliance for the Sustainable Development of
Central America is an integral development programme that
focuses on the human being as the central and primary
subject of development and gives priority to economic and
social growth in our countries and to the protection and
conservation of the ecosystem, as is evidenced by regional
efforts in the areas of biodiversity, climate change and
forests.
Through the joint presentation of the Presidents of the
five countries in their statements in the general debate at
this session of the General Assembly, the region seeks to
consolidate political harmonization and coordination,
strengthen economic integration and foster sustainable
development.
The process of achieving genuine sustainable
development far exceeds the individual capacities of the
region's nations, and its genuine achievement in this region
requires as an essential condition a harmonized plan for
regional actions. Such achievements, based on priorities
identified by the Central American countries themselves,
rely to a large extent on international economic, financial
and technical cooperation and on assistance to the region by
the organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations, the donor community, international financial
institutions and friendly States.
It is relevant here to highlight the need for the
international community to continue its cooperation with the
Central American countries by providing the required
economic, financial and technical assistance in sustained
fashion and on favourable terms in order to make the goals
of the programme of sustainable development in Central
America achievable. In this connection, we should like to
take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to
countries that have worked with us in this process of
consolidating sustainable development in Central America.
Essentially, the draft resolution, in paragraph 2,
“Emphasizes the importance of supporting and
strengthening the new programme for international
economic, financial and technical cooperation and
assistance for Central America geared to the new
circumstances in the region and based on the priorities
laid down in the new sustainable development
programme for the region”.
In paragraph 7, it

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
“Again stresses the need for the international
community to maintain its cooperation with the
Central American countries and to provide them
with the necessary financial resources, in a sustained
manner and on soft terms, with a view to promoting
effectively the economic growth and development of
the region”.
We hope that, as in previous years, the draft
resolution on this subject will be adopted by consensus in
order to support the decision of the Central American
Governments to harmonize their efforts to carry out
updated programmes based on strategies of sustainable
human development so as to contribute to the
consolidation of democracy and of what, in our view, is
the most important goal of the coming century: the
recognition of the close relationship between democracy
and development.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Ukraine to introduce
draft resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1.
Mr. Bohaievs'ky (Ukraine): On behalf of the
delegations of the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of
Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic
and Ukraine, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1, “Economic assistance to
States affected by the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions imposing sanctions on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia”, submitted under sub-item (b),
“Special economic assistance to individual countries or
regions”, of agenda item 20, “Strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance
of the United Nations, including special economic
assistance”.
This concise document focuses on the need for
further economic assistance to the affected third States in
the transition period following the termination of the
sanctions regime against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution welcomes the support that has
already been provided by the international community to
the affected States, in view of the problems which the
imposition of sanctions has produced, and renews the
invitation to all Member States and the relevant
international organizations within and outside the United
Nations system, in particular the international financial
institutions, to continue to take into account the special

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
needs of the affected States in providing assistance to those
States.
The draft resolution also appeals to the relevant
international organizations to take appropriate steps in order
to ensure active participation of the affected countries in the
process of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the former
Yugoslavia.
By this document the General Assembly would request
the Secretary-General to report to it at its fifty-fourth
session on the implementation of the present resolution, in
order to assess the situation and to present an analysis of
the implementation of the resolution, with a view to
concluding consideration of this issue.
The implementation of sanctions showed that the
Organization is not sufficiently prepared to respond
adequately to possible problems and unforeseen negative
consequences for the third States neighbouring the target
country. These States, including my own country, Ukraine,
have not received any practical assistance as compensation
for their losses.
In this regard, we agree with the conclusion in the
report of the Secretary-General that, as the focus of the
United Nations humanitarian assistance programme has
shifted from emergency relief operations to supporting
capacity-building, the long-term support projects in the area
of development efforts in the former Yugoslavia open up
new possibilities for the affected and neighbouring States.
The active involvement of those States in the process
of regional economic cooperation would be regarded as an
element of a complex and effective mechanism to address
their special economic problems.
In conclusion, let me express our appreciation to all
delegations that sponsored this draft resolution and to
representatives of those Member States that offered their
constructive cooperation in the process of its preparation.
We are especially grateful to the European Union for its
understanding of our concerns.
We expect that delegations will support our draft
resolution, and this support will be very much appreciated.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.46/Rev.1.

8

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from
Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document
A/52/L.46/Rev.1 of 12 December 1997. Since the
document was issued, Austria, Germany, India, Italy, the
Netherlands, Pakistan and Portugal have become sponsors
as well.
Since the General Assembly's adoption in April this
year of its previous resolution on this question, there has
been a breakthrough in the efforts to settle the conflict in
Tajikistan. With the signing in Moscow of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, we have closed a very sad chapter
in the history of my country and have laid the foundation
for lasting peace and national reconciliation.
But peace in Tajikistan would hardly have been
possible without the effective support of the United
Nations, of the observer countries — Russia, Iran,
Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan — and of international
organizations, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and others. I would like to express to all of
them our enormous appreciation for the assistance and
support they have given us and to reconfirm our readiness
to continue to work constructively with them.
Unfortunately, the reality of the situation is such that
the people of Tajikistan need strong international support.
Without it, achieving peace and national reconciliation
and overcoming the consequences of the conflict would
be extremely difficult. The draft resolution before the
General Assembly today is designed specifically to focus
the attention of the international community on the acute
humanitarian needs of Tajikistan and on the need to assist
the country in implementing the General Agreement and
in economic recovery.
In the preamble, the draft resolution welcomes the
successful conclusion of the inter-Tajik talks, conducted
under United Nations auspices since 1994, with the
signing in Moscow on 27 June 1997 by the President of
the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the United
Tajik Opposition of the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.
It also welcomes the progress made by the parties in the
implementation of the General Agreement and the
effective maintenance of the ceasefire between them since
December 1996. The draft commends the efforts of the
United Nations, in particular those of the Special

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Representative of the Secretary-General for Tajikistan and
of the personnel of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan, in assisting the parties in the
implementation of the General Agreement.
The preamble notes that, despite the successful
conclusion of the inter-Tajik talks and the efforts of the
Government of Tajikistan, the economic situation in the
country remains bleak and a large percentage of the
population is extremely vulnerable. It bears in mind the
close interrelationship between ensuring peace and
achieving national reconciliation in Tajikistan and the
ability of the country to meet the humanitarian needs of its
people and to take effective steps towards the rapid
revitalization of the economy. It reaffirms the urgent need
to assist Tajikistan in its efforts to restore basic services
and the infrastructure of the country.
The draft resolution expresses concern that the security
situation in parts of Tajikistan remains volatile, while
expressing deep concern at the recent attack on the United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel in Tajikistan. It
also expresses its deep concern about the danger posed by
landmines in Tajikistan.
The preamble welcomes the completion of the
voluntary repatriation of Tajik refugees from northern
Afghanistan, and it stresses the importance of ensuring the
voluntary return, in safety and dignity, of all refugees and
displaced persons to their places of permanent residence. It
expresses appreciation to the States, the United Nations and
other intergovernmental organizations and all relevant
humanitarian organizations, agencies and non-governmental
organizations, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross, that have responded and continue to respond
positively to the humanitarian needs of Tajikistan.
In the operative part, the draft resolution takes note of
the report of the Secretary-General and endorses the
observations and recommendations set out therein. It
welcomes the efforts aimed at achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Tajikistan and encourages the parties to
implement fully the General Agreement. It also encourages
the Commission on National Reconciliation to continue its
efforts aimed at the institution of a broad dialogue among
the various political forces in the country in the interests of
the restoration and strengthening of civil accord in
Tajikistan.

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
humanitarian problems of Tajikistan and in mobilizing
assistance for the implementation of the General
Agreement and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
country. It welcomes the intention of the SecretaryGeneral to appoint the United Nations Resident
Coordinator as Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. It welcomes the results of the donor
conference convened by the Secretary-General at Vienna
on 24 and 25 November 1997 to obtain international
support dedicated to the implementation of the General
Agreement.
The draft resolution encourages Member States and
others concerned to continue assistance to alleviate the
urgent humanitarian needs of Tajikistan and to offer
support to Tajikistan for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of its economy. It welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to prepare a full-scale
consolidated inter-agency appeal for humanitarian
assistance to Tajikistan for a period of 12 months
beginning in January 1998.
It strongly condemns the recent act of kidnapping of
the United Nations and other humanitarian personnel and
urges the parties to ensure the safety, security and
freedom of movement of United Nations and other
international humanitarian personnel as well as the safety
and security of their premises.
It encourages the parties to cooperate in order to
reduce the threat from the indiscriminate use of landmines
to the civil population of Tajikistan and to the provision
of humanitarian assistance. It requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to monitor the humanitarian situation
in Tajikistan and to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
By the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
decide to consider this item at its fifty-third session.
I wish to express appreciation to all those who have
made a real contribution to the work of preparing this
draft resolution, in particular the Permanent
Representative of Austria to the United Nations, Mr. Ernst
Sucharipa, who coordinated this work with great skill.
We hope that all delegations will be able to adopt
this draft resolution by consensus.

The draft resolution welcomes with appreciation the
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in drawing the
attention of the international community to the acute

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Jamaica to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.56.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I have the honour, on behalf
of the sponsors, to introduce the draft resolution entitled
“Emergency assistance to Montserrat”, contained in
document A/52/L.56. Since the document was issued, the
following countries have become cosponsors: Croatia, Cuba,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, India, the Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
Suriname.
We also wish to express appreciation to Ambassador
Ernst Sucharipa of Austria for having so ably guided the
informal consultations on agenda item 20.
Member States are aware of the grave situation in the
small Caribbean island of Montserrat, where volcanic
eruptions over the last two years have destroyed two thirds
of the country. Several persons have lost their lives;
thousands have lost their homes and their sources of
livelihood. Infrastructural damage has rendered the country's
air and sea ports unsafe; major destruction has occurred to
the utilities system, with schools and the major hospital
destroyed. In August this year, volcanic activity destroyed
the island's capital, Plymouth. The overwhelming majority
of Montserrat's population has been displaced, including to
neighbouring countries in the Caribbean. The result is that
the long-term economic and social development of
Montserrat has been seriously jeopardized.
As Montserrat is a member of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), its plight is naturally of grave
concern to all CARICOM States, which have offered
constructive support in the recovery efforts. We also
acknowledge the commitment of the United Kingdom, both
for emergency assistance to Montserratians as well as for
the sustainable development of their territory. A number of
other Governments and international agencies have also
provided assistance. May I take this opportunity to express
appreciation to those States and organizations which have
responded to the appeal for assistance, including
contributions to the Governor's Appeal Fund.
Montserrat remains a viable entity and the people of
the island have expressed a wish to maintain their existence
on their own land. The northern part of the country has
been unaffected by the volcanic activity and is considered
a safe zone for redevelopment and resettlement. The
Government of Montserrat has therefore decided that
redevelopment efforts should be concentrated in this area.

10

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
The costs of the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Montserrat are, however, immense and will require a
humanitarian gesture of solidarity from the international
community.
It is in this context that draft resolution A/52/L.56 on
economic assistance to Montserrat is being presented for
adoption by the General Assembly. In its operative
paragraphs, the draft resolution calls upon States to
contribute generously to the relief, rehabilitation and
reconstruction efforts. It further calls upon the United
Nations Development Programme to finalize its proposals
for a package of emergency assistance to Montserrat; and
upon the Secretary-General to monitor the situation in
Montserrat with a view to assessing the ecological and
developmental impacts of the volcanic eruptions as well
as to assisting in the long-term needs of Montserratians,
including the needs of evacuees and their rehabilitation.
It is the hope of the sponsors that, through the
adoption of this draft resolution, tangible measures to
assist the rebuilding and sustainable development of the
island of Montserrat will be forthcoming. We commend
the draft resolution to the General Assembly for adoption
by consensus.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Morocco to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.58/Rev.1.
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from
French): I have the pleasure of introducing the draft
resolution entitled “Assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Djibouti”, contained in document
A/52/L.58/Rev.1 on behalf of its sponsors: Andorra,
Burundi, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, France, Gabon,
Greece, Guinea, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Oman, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and
Yemen. The Comoros and Pakistan have also become
sponsors.
Our aim is to continue to focus the attention of the
international community on the critical economic and
social situation in this brotherly and friendly country, in
the hope of further promoting feelings of solidarity
towards it throughout the world.
We would like first and foremost to express our
gratitude to those States and international organizations

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997

that have continued to provide financial and material
support to Djibouti, particularly those that participated in
and made pledges during the round table on Djibouti held
at Geneva in May 1997.

development of the Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan”,
contained in document A/52/L.61/Rev.1. Armenia, Chile,
Egypt, Hungary, India, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal and
Tunisia have joined as sponsors of the draft.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General of
our Organization most sincerely for his efforts to strengthen
international cooperation for Djibouti.

This is the first draft resolution on this subject to be
introduced in the General Assembly. It refers to an issue
of paramount importance to my country, which has
inherited severe environmental problems from the past.

The sponsors would like to recall that Djibouti —
which is classified among the least developed countries of
our world — faces problems related to the extremes of the
local climate, which require the mobilization of resources
that exceed its capacity. In fact, recurring droughts,
torrential rains and floods have a negative impact, to say
the least, on the economic and social development of the
country and call for the commitment of substantial financial
resources.
The situation in Djibouti is further exacerbated by the
instability that prevails in the Horn of Africa, particularly
in Somalia, which gives rise to flows of refugees and
displaced persons, whose presence brings about unbearable
pressures that cause security problems heretofore unknown
in that country.
The sponsors of the draft resolution would like to
stress, among other things, that despite its limited resources
the Government of Djibouti is courageously facing the
problems that assail it by adopting an appropriate economic
and social policy, which shows its commitment to
remedying the situation. Indeed, the Government's
implementation of a structural adjustment programme, a
programme for demobilization and a plan for national
recovery are evidence of its commitment, and this cannot
fail to move the international community to greater
generosity.
Finally, the sponsors hope that the Member States of
our Organization will examine this draft resolution carefully
and conscientiously so that it can be adopted by consensus,
as the humanitarian cause that it embodies is certainly
laudable and worthy of our support.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Kazakhstan, who will
introduce draft resolution A/52/L.61/Rev.1.
Ms. Arystanbekova (Kazakhstan): I have the honour,
on behalf of 37 countries, to introduce the draft resolution
entitled “International cooperation and coordination for the
human and ecological rehabilitation and economic

As mentioned in the draft resolution, the nuclear
testing ground in Semipalatinsk, which was inherited by
Kazakhstan, has become a matter of serious concern for
the people and the Government of the Republic of
Kazakhstan with regard to its consequences for the lives
and health of the people, especially children, as well as
for the environment of the region.
Over a period of more that 40 years, 470 nuclear
explosions were conducted at this former Soviet nuclear
test site, which used to be the largest in the world. The
tests caused serious damage to the health of 1.2 million
people and to the ecosystem of Kazakhstan. The highest
level of oncological diseases in our country has been
registered in that region. Since 1950 the child mortality
rate there has risen five to tenfold, and a decrease in the
average life span of the population is apparent.
The draft resolution stresses the need for the
international community to pay greater attention to the
issue of the human, ecological and socio-economic
dimensions of the situation in the Semipalatinsk region.
It recognizes the need to coordinate national and
international efforts aimed at the rehabilitation of the
health of the affected population and the environment in
this region, bearing in mind the need for know-how in
minimizing and mitigating these problems.
The operative paragraphs of the draft resolution
contain the request to the Secretary-General to compile a
report on the humanitarian situation in the Semipalatinsk
region, in order to assist the Government of Kazakhstan
in the formulation of a recommended overall action plan
to address the humanitarian, ecological and economic
problems and needs of the region.
The draft resolution urges the international
community to provide assistance in the formulation and
implementation of special programmes and projects;
invites all States, relevant multilateral organizations and
other entities, as well as non-governmental organizations,
to share their knowledge and experience in order to

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
contribute to the human and ecological rehabilitation and
economic development of the Semipalatinsk region. The
draft resolution also contains a decision to consider the
humanitarian situation in the Semipalatinsk region at the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly under the
agenda item entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations, including special economic assistance”.
The adoption of this draft resolution will be a matter
of vital importance to my country and a remarkable sign of
support from the international community. It is very
encouraging for the people and the Government of
Kazakhstan to know that the Member States of the United
Nations, its specialized agencies, funds and programmes
share their concern with regard to the problems of the
Semipalatinsk region.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the
sponsors of this draft resolution on behalf of the delegation
of Kazakhstan.
The sponsors propose that the draft resolution be
adopted by consensus.
Mrs. Beneke (El Salvador) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank the representative
of Mexico, His Excellency Ambassador Gustavo Albín, for
his introduction of the draft resolution contained in
document A/52/L.34/Rev.1 on assistance for the
reconstruction and development of El Salvador. Our thanks
go also to the sponsors of that draft resolution — which, I
am pleased to note, now include Venezuela — as well as
to all the friendly countries that we are certain will lend us
their support in order to ensure that this draft resolution is
adopted by consensus.
We wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report on this item, which describes the economic
situation in El Salvador and the progress made in
reconstruction and in the strengthening of democracy during
the period 1995-1996.
Not quite six years have elapsed since the historic
signing of the Peace Agreements in January 1992, which
put an end to the armed conflict and established peace, thus
laying the foundation for a process of democratic transition.
In that short period of time, we have wrought a tremendous
transformation, making El Salvador an example of the
success of a peace process facilitated by the United
Nations.

12

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
The consolidation and maintenance of peace have
taken place in a complex and difficult context, but they
are based on the undeniable political will of the
Government of El Salvador and all its political forces to
keep that peace at all costs. Reconciliation has been the
key factor in the success of our peace process, and we are
striving to maintain an environment conducive to the
promotion of peace, freedom, justice and social equity in
order to continue with the consolidation of democratic
governance and to achieve sustainable development.
In El Salvador's post-war period, the primary
objective of the Government's policies is the country's
sustainable development, with due consideration given to
its three components: economic development, social
development and environmental protection. We are
sparing no effort to develop socio-economic and
environmental programmes and projects that will reach
out to and benefit all Salvadorans, particularly in the most
vulnerable segments of the population.
The Government, through its economic and social
development plan, has succeeded in stabilizing the
country economically in the wake of the difficult situation
that prevailed in the 1980s. The goal is to make
El Salvador a competitive country capable of tackling the
challenges involved in globalization and the liberalization
of world markets, thus ensuring sustained growth that will
promote the well-being of the population as a whole.
National reconstruction and democracy in
El Salvador have made significant progress, as is clear
from the successes achieved in strengthening new
democratic institutions such as the Office of the National
Counsel for Human Rights, the National Civil Police and
the National Public Security Academy, as well as from
the progress made in electoral reform and in reform
programmes aimed at a better administration of justice.
Considerable advances have also been made in other areas
identified as priorities in the Peace Agreements, such as
the economic and social reintegration of ex-combatants
and demobilized personnel; the economic and social needs
of peoples in the post-war period; and the improvement
of social infrastructures, including education, health care
and the environment.
International cooperation has played, and continues
to play, a significant role by complementing national
efforts. For that reason, I should like to take this
opportunity to thank the organs, agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system; the
Governments of the cooperating countries, in particular

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Austria, Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Netherlands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States; and the European Union, the Inter-American
Development Bank, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, and the Central American
Bank for Economic Integration, which have responded by
providing valuable technical and financial support, thereby
helping to ensure the successful implementation of the
peace agreements; as well as all the other countries and
entities that in one way or another have cooperated with
El Salvador.
El Salvador is confronting the challenges of the new
international agenda, as globalization compels us to address
the problems common to the developing countries:
strengthening the economy, upgrading the infrastructure,
combating poverty, and achieving sustainable development.
Allow me to conclude by quoting from the report of
the Secretary-General:
“I should like to take this opportunity to call on
the international community, which has contributed so
much to the progress made in El Salvador since the
signing of the peace agreements, to continue its
political, technical and financial support for the
complex process of rebuilding and developing the
country.” [A/52/433, para. 85]
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/52/L.14/Rev.2, L.16/Rev.2, L.32/Rev.1, L.33/Rev.1,
L.34/Rev.1, L.36/Rev.1, L.40/Rev.1, L.42/Rev.1,
L.43/Rev.1, L.44/Rev.1, L.45/Rev.1, L.46/Rev.1,
L.48/Rev.1, L.56, L.57/Rev.1, L.58/Rev.1, L.60 and
L.61/Rev.1.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
make statements in explanation of vote before the voting.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Hamdan (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes to explain its position on draft
resolution A/52/L.45/Rev.1, entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel”. My delegation welcomes that draft
resolution and stresses that every possible effort should be
made at the international level to ensure the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel. We join in condemning
actions targeting such personnel.

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
But it is important to take account of the
humanitarian activities and services of international
humanitarian agencies outside the context of United
Nations emergency humanitarian assistance, for example
those of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and of agencies associated with the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
These agencies do not act within the framework of
resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991, but they have a
recognized status based on the principle of impartiality
and independence. These agencies have repeatedly stated
their reservations about the use of force in the framework
of providing humanitarian assistance, because of its
negative repercussions for the activities of humanitarian
agencies that provide assistance to those in need,
including in times of emergency.
We consider that the elements set out in paragraph
9 cover the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies. We look forward with interest to the
report of the Secretary-General on this item.
All States must cooperate to strike a balance
between the needed security of humanitarian personnel
and the imperatives of the sovereignty of the States
concerned. We believe that the Sixth Committee, which
deals with legal matters, could consider formulating
guidelines or even an international convention on this
matter.
Ms. Hall (United States of America): I wish to
speak on draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1, “Emergency
assistance to the Sudan”. My delegation regrets that,
despite several intensive rounds of negotiations between
interested Member States and the delegation of Sudan, we
were not able to reach consensus on the text of a draft
resolution governing emergency assistance to Sudan. My
Government strongly supports the United Nations
Operation Lifeline Sudan and has contributed both money
and food towards its successful operation.
For the second year in a row, the Sudanese position
has prevented agreement on important issues of
humanitarian assistance. Sudan's Government is at war
with the citizens of its own country and has again chosen
not to cooperate with the international community, which
has devoted so much energy and treasure to help Sudan's
war-affected citizens. We question whether the Sudanese
Government delegation ever sought a consensus text in
good faith, and urge this body to vote against the draft
resolution.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Mr. Rahmtalla (Sudan): We would like to express
our disappointment that once again the humanitarian work
coordinated by the United Nations is being subjected to
politics and narrow political interests by some donor
countries. As was the case with a similar text during the
fifty-first session, draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1, on
emergency assistance to the Sudan, was unanimously
endorsed and sponsored by the African Group at the United
Nations. Its preambular and operative parts are substantially
identical to those of resolution 51/30 I.
In recent weeks, our delegation has been engaged in
serious and good-faith negotiations with interested
delegations of donor countries under the chairmanship of
His Excellency the Permanent Representative of Austria. In
those informal consultations, we discussed and considered
written proposals presented to us by the European Union.
The General Assembly is entitled to know how far we
have gone to accommodate the concerns reflected in those
proposals. However, we have stated that we are not
prepared to reverse the consensus and the agreed language
of resolution 46/182, which set out the principles and
guidelines for the coordination of all humanitarian
assistance undertaken by the Organization. We have
displayed unprecedented flexibility by accepting almost all
of what was proposed to us. We regret to observe that the
insistence by some on deleting references to the
participation of the Government in vital functions of
Operation Lifeline Sudan — such as the process of
assessment, allocation, distribution and evaluation of
humanitarian assistance — contravenes the principles and
guidelines for humanitarian assistance set out in resolution
46/182.
The United States delegation is alone in rejecting any
reference to cooperation by the Government with the United
Nations, despite acknowledgement of this cooperation in the
Secretary-General's report, which describes it as positive.
This was later confirmed, during the course of the
consultations, by the representative of the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs.
The insistence by the same delegation on removing
from the text of the draft resolution the reference to
national sovereignty constitutes a serious compromise of a
fundamental principle enshrined in the United Nations
Charter: respect for the national sovereignty of every State.
The new operative paragraph 7 of A/52/L.42/Rev.1,
uses consensus language agreed by all participants in the
informal consultations — that is to say, the European

14

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
Union, Canada and Japan — with the exception of the
United States of America. We have incorporated this part
of the text so as to meet the concerns of most of the
donor countries reflected in the proposal by the European
Union and to display our resolve for resuming the peace
talks under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development early next year for the
achievement of peace and stability in our country.
The United States of America's position on the text
of the draft provides yet more material evidence revealing
the real anti-peace agenda the American Administration
is seeking to impose on the Sudan, regardless of the
passive consequences which such action may have in
terms of loss of life and the suffering of innocent affected
populations in need of humanitarian assistance.
Here I would like to bring to the attention of
representatives that the effective contribution made by the
Government of the United States of America since the
beginning of the current year to Operation Lifeline Sudan,
which is the essence of this draft resolution, amounts to
zero.
Before I conclude, I would like to express to the
African Group our appreciation and gratitude for the
genuine African solidarity shown, as did our Heads of
State and Government at the Organization of African
Unity OAU summit in Harare last June. We also wish to
express appreciation and gratitude to all members of this
Assembly that voted in favour of the resolution on this
subject last year.
In the light of the aforementioned circumstances, we
have no doubt that members of this Assembly will again
lend their valuable support to this draft resolution, given
its purely humanitarian nature and the hope it carries for
the achievement of peace and stability in the Sudan.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg)(interpretation from
French): The European Union regrets that it was not
possible to arrive at a consensus on draft resolution
A/52/L.42/Rev.1, entitled “Emergency assistance to the
Sudan”. We are deeply concerned over the humanitarian
situation in the Sudan, and we would like to reconfirm
our commitment to respond as fully as possible to the
humanitarian needs of the Sudanese population, in
particular through Operation Lifeline Sudan, which must
be able to carry out its work effectively and in
cooperation with all the parties concerned.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997

The European Union is of the opinion that it is highly
regrettable that the Assembly will vote again this year on
a draft resolution on humanitarian assistance to an
individual country or region. During the informal
consultations led by the Permanent Representative of
Austria, Mr. Ernst Sucharipa, a compromise seemed to be
within our grasp, even on paragraphs that were politically
sensitive. While recognizing the sensitive nature of
operative paragraphs 2 and 7, the European Union showed
flexibility in order to respond to the concerns of the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
In our opinion, it is regrettable that, despite these
efforts, a text that differs only slightly from the original one
has been submitted. Accordingly, the European Union will
vote against the draft resolution contained in document
A/52/L.42/Rev.1.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take decisions on the draft
resolutions submitted under agenda item 20 and its subitems (a), (b), (d), (e) and (f).
Under agenda item 20, draft resolution
A/52/L.45/Rev.1 is entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.45/Rev.1 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.45/Rev.1
(resolution 52/167).

was

Draft resolution A/52/L.14/Rev.2 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 A).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Now the Assembly will take a decision on draft resolution
A/52/L.16/Rev.2, entitled “Special assistance to Central
African countries receiving refugees”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.16/Rev.2 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 B).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.34/Rev.1, entitled “Assistance for the
reconstruction and development of El Salvador”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.34/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 C).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.36/Rev.1, entitled “Assistance for the
reconstruction and development of Lebanon”.

adopted

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Under sub-item 20 (a), draft resolution A/52/L.48/Rev.1 is
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.

Draft resolution A/52/L.36/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 D).

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.48/Rev.1 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.48/Rev.1
(resolution 52/168).

was

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.40/Rev.1, entitled “Assistance for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Liberia”.

adopted

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Under sub-item (b), the Assembly will first take a decision
on draft resolution A/52/L.14/Rev.2, entitled “Special
assistance for the economic recovery and reconstruction of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.

Draft resolution A/52/L.40/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 E).

May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt the draft resolution without a vote?

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1, entitled “Emergency
assistance to the Sudan”.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
A recorded vote has been requested.

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
in favour; the delegation of the Republic of Moldova
had intended to vote against.]

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Burundi, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Samoa, Slovenia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1 was adopted by 95
votes to 38, with 13 abstentions (resolution 52/169 F).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bhutan and Burundi
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote

16

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.43/Rev.1, entitled “International
assistance to and cooperation with the Alliance for the
Sustainable Development of Central America”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.43/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 G).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1, entitled “Economic assistance
to States affected by the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions imposing sanctions on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 H).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.46/Rev.1, entitled “Emergency
international assistance for peace, normalcy and
rehabilitation in Tajikistan”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.46/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/169 I).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.56, entitled “Emergency assistance to
Montserrat”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.56 was adopted (resolution
52/169 J).

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/52/L.58/Rev.1, entitled “Assistance for the reconstruction
and development of Djibouti”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.32/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/171).

adopted

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Under sub-item (f), draft resolution A/52/L.33/Rev.1 is
entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize
the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”.

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/52/L.60, entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief and
the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”.

May I take that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?

Draft resolution A/52/L.58/Rev.1
(resolution A/52/169 K).

was

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.60 was adopted (resolution
52/169 L).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/52/L.61/Rev.1, entitled “International cooperation and
coordination for the human and ecological rehabilitation and
economic development of the Semipalatinsk region of
Kazakhstan”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.61/Rev.l
(resolution 52/169 M).

was

adopted

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Under sub-item (d), draft resolution A/52/L.57/Rev.1 is
entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/52/L.57/Rev.1
(resolution 52/170).

was

Draft resolution A/52/L.33/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/172).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Ukraine on a point of order.
Mr. Bohaievs'ky (Ukraine): I apologize for delaying
the decision on a very important draft resolution,
A/52/L.44/Rev.1, which my delegation initiated and which
was sponsored by a number of delegations.
First of all, I would like once again to express our
deep appreciation to all delegations that joined the
consensus on draft resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1, as well as
on the draft resolution concerning assistance to
Chernobyl.
It had been my intention, before a decision was
taken on A/52/L.44/Rev.l, to bring to the Assembly's
attention that, at the last moment, and after I had
introduced the draft resolution, we were approached by
one delegation with a request to make a minor change in
operative paragraph 5. We had little time to consult the
other sponsors, and we reached a general agreement that
we could accept the request that the words “of the former
Yugoslavia” could be dropped from the end of operative
paragraph 5.

adopted

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Under sub-item (e), draft resolution A/52/L.32/Rev.1 is
entitled “Participation of volunteers, White Helmets', in
activities of the United Nations in the field of humanitarian
relief, rehabilitation and technical cooperation for
development”.

Unfortunately, we did not manage — and we respect
the procedures, but in some situations it is very important
to have the final approval or agreement of all interested
delegations.
For this reason, I wanted to make this clarification
and ask whether, taking this fact into consideration,
operative paragraph 5 of the final version of the text
could end with the words “reconstruction and

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
rehabilitation” and the words “of the former Yugoslavia”
could be dropped. We would very much appreciate it.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I do not believe that the Assembly, having adopted without
a vote the text that was introduced by the representative of
Ukraine — draft resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1 — can now
amend or revise the text. However, the explanation and
clarification given by the representative of Ukraine will be
reflected in the official record of the meeting. Thus,
interested delegations will be able to take into account, the
request by some delegations to delete some words from
operative paragraph 5. I hope that this will be satisfactory.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
explain their votes or positions.
Ms. McVey (Canada): Canada deeply regrets that,
once again, consensus on the important issue of emergency
assistance to the Sudan was not achieved. Canada voted
against draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1, on emergency
assistance to the Sudan. Our vote should not be construed
as a vote against the principles of humanitarian assistance
but rather as a reservation about language contained in the
text which could detract from a coordinated international
effort to effectively deliver humanitarian assistance to the
Sudan.
Canada has fully supported and will continue fully to
support the humanitarian work of Operation Lifeline Sudan.
As Operation Lifeline Sudan constitutes the basic
framework for assistance to the Sudan, it is of paramount
importance that all parties in the Sudan cooperate and
operate in accordance with the 1994 tripartite Agreement
and that the principles and guidelines of Operation Lifeline
Sudan are duly respected to ensure the efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency of the operation. Safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian personnel must also be
ensured.
It is a great shame that the Member States of the
United Nations cannot join together and agree on a
resolution to provide humanitarian assistance in the Sudan.
The challenges before the parties involved are now even
greater.
Mr. Peleg (Israel): Israel joined the consensus, as we
did on similar drafts in previous years, on draft resolution
A/52/L.57/Rev.1, “Assistance to the Palestinian people”,
and I would like to explain our position.

18

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
For many years Israel has been cooperating fully
with the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Children's Fund, as well as with other international
organizations in implementing programmes aimed at
improving the living conditions of the Palestinian people
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In this respect, my
delegation believes that the United Nations Special
Coordinator in the West Bank and Gaza can play a
significant role in achieving the social and economic
goals set out by those organizations. We welcome the
concerted efforts of Member States, international financial
institutions and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to aid in the development of the West Bank
and Gaza. We have made general efforts to reach a
consensus on draft resolution A/52/L.57/Rev.1, which
addresses the important issue of assistance to the
Palestinian people. We believe that economic and social
progress can be advanced only through cooperation.
Economic development and improved living conditions in
the territories will encourage peace and stability in the
region.
In this regard, we feel constrained to mention that in
our opinion, assistance to the Palestinian people should be
as tangible as possible, and on the ground. The holding of
conferences and seminars cannot and should not replace
direct economic assistance. If the economic situation is as
serious as the draft resolution contends, then surely the
funds available should be applied towards directly
alleviating that situation and not for the purpose of
holding yet another seminar.
Israel's participation in the consensus on the draft
resolution should not be construed as implying any
position regarding the present status of the territories
referred to as “occupied territories”. Additionally, our
support does not carry any implication regarding Israel's
position on the permanent status of those territories
which, in accordance with the Declaration of Principles,
signed on 13 September 1993, is a matter to be negotiated
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Israel hopes that at the fifty-third session of the
General Assembly there will be more consensus
resolutions on the issues relating to the Middle East,
including the resolution on the Middle East peace process,
regarding which Israel expended much effort this year in
the hope of its being adopted by the General Assembly,
rather than one-sided political resolutions completely
divorced from reality.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Mr. A'Ala (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus on the
draft resolution on assistance to the Palestinian people,
contained in document A/52/L.57/Rev.1, which was adopted
a moment ago, on the basis of the continuous support of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the efforts to support the
Palestinian people and provide assistance to them.
My delegation supports the operative paragraphs
calling for assistance to the Palestinian people to help them
overcome the immense challenges they are facing and to
assist them in fulfilling their needs and promote their socioeconomic development.
However, my delegation reserves its position on some
of the preambular paragraphs included in the resolution just
adopted, as they do not reflect the development of the crisis
facing the peace process in the Middle East or the reality of
the situation.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes that taking the
right approach to socio-economic development for the
Palestinian people and alleviating their suffering means
removing the real reasons for this suffering, reflected in the
continuous Israeli occupation. The right approach requires
implementation of United Nations resolutions aimed at
putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories — occupied since 1967 — and steering away
from the politics of closure and the economic embargo
imposed on the Palestinian people. Furthermore, the seizure
of lands, the exploitation of natural resources in the
occupied Palestinian territories, expanding settlement
activities and pursuit of a policy of impediments and
obstacles to the peace process in the Middle East represent
the crux of the crisis currently faced by that process.

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
Ms. Kløvstad (Norway): Norway deeply regrets that
in spite of sincere efforts it did not prove possible to
reach consensus on draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1, on
assistance to the Sudan, due to lack of agreement on
several of the paragraphs in the draft. Norway therefore
voted against draft resolution A/52/L.42/Rev.1.
Operation Lifeline Sudan is the major framework for
assistance to the Sudan. It is of vital importance that all
parties to the Operation work in accordance with the 1994
tripartite Agreement and the principles and guidelines of
the Operation itself, in order to ensure its efficiency and
effectiveness.
Furthermore, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations and their personnel must be
ensured. Norway has a long-standing commitment to
development efforts in the Sudan and to contributing to
creating peace and reconciliation in the country. We will
continue these efforts, and I want to make it clear that our
vote today should not be seen to be directed against the
principles of humanitarian assistance, or indeed against
extending such assistance to the Sudan.
Mr. Džundev (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): My delegation joined the consensus on draft
resolution A/52/L.44/Rev.1, just adopted by the General
Assembly, which was ably introduced this morning by the
representative of Ukraine.
We consider this decision by the General Assembly
to be very important. In our view, however, the resolution
does not adequately request States and international
organizations to respond satisfactorily to the needs of the
affected countries, one of which is my own.

As for the Israeli allegations we have just heard, to the
effect that while Israel supports international efforts to
assist the Palestinian people, it does not recognize, at the
same time, that the territories referred to in the draft
resolution are occupied territories: these remarks are
ridiculous. They are an attempt to delude world public
opinion and take lightly the will of the international
community, as expressed in numerous relevant United
Nations resolutions, especially those of the Security
Council.

We have some difficulty agreeing with the content
of operative paragraph 5, since, as is widely known, the
situation of each State of the former federation is
different. In the context of this resolution, the phrase “the
former Yugoslavia” has no meaning.

This is also aimed at evading the bases and the
principles of the peace process in the Middle East, which
was launched in Madrid in 1991.

The Republic of Korea strongly supports the
humanitarian assistance activities of the United Nations to
address humanitarian crises and disasters. Accordingly,
we attach great importance to the strengthening of the

Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): My delegation wishes
to make a statement in explanation of position in
connection with draft resolution A/52/L.48/Rev.1, which
was just adopted by consensus.

19

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
capacity of the United Nations system in humanitarian
assistance activities through a more strategic approach.
We believe that the humanitarian assistance activities
of the United Nations system should be more coordinated,
effective and transparent. In this regard, we unreservedly
support the establishment of the new Office of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on strengthening coordination in
humanitarian affairs, as contained in his report A/51/950.
In this connection, my delegation particularly wishes
to stress the following points. In implementing humanitarian
assistance, we all know that responsibility lies first and
foremost with the States in which such emergencies occur.
Therefore, the United Nations efforts for humanitarian
assistance must be linked to the encouragement of self-help
efforts by the affected States to take care of their own
victims.
Secondly, we also wish to reiterate the vital need to
secure full access for humanitarian assistance personnel to
victims of humanitarian disasters in affected areas. We must
keep in mind that unless full transparency is ensured in the
distribution of the assistance provided, the effectiveness of
such assistance will inevitably be undermined.
Lastly, the humanitarian assistance activities of the
United Nations must no doubt be guided by the principle of
humanity. We hope in particular that the United Nationssystem organizations involved in humanitarian assistance do
not lose sight of the legitimate requirements of the United
Nations in providing humanitarian assistance to encourage
the States concerned to pursue a national policy in
accordance with the purposes and basic principles of the
United Nations Charter and various international legal
regimes, such as, in particular, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, which all Members of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole are to
promote.
Having said that, my delegation looks forward to the
submission of the report of the Secretary-General, as
requested in the operative paragraph of the resolution we
have just adopted. We hope that the Secretary-General's
report will fully take into account the points we have just
raised.
With that understanding, we joined the consensus on
adopting the resolution.

20

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Costa Rica on a point of
order.
Ms. Castro de Barish (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): I wish to state that Costa Rica joined the
sponsors of the draft resolutions contained in the
following documents: A/52/L.45/Rev.1, entitled “Safety
and security of humanitarian personnel”; A/52/L.56,
entitled “Emergency assistance to Montserrat”; and
A/52/L.61/Rev.1, entitled “International cooperation and
coordination for the human and ecological rehabilitation
and economic development of the Semipalatinsk region of
Kazakhstan”. We fully support every aspect of these
resolutions.
The Acting President: (interpretation from
Spanish): I am sure all members of the General Assembly
will join me in thanking sincerely Ambassador Ernst
Sucharipa of Austria, who, as we all know, undertook the
long and arduous task of holding consultations and
negotiations on the resolutions that we have just
considered and adopted under agenda item 20.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like to
thank Ambassador Sucharipa. We are very grateful to
him.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items (a),
(d), (e) and (f) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 20.
I should like to inform members that the
consideration of draft resolution A/52/L.37, concerning
Burundi, and

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

73rd plenary meeting
16 December 1997

draft resolution A/52/L.41, concerning Angola, will be
taken up at a later date to be announced.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

21
