S/PV.7532

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7532nd meeting

Friday, 9 October 2015, 11.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Dambrauskas
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 19 August 2015 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United States
Mission to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/654)
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/655)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30642 (E)
*1530642*

S/PV.7532

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 19 August 2015 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the United States Mission to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/654)
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2015/655)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/770, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/654, which contains a letter dated
19 August 2015 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
United States Mission to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, and document
S/2015/655, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on South Sudan.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and United States of America
Abstaining:
Russian Federation, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
two abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted
as resolution 2241 (2015).
2/7

09/10/2015

I will now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Given the need to pursue active international
efforts towards a peaceful settlement to the armed
conflict in South Sudan and the important role in that
process being played by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Russia decided today not to stand in the
way of the Security Council’s adoption of the resolution
on the subject.
Nevertheless, we were unable to vote in favour of
resolution 2241 (2015), since it fails to take into account
certain serious concerns of the Russian Federation and
other members of the Security Council. Inter alia,
we cannot agree with the wording in the form of an
ultimatum regarding sanctions against South Sudan. The
use of such language in the resolution is inappropriate,
as the resolution’s main purpose is to supplement the
mandate of the peacekeeping mission with tasks aimed
at facilitating the peace process, rather than to frighten
the parties with the “club” of sanctions.
In principle, it is unacceptable when, instead
of serious political and diplomatic work, certain
colleagues prefer to arbitrarily make use of Security
Council sanctions. A political settlement will not
be helped by that. The South Sudanese parties need
support and encouragement to implement the agreement
and to settle the conflict in South Sudan, whereas
the threat and use of sanctions will only harden their
positions. We are also unable to agree with the wording
regarding the Council’s intention to formulate any
kind of assessment of the hybrid court in South Sudan,
since, under the peace Agreement and the decisions of
the African Union, the establishment and activities of
that judicial body are the exclusive prerogative of the
African Commission.
We are also against attempts to force South
Sudan to accept the use by the Mission of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), despite the repeated energetic
objections by the Government of that country. The
absence of Juba’s consent could result in problems if
UAVs are deployed and operated. The wording in that
regard effectively undermines the State sovereignty of
South Sudan and is therefore unacceptable to a number
of Security Council delegations. Also inappropriate are
calls on the part of the sponsors of the resolution for
the Council to agree to those intrusive provisions just
because the Secretariat requests them. We do not think
that the recommendations of United Nations officials
15-30642

09/10/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

represent an obligatory action manual for Member
States or the Security Council.
Finally, we have long had serious concerns about
the working methods of certain colleagues in the
Security Council who, in the furtherance of their
national interests, try to push through resolutions that
ignore the legitimate concerns and redlines of other
delegations. Such practice is at odds with the calls of
those colleagues for more democratization and greater
openness in the Council’s work.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of newly adopted resolution 2241 (2015)
on adjusting the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). Under the active facilitation
efforts on the part of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other international partners,
parties to the conflict in South Sudan formally signed
the agreement on resolving the conflict in South Sudan.
The peace process in South Sudan has therefore entered
a new stage. China welcomes that development. We
appreciate the tremendous efforts undertaken by the
African Union (AU) and IGAD in that regard.
It is China’s hope that resolution 2241 (2015)
will play a vigorous and constructive role in moving
South Sudan towards the early achievement of peace
and stability. The current imperative is to support the
efforts of the AU and IGAD, urge all South Sudanese
parties to honour their ceasefire commitments in an
effective manner and comprehensively implement the
provisions of the agreement on schedule, firmly support
the role of IGAD as the main conduit of good offices
and actively provide assistance to IGAD in monitoring
the implementation of the agreement.
On the question of sanctions, China has always
maintained that the Security Council should exercise
caution. The Council’s actions on South Sudan should
consider the broader picture of the peace process
in South Sudan and facilitate the implementation
of the Agreement by all parties and the prevention
of confrontation and conflict. China notes that the
concerns of certain members of the Council with regard
to the draft resolution have not been completely met.
We believe that the Security Council should have spent
more time on broad consultations so as to maximize
efforts to seek a consensus, maintain the unity of the
Council and ensure the successful implementation of
the resolution.

S/PV.7532

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria voted in favour of
resolution 2241 (2015), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
because we acknowledge the role of the Mission as vital
to stabilizing South Sudan. The tasks of the Mission are
clear: to protect civilians, to monitor and investigate
human rights, to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid and to support the implementation of the ceasefire
and the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. Those are without a
doubt essential tasks that, in the current circumstances,
only UNMISS can perform. We welcome the adoption
of the resolution, which sends a message of support to
the brave men and women of UNMISS working in very
challenging circumstances to save lives and contribute
to the peace process in South Sudan.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has supported and will continue to support
the efforts of the parties to the conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan to end the fratricidal war that has led
to the suffering in the youngest nation in the world.
We also reiterate our support for the work done by the
regional authorities, such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, as well as the brotherly countries of the continent
seeking African solutions to African problems. It was
thanks to this desire for peace that the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan was signed in August, and which our country
welcomed with hope. Everyone in this Council should
support the Agreement.
Furthermore, we wish to express our gratitude and
ongoing support for the work being done by UNMISS,
whose personnel have delivered a valuable service in
protecting civilians, particularly the most vulnerable,
such as women and children, and in providing
humanitarian assistance.
Nonetheless, our country decided to abstain in the
voting on resolution 2241 (2015) because we believe
that it contains elements that unnecessarily divert the
focus of attention from its main objective, which is to
adapt the work of UNMISS to the terms established in
the Agreement and to contribute through the Mission
to creating conditions that will allow the Government
and the South Sudanese opposition to take part in the
process of negotiations.

15-306423/7

S/PV.7532

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In the case of South Sudan, a resolution that will
help make UNMISS an instrument to promote the
implementation of the Agreement should not include
provisions that could be counterproductive to achieving
peace. That is why we abstained. Other reasons are the
references to targeted sanctions and a definition of the
protection of civilians that is not generally found in
contemporary peacekeeping mandates. The inclusion
of equipment, such as unmanned aerial vehicles, has
generated opposition within the South Sudanese State
with respect to safeguarding its sovereignty. The
mention of the hybrid court for South Sudan could
create confusion over the provisions of the Agreement
promoted by IGAD and the African Union. We believe
that no peacekeeping operation should act without the
consent of the host Government to all aspects of its
action, in this case of the Government of South Sudan.
We regret the fact that the spirit and unity that should
characterize the work of the Security Council was not
achieved in this case, and that many of the observations
and comments that were made in the discussion of
the resolution did not receive proper attention. The
sponsors instead preferred a controversial text.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Earlier
this week, the outgoing head of the delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in South
Sudan described the horrific attacks — including rape,
abduction and murder — that his teams have observed
in that country. Let me read some of what he told a
reporter:
“Civilians have been directly targeted, houses are
burned, properties destroyed and the people are
literally running for their lives.”
“We went to one village to distribute aid and our
teams were told they had been attacked some days
earlier, and 90 women had been abducted. After
several days, only about 60 of them came back.”
“Women have been attacked while they have been
seeking refuge. Those who are abducted may be
forcefully married, enslaved or killed.”
Again, that is the account of the outgoing head
of the delegation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, an institution that is known for
its neutrality. It aligns with similar reports from
multiple sources — journalists, human rights groups,
humanitarian workers, United Nations staff and
others — of widespread atrocities against civilians, and
in particular against women and girls.
4/7

09/10/2015

We are here today to support the hard-earned
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, and to respond to the fighting
that persists in spite of repeated pledges by both
sides to commit to peace. Resolution 2241 (2015) is
the beginning of a process to ensure that the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the
tools it needs to support the implementation of the
peace Agreement, which is essential to ending the cycle
of violence in South Sudan.
Let me briefly highlight what thie resolution
does. The resolution amends the UNMISS mandate to
undertake a series of immediate steps to support the
peace Agreement. No changes have been made to the
Mission’s core tasks of protecting civilians, monitoring
and investigating human rights abuses and violations,
and creating conditions in which humanitarian
assistance can reach people in need. The resolution
asks the United Nations to provide, within 45 days, an
assessment and recommendations to improve UNMISS
civilian and force-structure capabilities so that the
Mission can help implement the peace Agreement
and the core tasks of its mandate. That review is
essential for the Mission to better address the growing
numbers of people in protection-of-civilian camps, the
hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese in need of
assistance, and the ongoing violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, which must be
rigorously documented and whose perpetrators must be
held accountable.
This resolution reflects the consensus we witnessed
on 29 September at the high-level meeting on South
Sudan, convened during the General Assembly’s highlevel week, when the international community spoke
in a single voice about the critical importance of the
signatories and other stakeholders fully supporting
the implementation of the peace Agreement. However,
while the resolution reflects that consensus and is
focused on ensuring that UNMISS can fulfil its role in
supporting the peace Agreement, some have attempted
to distract from its aims. Therefore let me briefly
respond to some of those criticisms.
The resolution expresses our continued commitment
to maintain pressure on both sides, neither of which has
fully complied with its ceasefire obligations. That is
fully consistent with the strong warning issued by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in its
communiqué of 26 September

15-30642

09/10/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

“that it will not tolerate any further violations and,
in line with its previous pronouncements, expresses
its determination to impose measures against all
those who would impede the implementation of this
Agreement”.
The resolution makes clear our shared responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan is adequately equipped to fulfil its mandate in
support of the peace Agreement.
Eight of the 15 countries represented on the
Council, including the United States, have troops
or police serving in UNMISS. If we are going to ask
peacekeepers to risk their lives to protect civilians,
monitor ceasefires and fulfil other duties under a
mandate the Council has adopted, then surely it is our
collective duty to ensure that they have the tools and
technological capabilities needed to fulfil their mission
and do so safely. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has told the Security Council precisely what
it needs in order to keep troop and police contributors
safe and empower them to do their job. It is incumbent
upon the Council to deliver, as we have. History has
repeatedly demonstrated how dangerous it is to deploy
peacekeepers who are not adequately equipped to do
what is asked of them.
Finally, the resolution affirms the Council’s
unwavering commitment to advancing accountability
for the crimes that have been perpetrated against the
people of South Sudan, including by providing support
to the accountability mechanisms outlined in the peace
Agreement. In this respect, the resolution responds
directly to the 26 September request of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, which asked the
United Nations Security Council to support and assist
its efforts to promote justice.
In the context of this horrific conflict, justice is not
a choice — it is a necessity. Ensuring that perpetrators
are punished for their abuses and that victims have
access to justice is an essential part of building a
lasting peace, not an obstacle to it. The hybrid court
proposed by the Agreement could play an important
role in that effort, and the resolution reaffirms the
Security Council’s commitment to staying involved in
the development of that institution.
In conclusion, we know the profound stakes of
securing peace in South Sudan. We have witnessed
the devastating consequences of the violence — in the
words of that Red Cross officer, of women and girls

S/PV.7532

being abducted and raped and of people “literally
running for their lives”. It is the welfare of the South
Sudanese people — a people who have already endured
so much — that drove our collective efforts to support
a peace Agreement, to press the warring parties to
abide by their commitments, and to see that United
Nations peacekeepers are equipped to do their part
in its implementation. This resolution continues that
important effort.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Today we have
adopted resolution 2241 (2015) to reconfigure the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), taking into account the signing of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan by the South Sudanese parties
and the international stakeholders, in particular the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This
was possible thanks only to the cooperation of all the
members of the Council.
We voted in favour of the resolution despite the
fact that, as we have said, the fragile Agreement just
signed is aimed at ensuring a ceasefire and the end of
violence in South Sudan. It is not a perfect document,
but it is the basis for the current discussions between the
parties. The Council needs to continue to keep a very
close watch on the parties and listen to their concerns
and reservations if it is to be of assistance instead of
creating new problems that could create a situation
that we would have to address when it comes to the
implementation of the Agreement.
Our vote today expresses our support for the mission
of UNMISS and the troops, despite the differences of
views among the members of the Security Council on
a number of issues, including the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, the balance between accountability
and reconciliation, the role of the United Nations in
the establishment of the hybrid court and the adoption
of the new configuration. The question of sanctions
remains very sensitive, and I think that the Council will
have to address it with extreme care in order to avoid
creating problems rather than resolving them.
We believe that the actions of the Council should
be in support of the discussions of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, which is the main
partner of the Security Council in matters related to
international peace and security and stability in the
African continent.

15-306425/7

S/PV.7532

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time that I am speaking to the Council under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on
your leadership of the Council this month and pledge
our full cooperation. I would also like to acknowledge
the role of your predecessor in leading the Council last
month.
It has been a while since I addressed the Security
Council on the tragic situation afflicting my country.
I take this to be a good sign of improvement of our
situation and our relations with the United Nations
and the Security Council following the conclusion
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, brokered by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
We welcome today’s renewal and extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS ) for 90 days, during which the Mission is
called upon to conduct an evaluation of how best to
improve the mandate in light of the recently signed
peace Agreement. This is a welcome move.
Our consistent support for the extension of the
UNMISS mandate is an indication of our appreciation
of the contribution the Mission is making in our
country. Despite differences on some issues and the
manner of implementation of the mandate, we have
always recognized that we share the same objective
of consolidating peace, security and stability in
our country as prerequisites to the reconstruction,
rehabilitation and socioeconomic development of a
country that has been devastated for far too long by
chronic wars.
It was our hope that at this critical juncture, when
the peace Agreement is bringing the warring parties
together and gaining the support of the international
community, the Security Council and the international
community will engage the Government of South
Sudan constructively on all matters related to peace,
security, the protection of populations, human rights
and humanitarian issues, and promote close cooperation
with the peacekeepers. In this connection, we recall
resolution 2086 (2013), which reaffirms the basic
principles of peacekeeping that require impartiality
and the consent of the parties. It is in this light that
we hope that the Council will seek the consent of the
Government of South Sudan during the implementation
of some of the provisions of the mandate adopted today.
6/7

09/10/2015

These issues naturally call for close consultation
between the United Nations and the Government,
and that is precisely what the Government requested
of the United Nations. It is therefore unfortunate that
the resolution has been adopted without consultation
with the Government. It is particularly regrettable that
issues on which the South Sudan Government had made
its position clear have been adopted without regard to
the Government’s point of view. I refer specifically to
operative paragraph 10, which
“Requests the Secretary-General to prioritize
the complete deployment of UNMISS personnel
to the authorized military and police strength,
including tactical military helicopters and unarmed
unmanned aerial vehicles”.
It is well known that the Government considers
these to be contested issues, and to include them
without consultation with the Government is to
invite controversy and potential disagreement and
hostility, when harmony and cooperation are what the
situation calls for. Furthermore, they undermine the
lofty principles expressed in the second preambular
paragraph, which states that the Security Council is
“Reaffirming its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of the Republic of South Sudan,
and recalling the importance of the principles
of non-interference, good-neighbourliness and
regional cooperation”.
The Government of South Sudan reaffirms its
commitment to working with UNMISS and the
international community at large. We would like
to thank the troop-contributing countries and all
the men and women of the civilian, military and
police components of UNMISS for their tireless and
courageous efforts to execute their mandate even
under difficult circumstances. South Sudan also deeply
appreciates the support that the international community
rendered in its liberation struggle, which culminated in
independence, and the goodwill demonstrated by the
United Nations and many nations that resulted in the
creation of UNMISS.
The Government of South Sudan is most grateful
for the efforts of the “IGAD-Plus” initiative, which
has resulted in the signing of an agreement, as well
as for the role that the Chama Cha Mapinduzi, the
African National Congress party and other friends of
South Sudan have played in reunifying the Sudanese

15-30642

09/10/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

People’s Liberation Movement. We call on the Council,
the international community and all friends of South
Sudan to support the parties rather than making threats
and proposing punitive measures, which, as we have
repeatedly stated, only aggravate the situation and may
tend to harden positions in the direction of confrontation
rather than cooperation.
South Sudan now desperately needs the support of
the United Nations and the international community if
it is to achieve credible implementation of the peace
Agreement. It is also time for them to focus once again
on the initial objective of providing South Sudan with
a comprehensive programme of assistance in a variety
of areas related to peacebuilding, including ensuring
security, building governance capacity, delivering
essential services and generating socioeconomic
development. That was indeed the message of the
high-level side event organized by the Secretariat
on 29 September 29 and chaired by the Secretary-

S/PV.7532

General and Deputy Secretary-General. It is time for
the United Nations and the international community
to engage with the Government of South Sudan on
that positive, constructive agenda, instead of making
negative threats of sanctions and punishment, which
can only undermine cooperation and the possibility
of our country’s optimistic march towards peace and
reconciliation.
I am a strong believer in cooperation rather than
confrontation. I also believe in the power of optimism
rather than pessimism. We hope and trust that there
will be much improvement in the efforts to achieve a
more effective, constructive dialogue with UNMISS
and the Security Council in the implementation of the
Mission’s vitally important mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

15-306427/7
