THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
I

th
MEETING:

6 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2375)

Adoption

of the agenda .....................

Page
1

.....................................
...........................

I

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . , . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . ..I.......
. . ..I...

1

S/W .237S

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the i3fficid Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
md
Decisions
qf the Security Comcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively LOresolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2375th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 6 June 1982, at 7.45 p.m.
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

President:

de NANTEUIL

4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The present
report is submitted in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 508 (19821, which was adopted unanimously
at the 2374th meeting of the Council on 5 June 1982
at 1730 hours (New York time). In that resolution,
the Council called upon all the parties to the conflict
to cease “immediately
and simultaneously all military
activities within Lebanon and across the tebaneseIsraeli border and no later than 0600 hours (local
time) on Sunday, 6 June 1982”, i.e. 0400 hours (GMT)
on 6 June, or midnight (New York time) on the night
of 5/6 June. The Council also requested me to undertake all possible efforts to ensure the implementation
of and compliance with the resolution and to report
to the Council as early as possible, and not later than
48 hours after the adoption of the resolution.

Pwsc~nt:
The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2375)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162)

5. As the Council is aware, prior to the adoption of
the resolution I had already made an urgent appeal
to the parties for such a cessation of hostilities. Thereafter, following the adoption of the resolution, the
representative of the PLO reaffirmed its commitment
to stop all military operations across the Lebanese
border while reserving its right to respond in case of
any Israeli aggression, The representative of Israel
informed me yesterday at 2300 hours (New York
time) that, while Israeli reactions were in exercise of
its right of self-defence, the resolution of the Security
Council would be brought before the Israeli Cabinet.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

6. In a message to Lieutenant-General
Callaghan,
the Commander of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (WNIFIL),
I instructed him to use every
possibility of following up on my appeal to the parties
and the subsequent resolution of the Council.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtcltion
,fic~m Fwnch):
In accordance
with decisions taken at the 2374th
meeting,
I invite the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table. I invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.

7. I regret to state, however, that despite all efforts
throughout the night, it was not possible to effect a
cease-tire. Indeed, hostilities have escalated dangerously. In this connection, it is relevant to record that
Mr. Arafat, Chairman of the Executive Committee of
PLO, in response to a message from me, informed me
that in spite of heavy Israeli airstrikes after the scheduled time of the cease-fire, he had given orders to all
PLO units to withhold fire for a further unspecified
period. This was, of course, before the Israeli ground
operations had started.

2. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwtcrtion
jwn
Fwnchj:
Members
of the Council have before them document
S/ I.5 17 I, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted
by Ireland. Members also have before
them document
S/15170, which contains the text
of a letter dated 6 June from the representative of Oman
to the President of the Council.
3.

8. The following is the information
the Commander of UNIFIL.

9. Between 2100 hours (GMT) on 5 June 1982 and
0400 hours (GMT) on 6 June, there were intormittcnt

I now call on the Secretary-General.,..
1
6

received from

and relatively light exchanges of fire between positions
of the armed elements (mainly PLO and the Lebanese
National Movement) on the one hand, and the Israel
Defence Forces and the &J ,firc.fo forces on the other.
The exchanges of fire involved, or affected, the following areas: on the one side, in Lebanon, Tyre and
vicinity, Ch%eau de Beaufort, Nabatiyah and the
Kawkaba-Hasbayah
area: on the other side, Marjayoun
in Lebanon and the area of Metulla in Israel.

14. Finally. I must inform the Council with profound
regret that a Norwegian soldier has been killed by
shrapnel in circumstances that are not yet clear. I shall
report to the Council on further developments.
15. Mr. DORR (Ireland): As we all know, the situation in Lebanon at this moment is extremely gctve.
Over the past 24 hours there has been a massive invasion of Lebanese territory. Many lives have already
been lost. With this invasion the spiral of violence in
the region has taken another and most serious turn.
Escalation now is rapid. The direction of the spiral is
always upward.

10. From 0424 hours (GMT), i.e. 0624 hours local
Lebanese time (and after the cease-fire time set by the
Council), to 1235 hours (GMT), intensive air-attacks
were launched by Israel, with approximately
110
strikes being recorded by UNIFIL.
These strikes
occurred principally in the area of ChHteau de Beaufort
and Tyre and its vicinity, from where there was antiaircraft fire. One aircraft was observed to have been
downed north of the Litani river, near Ch;iteau de
Beaufort.

16. That rapid escalation causes us the most grnve
concern. This is not a time for long speeches or for
extended debate: it is a time for action-rapid
actionby the Council. If that action is to be truly effective.
the Council should try to act in unison. \Ne need to
bring the full moral and legal authority of the Council
to bear on the situation in order to call a halt. As n
Council we carry the primary responsibility
for the
maintenance of international
peace and security. In
exercise of that responsibility we must demand an end
to all hostilities and the strictest respect for the territorial integrity, the sovereignty and the pollitical independence of Lebanon.

I I. At around 0930 hours (GMT), UNIFIL
reported
that Israeli ground forces-including
a very large
number of tanks and armoured personnel carriershad begun to move into Lebanese territory in strength.
They moved along three main axes: in the west, along
the coastal road; in the central sector, towards Ett
Taibe and the Akiya bridge; and in the eastern sector,
through the Kafer Chouba-Chebaa area, As at 2100
hours (GMT). the Israeli forces are reported to have
reached the following locations: Tyre, on the coastal
road, where heavy fighting is reported; in the central
sector, Israeli forces have neared Nabatiyah, but it is
not known whether they have entered the town; in the
eastern sector, Israeli columns are moving towards
Hasbaya. There is also a heavy concentration of tanks
in the Khardala and Blate areas. I have also been
informed by General Callaghan of extremely heavy
aerial bombardment of Tyre, which is bound to cause
numerous casualties as well as extensive destruction.

17. That is the aim of the draft resolution! contained
in document S/15171, which I wish to introduce formally to the Council on behalf of Ireland.
18. In the preamble, the Council reaffirms the need
for strict respect for the territorial integriity, SOWXeignty and political independence of Lebanon within
its internationally
recognized boundaries. ‘That must
always be the starting-point and the basic aim of all
action by the Council in this matter.
19. In operative paragraph 1, the Counciil demands
that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith and
unconditionally
to the internationally
recognized
boundaries of Lebanon; it demands that iall parties
observe strictly the terms of paragraph I of resolution 508 (1982), which we adopted yesterday, and
operative paragraph 2 spells out those terms. In Paragraph 3, the Councit calls on all parties to ‘communicate to the Secretary-General their acceptance of the
present resolution within twenty-four hours and in
paragraph 4, the Council decides to remain seized of
the question.

12. As the Israeli forces moved into southern Lebanon, the Commander of UNIFIL
gave instructions
for the standing operational procedures to be put into
effect by all units. These include measures to block
advancing forces and also defense measures. The
overwhelming strength and weight of the Israeli forces
precluded the possibility
of stopping them, and
UNIFIL
positions in the line of the invasion have thus
been overrun or bypassed.
13. UNIFIL
is, of course, a peace-keeping
force
with a specific mandate entrusted to it by the Security
Council, which is based on the assumption that the
parties to the conflict will take the necessary steps for
compliance with the decisions of the Council. The
Force has neither the mandate, nor the military capacity, to counter an invasion such as is now taking
place, which is estimated to comprise more than
two mechanized divisions with full air and naval
support.

20. I believe, on the basis of our informal consultations, that it is possible that this draft could be the
basis for common and urgent action by the Council
in this grave situation. I therefore commend the draft
to the Council and I hope that it will be adopted.
2 I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtiot?
jkrn
F~td~~:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
2

/
I

22. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In the Council’s meeting
yesterday
[237&h meeting]
the representative
of
Lebanon made what was apparently a slip of the
tongue. Since slips of the tongue are not likely to be
recorded in the minutes of the Council, and because
of the revealing nature of the case in point, I should
like to commit it to posterity.

were killed and I9 people were wounded, including
2 children and 2 Austrian policemen. This was reported by me to the Council in document S/l4670 of
31 August.
29. On 7 October, an explosive charge went off at a
building in Rome housing the offices of Israel’s national
airline, El Al. Eight people were wounded and the
premises were badly damaged.

23. Mr. Tuini called upon the Council to consider
“the aggression against Israel”. Mr. Tueni is, of
course, right. Israel, indeed, has been the target of ongoing aggression for many years. Yet, the Council
has not evinced the slightest interest in all those acts
of warpdre, violence and terrorism which in their
totality manifest the ongoing Arab aggression against
my country. Let me assure Mr. TuCni that the Council
will remain equally indifferent now to the display of
Arab aggression against my country and against my
people.

30. On 20 October, a booby-trapped
car exploded
opposite the Jewish Portuguese Community Synagogue
in Antwerp, only minutes before special holiday
services were due to begin. Three people were killed
and about 100 wounded.
31. On 15 January 1982, the PLO bombed a Jewishowned restaurant frequented by Jewish patrons in
West Berlin. The explosion killed a l4-month-old
girl
and wounded 24 other people. This was reported by me
to the Council in document S/14842 on 20 January.

24. The Council cannot even plead ignorance in this
regard. Israel has regularly informed the Council, over
the years, of the attempted atrocities and the actual
atrocities
perpetrated
by the PLO against Israel,
Israelis and Jews around the world. In fact, I would
even venture to say that we have long been among the
most diligent correspondents of the Council in recent
years. Permit me, therefore, Mr. President, to refresh
the Council’s memory and to remind its members of
some of the “highlights”
of PLO barbarism in recent
years.

32. On 3 April, a PLO terrorist shot and killed a
diplomat at the Israel Embassy in Paris, outside his
home in the French capital. The murder of Mr. Yacov
Barsimantov by a 20-year-old female terrorist, who
shot him at point-blank range, was witnessed by his
family. Responsibility
for the murder was assumed
by the “Lebanese Armed Revolutionary
Faction”,
one of the many aliases of the terrorist PLO. Being
the seasoned criminals that they are, the PLO terrorists have developed the fine technique of adopting
such aliases specially invented for the purpose of
covering up their crimes. This was reported to the
Council by the ChargC d’affaires ofthe Mission of Israel
in document S/1495 1 of 3 April.

25. On 22 April 1979, four PLO terrorists landed at
night on the coast of Nahariya in a rubber dinghy after
setting out from the Lebanese port of Tyre. On reaching
Nahariya, the terrorists attacked an apartment building,
killing
one Israel civilian, his two small children
and an Israel policeman. This was reported by me to
the Security Council in document S/ 13264 of 23 April.

33. And last week, on 3 June, a group of PLO terrorists attempted to assassinate Israel’s Ambassadot
to the Court of St. James, Mr. Shlomo Argov, as he
was leaving a hotel in central London. One of the PLO
terrorists of the group fired at point-blank
range,
seriously wounding our Ambassador, who underwent
brain surgery and remains in critical condition in a
London hospital. This was reported by me to the
Council in document S/15158 of 4 June.

26. On 6 April 1980, five PLO terrorists of the socalled Arab Liberation
Front infiltrated Israel from
Lebanon and attacked a children’s nursery at Kibbutz
Misgav Am on Israel’s northern border. A two-yearold child and a kibbutz secretary were murdered by
the terrorists and one soldier was killed. One adult
civilian, 4 children and I I soldiers were injured. This
was reported by me to the Council in document S/ I3876
of 7 April.

34. That is by no means the statistical sum total of
PLO atrocities over the years. Let me just point out,
in this connection, that even in the relatively short
period of time which has elapsed since the July 1981
agreement on cessation of hostilities, the total of dead
and wounded at the hands of the PLO has steadily
mounted to a point where it now reaches 17 dead and
241 wounded in a total of I41 terrorist acts, all of them
originating from terrorist bases inside Lebanon. And
to give some indication of the escalation of terrorist
activity in the last few weeks, I would point out that
since 9 May this year-less
than one month ago28 acts of PLO terrorism have been reported in Israel
and abroad and against the area under the control of
Major Saad Haddad in southern Lebanon.

27. On 27 July, a PLO terrorist hurled two grenades
into a group numbering
40 Jewish schoolchildren
waiting to board a bus outside a community centre in
Antwerp. One child was killed outright, seven others
were wounded, in addition to ten adults and a pregnant
woman all of whom sustained injuries. This was
reported by me to the Council in document S/l4081
of 30 July.
28. On 29 August 1981, terrorists of the PLO faction
“Black June” attacked a synagogue in Vienna using
hand grenades and machine-guns. Two worshippers
3

35. These and many hundreds of additional terrorist
attacks against Israel, Israelis and Jews were regularly
reported by us to the Council. All our reports have gone
unheeded. The Council has remained unmoved and
did not see fit to act with a view to curbing the criminal
activities of the PLO. Nor did the Council ever pronounce itself against the harassment by the PLO of
Israel’s civilian population in the northern part of OUI
country, which has been repeatedly subjected to
massive bombardments,
shelling and rocket attacks by
the PLO using long-range artillery pieces and Katyusha
rocket launchers supplied to them by the Soviet
Union.

simply doing their shopping, how malny ordinary
Israeli civilians asleep in their beds, how many of
Israel’s diplomats must be murdered by the PLO for
the Council to realize that Israel and its people are one
of the prime targets of international terrorism and of
its foremost exponent and linchpin, the murderous
PLO? The answer is simple. It is grounded in the bitter
experience of many years. Given the parliamentary
situation in the Organization
and the constellation
within the Council, Israel cannot expect thlis body even
to deplore PLO barbarism against Israel’s civilian
population, let alone take any steps with a view to
curbing that barbarism,

36. When is the Council galvanized into action?
When Israel, after years of unparalleled
restraint,
finally resorts to the exercise of its right of self-defence,
the fundamental and inalienable right of any State,
which is also recognized by the Charter of the United
Nations as the inherent right of Member States of the
Organization. In order to save a terrorist organization
from well-deserved
and long-overdue
retribution,
the Council is convened in emergency meetings,
urgent meetings and every conceivable form of extraordinary session. It is the same Council which over all
these years has not found the time to devote even
one such meeting to a debate on the situation in Lebanon as a whole and to the causes underlying that
unfortunate country’s predicament.
It is the same
Council which has not found the time to discuss the
mass murder and bloodbath perpetrated by the rCgime
of the Assad brothers of Syria against the people of
Hama, the fifth largest city of that country, last February. It is the same Council which has not found
time over the past I9 months to discuss the Iraqi
aggression against Iran and the resulting misery for
millions of people, including more than 2 million
refugees. It is the same Council which has not seen
fit to discuss since January 1980 the ongoing rape of
Afghanistan by the Soviet army of occupation, It is the
same Council which has not found time to discuss in
over three years -since January 1979, to be precisethe continuous genocide of the people of Kampuchea,
a country which has been subjected equally to external
aggression from Viet Nam. And it is the same Council
which has never found time to consider the suppression of the Polish people by a military regime imposed
on it from without.

39. It thus becomes imperative for the Governmen!
of Israel to exercise its legitimate right of self-defence
to protect the lives of its citizens and to (ensure their
safety. Indeed, I would ask how many States repnsented here would agree to sit back passively and
watch their own women and children murdered md
maimed by terrorists? How many States represented
here in the Council are willing to accept an unconditional cessation of hostilities without guaranteeing
what they perceive as their vital interests? Yet we are
still confronted with the strange phenomenon
that
countries that one day vote against such a call for an
unconditional cessation of hostilities when the matter
affects them in one part of the world have no compunction about supporting, the following day, a similar Cd
in another part of the world.

37. Perhaps I have been a trifle naive, but I have
been under the impression that the primary duty of
the Council was and remains the promotion of international peace and security, not the encouragement of
international
terrorism or the protection of its practitioners.
38. Let me ask the Council a simple question: how
many Israelis have to be killed by the PLO terrorists
for the Council to be persuaded that the limits of our
endurance have been reached? How many passengers
on civilian buses, how many Israeli schoolchildren,
now many Israeli toddlers, how many Israeli women

;
j
i
!
i

40. Reference was made in the Council1 yesterday
to the fact that the hit list of the PLO terrorisls involved in the assassination attempt in London against
Mr. Shlomo Argov apparently included tlhe resident
PLO terrorist in the British capital. If indeed this
information is correct it should not occasion any
surprise. After all, the settling of scores in the criminal
underworld is a welt-known fact of life and there is no
reason to expect that this should be any less applicable
to the PLO criminal community.
In fact, its constant
internecine feuding and reciprocal assassinations have
proved over the decades a characteristic <and salient
feature of Arab terrorism in general and of Palestinian
Arab terrorism in particular.
The warring factions
within the PLO have excelled themselves in this
field. Let me give the Council a few examples: the
murder of PLO henchman Sa’id Hamami in London
in April l979-the
man who in fact served HS the
immediate predecessor of the present PLO operative
in London, who is said to have figured on the latest
hit list; the murder of Ali Yassoun, the PLO operative
in Kuwait, in June of the same year: the murder in
Cannes, France, of Zohair Mohsein, the chief of tht:
As-Saiqua terrorist faction within the PLO; the
murder of the PLO terrorist Na’im Khader in Brussels i
in June 1981. To borrow an expression from English
company law, it is not incumbent upon Israel “to lift
the veil” with regard to the internal blood feuding of
the PLO with a view to researching the mutual relationships of its factions and members. To make such ii
demand on Israel would be about as reasonable as to

-

.

demand that the law enforcement authorities of a
particular State should absolve a known criminal of
responsibility
for his crime simply because he has
also had the intention of murdering another member
of his gang.

- -

one symptom of a much larger problem. The
internal problems of Lebanon are of long standing.
They were greatly aggravated by the arrival of large
numbers of armed PLO terrorists there. With its far
from gentle expulsion from Jordan in 1970 and its
exclusion from other Arab countries, the PLO took
advantage of Lebanon’s
inherent
weaknesses to
establish operational bases and headquarters there.
Indeed, the erosion of Lebanon’s sovereignty began
in the early 1970s when the PLO set up what was
virtually “a State within a State” in Lebanon, principally in southern Lebanon where one of the areas
was even dubbed “Fatahland”.
merely

41. The simple and incontrovertible
fact remains:
all the groups which together constitute that multitentacled octopus known as the PLO have their headquarters, training grounds and bases of operations in
Lebanon. This fact is unaltered by the feuding that
remains a permanent feature of PLO existence and
that occasionally
erupts into full-fledged violence
between the various PLO groups.

46. Over the last few years the PLO with increasing
intensity turned southern Lebanon into a staging post
for its murderous incursions into Israel, Names like
Avivim,
Ma’alot,
Kiryat Shmona,
Nahariya
and
Misgav Am came to denote the scenes of bloody
massacres of women and children. All of those acts
and many others were perpetrated by PLO terrorists
operating from Lebanese territory. Nor were the PLO
terroristic activities confined to Israel.

42. Not many weeks past, on 25 February of this
year to be precise, in a remark that did not go unnoticed, Mr. Tuini told a meeting of the Council that:
“we shall never become accessories to anybody’s
strategy in the destabilization
process that is today
tearing the Middle East apart” [233211rl mwting:,
yap/. /42]. Now Mr. Tuini has requested a meeting
of the Council to complain in substance that Israel
has attacked PLO bases in his country.

47. A reign of terror swept Lebanese villages in
the south as the PLO gradually tightened its grip over
the area. Moreover, southern Lebanon became the
training ground, logistic centre and refuge for members of the terrorist internationale
from all over the
world. Their activities have plagued numerous countries and the international community at large.

43. Israel has stated on numerous occasions that it
has no territorial ambitions in Lebanon, that it respects
and honours Lebanese independence and territorial
integrity. My Government reiterates this clear policy
today, but the least that we are entitled to expect is a
full measure of reciprocity. We are perfectly willing
to believe in the earnestness of Mr. Tueni’s declaration, which 1 just quoted, and another serious undertaking,
and I quote him again: “my country”
-Mr. TuCni said at the same meeting of the Security
Council-“is
not for hire nor for sale: it is not negotiable and it is not dispensable” [ihid., paw. 1411,

48. From the early 1970s onwards, Lebanon lost
much of its sovereignty over its own territory to the
terrorist PLO, but in the bitter and brutal war in Lebanon between 1974 and 1976 the country also lost its
independence
to Syria, which saw in the steadily
deteriorating situation in Lebanon an opportunity to
realize its long-standing
ambition-to
swallow up
Lebanon within what the Syrians refer to as “Greater
Syria”. Between 1974 and 1976 Syrian allegiances
jockeyed and changed for reasons of political expediency to suit Syria’s own purposes. At one stage the
Syrians presented themselves as the protectors of
the Christian Lebanese against the PLO and did not
hesitate at that stage to bombard and demolish PLO
strongholds, such as Tel El-Zaatar. Later on, roles
reversed and the Syrians turned brutally on the Christians with horrifying results, mercilessly bombarding
civilian centres, killing uncounted thousands of civilians and turning up to a million Lebanese into refugees.
Indeed, the images of Syria’s indiscriminate
brutality
in Lebanon are familiar to anyone who watches television news. Most vivid are the pictures of last year
of the merciless Syrian siege of ZahlC, the largest
Christian city in the Middle East. That siege went on
for weeks and by the time it was lifted it had resulted
in more than 1,000 casualties.

44. If all this were true, what-may
one ask-are
15,000 armed PLO terrorists doing on Lebanese soil
with their artillery and tanks? What of the well-documented comings and goings of international terrorist
organizations
finding succour and enlightenment
in
the academies of international terror run by the PLO
to the glory of murder and rampage? Under what
authority are they receiving international delegations,
including
United Nations committees, on Lebanese
soil? Why is the Syrian army of occupation laying down
the law in Lebanon? What are 25,000 well-armed
Syrian soldiers, one third of the Syrian army, doing
in Lebanon, in Beirut, its capital, in Tripoli and in other
cities in the Beka’a valley, which has been annexed
to Syria in all but name and where Syrian currency
is being used as legal tender? In short, where do
Lebanese sovereignty begin and Mr. T&i’s
hollow
protestations end?
45. The tragic reality prevailing in Lebanon must be
recognized by all of us. We are all painfully aware that
the situation in the southern part of Lebanon cannot
be detached from the situation in Lebanon as a whole.
The situation prevailing in the south of the country is

49. In all these activities, both the Syrian army of
occupation and the terrorist PLO have been aided,
abetted, trained, equipped and financed by the Soviet
5

Union, whose attempts at destabilizing and subverting
the MiddIe East as a whole are well known and whose
sinister role in the Lebanese tragedy is common
knowledge. As a result of all this, Lebanon has been
in recent years and still remains a country occupied by
alien forces. Syria still maintains in Lebanon a sizable
portion of its army-that
is, about 25,000 troops and
upwards-and
the PLO still has over 15,000 armed
terrorists operating in the country, of whom ovel
2,000 are positioned south of the Litani River. About
1,500 of these terrorists are located in the so-called
Tyre pocket and around 700 are deployed in some 40
pockets and nests within the UNIFIL
area of operation, with the clear intention of using that area as a
springboard in their attempts to terrorize Israel’s
civilian population, particularly in the northern part of
our country.

cussing the subversion of Lebanese sovereignty. firs!
by the PLO and subsequently by Syria, (except for tht
five desultory minutes which it accorded the topic
on 6 October 1978 [208Yrh mec’ting]-that
is to say.
more than three and a half year ago-at the end OF
which it nervously adopted, without any formal deh;W.
a milk-and-water
resolution [wsolurior~ 4.36 (I(1784
which avoided even indirect reference to Syria, which
was then involved in the massive bomlbardment and
destruction of civilian quarters of Beirut ancl the
large-scale massacre of its population. This puttcm
of behaviour by the Council, totally at variance with
the facts and realities prevailing in Lebanon, wilt itlso
be duly reflected in tonight’s deliberatioms, The Cuuk
cil apparently is still not aware of the fact that LA%*
anon is an occupied country, dominated by the Syrian
army of occupation and by the PLO arrned terrorids.
This bizarre pattern of behaviour by the Council map
perhaps be understood by its members, but is cert:binly
far from being comprehensible
to world opinion. lt
can only further lower and compromise the Council’s
already badly shattered credibility
on any mstter
affecting the Arab-Israel conflict.

50. As long as these non-Lebanese elements are
allowed to operate within and from Lebanon no real
progress will be achieved towards the return of the
effective authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the length and breadth of that country.
Peace cannot be restored in Lebanon and the Lebanese
Government cannot re-establish its effective authority
while a massive Syrian army of occupation holds down
the bulk of the country and while PLO terrorists,
trained and armed by the Soviet Union, are given
free rein on Lebanese soil.

54. In the normal course of international
nffain,
a sovereign State assumes the responsibility
for the
actions not only of its Government but also r_lf its
subjects and “guests”. Lebanon’s duty to prevent itr
territory from being used for terrorist attacks ;&kjl
other States is based on general internationul
IiW.
AS has been stated in Oppenheim-Lauterpi~cht’~
well-known and authoritative treatise on interwtrion~l
law:

51. Ever since its occupation of Lebanon in 1976
Syria has denied the Government
of Lebanon any
semblance of free and independent political decisionmaking and action. No decisions affecting Lebanese
national policies, either internal or external, are taken
any more by the Government of Lebanon, and no
longer are those decisions made in Beirut, its capital.
They are now made by its fraternal neighbour, Syria,
To rub it in, Syria has eliminated along itS border
with Lebanon all remaining vestiges of Lebanese
sovereignty and authority, especially in the Beka’a
valley. International
frontier demarcations between
the two countries have been removed, Syrian currency
has been introduced, and various Lebanese Government signs have been taken down and destroyed.
Various statements of the representative of Lebanon
in the Council must also be viewed against that background.

“States are under a duty to prevenl. and suppress
such subversive activity against foreign Govcrt
ments as assumes the form of armed hostile cxpeditions or attempts to commit common crimes ugBn!t
life or property.“’
This principle has been embraced by the Genewl ASsembly on numerous occasions, including, for example, in the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intr’tvention in the Domestic Affairs of States and thi
Protection of their Independence and Sovereignly.
adopted by the General Assembly on 21 Decwnbilr
196.5 [resolution 2/3/ (XX)] and the IDeclaration
CR
Principles of International
Law concerning Friend1)
Relations and Co-operation among States in :c-cord,
ante with the Charter of the United Nations, ~\dopteJ
by the General Assembly on 24 October I970 [l-~~.r~~br

52. To the outsider it may seem that Lebanon has
been divided into spheres of influence, principally
between the Syrians, who keep their army in the
north of the country, and the terrorist PLO, which
operates throughout much of the south. The fact is that
the PLO in Lebanon operates under complete Syrian
control. It is Syria which oversees the supply of the
PLO armaments and logistic facilities.
It is Syria
which decides how that terrorist organization
will
be deployed and what tasks it will undertake within
the framework of wider Syrian designs,

tion 242.5 (XXV),

~rnncs].

55. For Israel, all this is a matter of the utmc)st con,
tern, especially regarding Lebanon. The PLO, the SO
called guest of Lebanon, whose variety is legion and
whose sense of responsibility
is nil, is acting wilt
its customary brazenness in trespassing against thr
citizens of a neighbouring
State, Israel. Isrue mus
hold Lebanon fully responsible for any atrocity cum
mitted against it when it is conceived and planned il
Lebanon, irrespective of whether it is carried out from
Lebanon or from any other territory.

53. Over all these years of turmoil in Lebanon the
Council has not seen fit to devote any time to dis6

56. Our attitude should hardly appear strange to the
Lebanese authorities. They know full well what the
score-board indicates. It bears witness to assassinations and attempted
assassinations, murders and
attempted murders, all of which reflect the ob.jectives
of PLO strategy-namely,
the maximum loss of life
and limb among Israelis and Jews, wherever they
may be.

61. More recent testimony of Shiite Muslim resentment of the PLO presence in that country is supplied
by a Wtr.shit~,gronPost article of 27 May 1982. In a
dispatch from Sidon the Wrrskitzgtot~ POSY reports a
weakening of popular support for the terrorists. The
situation is described by Walid Jumblatt of the “national movement”,
which groups Lebanese leftist
militias with the PLO, as a “crisis of confidence”.
According to the dispatch, the PLO leadership is being
asked to show more respect for Lebanon’s own concerns when they differ from those of the Palestinians.

57. When the cessation of hostilities on the Lebanese border went into effect on 24 July 1981, after
laborious and protracted efforts by the United States
envoy, Mr. Philip Habib, it soon became clear that
the Lebanese Government, for all the protestations of
Mr. Tuini,
was unable to enforce it, control it or
ensure its continuation.
Violations of the cessation of
hostilities
began almost immediately
and have continued unabated, culminating
most recently in the
attempted
assassination of Mr. Argov in London.
In the face of great provocation, Israel has been acting
with the utmost restraint, but the most recent terrorist
outrages make too heavy demands on Israel’s patience.

62. This so-called crisis of confidence has found its
most recent expression in sharp clashes between
Muslim militias and PLO terrorists in Sidon. This is a
repetition of acts committed only a few years ago in
southern Lebanon, where the PLO entrenched itself
with the purpose of striking out across the border into
Israel lerritory. That phase of PLO activity is now
over, but the feverish build-up of arms and the building
of fortifications, as well as terrorist probes into Israel,
spell more trouble and bloodshed ahead.

58. It is customary for the PLO terrorists, as well as
for their protectors, financers and supporters, to voice
surprise at Israeli acts of self-defence when the limits
of forbearance are reached but the Security Council should consider Israel’s situation when confronted
with the unending harassment, the indiscriminate
and senseless killing of innocent people, by the PLO,
and it would do well to bear in mind the sinister association of the PLO with one of the super-Powers, with
the bandits who parade in military uniforms and make
use of the PLO in promoting their inter-Arab ambitions, with the potentates who buy insurance by paying
ransom to the PLO chieftains. Propaganda has elevated these men to the ranks of courageous freedom
fighters. In reality they are cowards, whose custom it
is to use men, women and children as human shields
in an attempt to ward off the retribution which they
deserve.

63. A PLO broadcast from Lebanon on 29 July 198 I,
only days after the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities, said:
“The Palestinian front in south Lebanon will be an
integral part of the internal front in all portions of the
occupied land, in order to strike once again the
Zionist enemy and attain international achievements
for the Palestinian cause, which introduced the
warrior’s rifle into all corners of the world.”
64. The message is clear: the killings will go on from
Lebanon against Israel, against Israelis and Jews
everywhere. But Israel will not remain unmoved by the
repetition of endless murders, sabotage and incitement. Those who overstep the boundaries and see
themselves under no obligation regarding the life and
property of Israel’s citizens must be put on notice.
Israel has always sought negotiations with its neighbours with a view to arriving at a peaceful settlement
of all the outstanding issues. Israel’s neighbours, with
one well-known recent exception, have declined to
negotiate with us.

59. Israel sincerely regrets any loss of life that may
have occurred among persons not directly responsible for PLO activities. The responsibility
must be
borne fully by the PLO and attributed to its total
disregard of human life, be it Israeli or Arab, Jewish,
Christian or Muslim. In this connection, I wish to
express to the Government and people of Norway our
profound sympathy on the death of a member of the
Norwegian contingent of UNIFIL.

65. Faced with intolerable
provocations,
repeated
aggression and harassment, Israel has now been forced
to exercise its right of self-defence to arrest the neverending cycle of attacks against Israel’s northern
border, to deter continued terrorism against Israel’s
citizens in Israel and abroad, and to instil the basic
concept in the minds of the PLO assassins that Jewish
life will never again be taken with impunity.

60. Hardly a day passes in Lebanon when the PLO
is not exercising its skills in butchery. Recent weeks
have seen the unfolding tragedy of more PLO activity
directed to gain the upper hand over the Shiites beyond
the Litani River. Together with their so-called leftist
comrades-in-crime,
they have been roaming the length
and breadth of the Shiite villages, killing, looting and
razing houses. Many thousands of Shiites have been
fleeing the area in an effort to escape from the PLO,
which is apparently planning to reassert its presence in
the territory which is has staked out for itself,

66. The Government of Israel, after all these months
of cautioning and warnings, has now decided to act,
justifiably and within clearly delineated parameters, to
free the inhabitants of the Gtililee from PLO harassment. The Israel Cabinet, in its meeting today, thus
resolved as follows: first, to instruct the Israel Defence
7

Forces to place all the civilian population of the Galilee
beyond the range of tire terrorists’ fire from Lebanon,
where they, their bases and their headquarters are
concentrated:
secondly, that the name of the operation is “Peace for Galilee”; thirdly, that during the
operation the Syrian army will not be attacked unless
it attacks our forces; fourthly, that Israel continues to
aspire to the signing of a peace treaty with independent Lebanon, its territorial integrity preserved.

the present representative of Israel, Mr. Herzog.
made pretty much the same speech. If my memory
serves me adequately, I think it was identical in partions, and possibly the representative of Israel should
update his stock of quotations.
74. We made our position clear then: we lhave made it
clear since: we have nothing to add. CINIFIL
was
established for a very specific purpose, with a vtlry
specific mission indeed, a most difficult mission. a
mission that has cost the lives of citiz’ens of your
country, Mr. President, and of other countries, partieularly Fiji, Ireland, Nigeria and Norway. It has cost
the lives of some of their valiant soldiers who crime
to establish peace in my country and in the Middle
East. Ever since its inception,
UNIFIL
has been
challenged, and so has the Council, by the Government
of Israel and its troops who claim to be th’e sole agents
of international law.

67. No one in the Middle East is as eager as Israel
to see Lebanese sovereignty restored, its internal strife
resolved, the Syrian occupiers removed, the PLO
subdued and freedom and tranquillity returned to that
war-torn land. Israel will do everything in its power
to maintain good-neighbourly
relations with Lebanon,
and the Lebanese leaders know this. If Lebanon is now
helplessly
given over to its captors, having forfeited
its independence, it must not expect Israel to relinquish
its responsibilities
as a sovereign State. Israel has no
quarrel with Lebanon, only with those who have
subjugated it.

75. If we are to follow Mr. Blum’s reading of international law, what we should do in fact is to dismantle
the Organization and entrust him with th!e implementation of the Charter and the preservation of the rights
of nations. But this we shall not do, and 1 am sure
the Council does not want to do it.

68, The PRESIDENT
(ii?te,.pl'LJtNtion
jh~rn
F/*rjac,l?):
I now call on the representative of Lebanon.
69. Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon): This has been a very
long day, Mr. President, and I must thank you and
the others members ofthe Council, and the Secretariat,
for your endless patience-particularly
in listening
to the speech of the representative of Israel.

76. Allow me to say that I very much thank thr
representative of Ireland for his words and for specifying that the aim of the present draft resuiution
[S/1.5/7/] is the preservation and guar,antee of the
security, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and in&
pendence of Lebanon, I know of the endless cmurts
that he and his colleagues on the Council have madC
all day to try to draft a resolution that would express
the Council’s desire for action and for peace. My Got’ernment would indeed have preferred that the dchtc
had followed a different course, and th;at a different
resolution had been submitted. However, 1 think the
draft which is now before the Council is an important
step towards the implementation
of peace and the
guarantee of everybody’s rights.

70. It is obvious to the Council and to myself that
this has been a standard filibuster, aimed at buying
time before the Council acts on an aggression, buying
time to pursue the aggression which is the subject of
the item on our agenda today. It is obvious also that
this is an attempt to blackmail the world Organization,
the Security Council, my Government and myself,
trying to intimidate us and prevent the Council and us
from acting.
71. I have no taste for the black humour of the representative of Israel, nor shall I engage with him at this
late hour in a contest in his own reading of international law, of history and of international politics in
the area. I would rather say the following.

77. The Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice Agree.
merit? with Israel which is an instrument of inturnational law-and we have insisted over and over ugain
on the necessity of implementing
it-has been violated.
But it would appear ridiculous indeed, in the fttce oJ’
the war which we are witnessing and living and of the
scars on our land, to speak of an armistice agreemr:nt.
I reiterate our commitment
to that Agreement merely
as an indication of my country’s desire for peuce and
its commitment to international
law.

72. The representative of Israel seems to have forgotten that it is his country which is accused, not mine,
It is therefore he who must answer accusations and
not Lebanon. Indeed, it is a very strange method of
helping a country to establish peace and to assume its
responsibilities under international law. This is indeed
the first instance in history where peace is to be established by aggression and where the aggressor pretends
to be the aggressed, while having sent its armies, its
air force and its navy to kill and destroy endlessly.

78. One last word to the representative
of Israel.
If his country desires peace, may I tell him very L’andidly that peace cannot be achieved by the establishment of barbed wire States, ghetto States, in thr
Middle East. If his country wants to integrate in the
area and wants to live peacefully, it cannot live peiiee*
fully by endlessly killing and destroying.

73. One point cannot go unnoticed, In 1978, the
Council adopted resolution 425 (1978). When that
resolution was being voted upon, the predecessor of
8

;
I
1

I

79. The PRESIDENT
(infrlpl.rfntion
fiwrn Fwnch).
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization, upon whom I now call.

Juarez who said, “El i+e.spctorrl d~~,-wlro ujcnn CJSt(r
pnz” -respect for the rights of others is peace,
84. Anyone who tries to step on the rights of others
cannot expect to live in peace. No criminal should be
able to get away with his crime: such a precedent should
not be tolerated. I am sure that no one seated at this
table believes the lies that were spoken here tonight
by the representative of the paranoiac madman Menathem Begin in Tel Aviv.

80. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization):
I apologize for having to start my brief
intervention
tonight with a few remarks on the lies
and distortions that the representative of the Government of the arch-terrorist Menachem Begin has uttered
here in the Council. Violence and terrorism are a trademark of the Zionist movement, and everybody knows
that. Before Menachem Begin and his clique came to
our land, Palestine, we did not know violence and wars.
They brought war with them and they brought violence
with them to our land.

85. The Council meets today to consider the criminal
assault by Israel on Lebanese and Palestinians residing
in Lebanon. The massive attack by Israel-equipped
with the most sophisticated
United States instruments of death, from F-15 and F-16 jets to cluster and
concussion bombs and napalm, used on what are, in
fact, civilian targets-continues.
Israeli troops, however, are being opposed by Palestinian
men and
women, who, in extremely difficult circumstances, are
exercising their primordial right of self-defence, What
they face is nothing less than extermination.
No human
being on earth can be expected simply to die in the
face of brutal attacks.

81. When Menachem Begin, the former corporal in
the Polish army, came to Palestine he started a terrorist organization
of mad, paranoid men like himself
who were responsible for the killing of 254 Palestinian
men, women and children in the village of Deir Yassin
on 9 April 1948. I think that at that time his present
representative
was not in Palestine: he was still in
Czechoslovakia.
He immigrated later to Palestine. His
counterpart,
Moshe Arens, in Washington, was still
studying in the United States as an American citizen.

86. The United States representative,
today on
American television, made two distortions. One was
that she said that the Palestinians do not have the
right to self-defence because they do not constitute a
State. What strange logic! Clearly, the United States
representative lives in a world that knows very little
about the will of our people, which, for dozens of years,
has been the target of the most savage, genocidal
onslaught. The other distortion made was that the
PLO violated the cease-fire. I think that the report of
the Secretary-General answers that lie.

82. In the problem of Palestine it is perhaps fortunate
for us to be in the vanguard of those who fight against
one of the most racist movements in the history of
mankind.
It is no surprise that this movement is allied
to the crptrltheid rkgime in South Africa. It is a movement that has as its purpose the expulsion and destruction of a whole people, the Palestinian people, and
the ingathering of all those madmen like Menachem
Begin, Sharon and Goodman, bringing them to Palestine to sow hatred and killing in our peaceful land.
They should remember that as long as our children
sleep in refugee camps in Lebanon, no peace can be
expected for them in Palestine. They should know that
as long as our men and women are terrorized by
settlers who come from Florida or Brooklyn in New
York to settle in Ramallah and Nablus, there will
be no peace in the Middle East. They must remember
that as long as the Palestinian people does not enjoy
its inalienable
right to self-determination,
to live in
freedom and dignity in its homeland, there can be no
peace in our part of the world.

87. Of course our people has the right-indeed,
it
has the duty-of
self-defence. No power on earth
-and certainly not that of Israel and the United
States-can take that right from the Palestinian people.
The whole world knows this and respects our people;
it respects our people’s noble and just resistance. We
will fight until there is no more fighting to be done.
88. We want to alert the world body to the fact that
the Israeli attack came through United Nations lines
in southern Lebanon. Israeli soldiers were unopposed
in this barbaric action taken by a State bent on the
destruction of another people, a people whose only
crime is that it exists. There is no international body,
no world conscience capable of representing moral
conscience and principle that will not condemn Israel
unreservedly. That a nation of refugees, the remnants
of those who suffered and died in Nazi extermination
camps, is now acting as barbarously and viciously as
this staggers the mind.

83. The representative
of Menachem Begin puts
the cart before the horse: he never asks why there are
500,000 Palestinians in Lebanon, and why there are
I million Palestinian refugees in Jordan, 350,000 others
in Syria and probably the same number in the Gulf
t-egion. He, and others like him, are living in my home,
in my country and in my cities. They are living in houses
that they did not build. They are gathering the fruits
of groves that they did not plant. They have attempted
genocide against our people, against our culture and
against our existence. I would remind them that those
who commit aggression cannot expect to live in peace
unless they respect the rights of others. It was Benito

89. The Palestinian people will resist as long as it
lives, Israel attacks Palestinians
everywhere:
in
occupied Palestine, in Lebanon, wherever there are
Palestinians. What Israel does on the West Bank
9

-oppressing
unarmed civilians, mostly young people-it is now doing in Lebanon. What is taking place
on the ground in Lebanon is phase two of the Sharon
plan, The purpose of that plan, put quite simply, is to
destroy the national will of the Palestinian people, to
impose servitude on them and to create an clprrl’lhcidlike rCgime for them in Palestine. To do this, the Begin
Government
must attempt principally
to obliterate
the military and political stature of the Palestinian
people, and this means obliterating the PLO, the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.

96. After listening to a report from the SecretnryGeneral, the Council, in exercise of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, unanimously adopted resolution 508 ( 1982).
which called upon all parties to the conflict to cease
immediately and simultaneously
all military activities
within Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli
border no later than 0600 hours, local time, on Sunday, 6 June 1982-that is, today.
97. Instead of hearing of a cessation of military
activities, what do we hear? The report of the Secrstary-General here today gives information ‘of a massive
invasion by Israel on Lebanese towns and villages and
on refugee camps of the Palestinian people, and the
violation of the territorial
integrity of a sovereign
State. Israel, instead of complying with Council resolution 508 (1982), with which the PLO agreed to comply, launched its massive attack. Hundreds of civilians
have been killed and the number of casualties is yr’t
unknown.

90. We wish to put our enemies on notice that for
most of this century our people has faced wars and
plots to “spirit it away”, to use the phrase of Herzl,
the father of Zionism, Our resistance is our history:
we have no intention of disappearing. The world will
continue to hear about the Palestinian people arid we
will continue to fight for peace and justice.
91. The PRESIDENT
(intcymttrtion from French):
I understand that the Council is ready to vote on the
draft resolution submitted by Ireland, which has been
circulated as document S/IS 171. If there is no objection I shall now put that draft resolution to the vote.

98. How can Israel justify this kind of international
lawlessness? It is absurd to link Israel’s action with
the attempted assassination of the Israeli Ambassitdor
to London, Mr. Shlomo Argov. It is most unfortunate
that such an act should ever have taken place. hiy
delegation joins with all others in deploring, this wanton
act of violence. But even if the two acts could
b’c
linked, there is no justification
for the widespread
destruction and human suffering, or for the illegal
invasion of the sovereign territory of a neighbouring
State. To accept any such justification
would be to
usher in a system of inter-State relations based on
vengeance and violence.

92. The PRESIDENT
(intclp/‘Pttrtion
,fiwn Frrn~*h):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
asked to be allowed to make statements after the
voting.

99. My delegation views the situation as extremely
dangerous for international
peace and security. It is
of the utmost importance that there should be an imrnediate withdrawal of the Israeli forces from all Lebanese
territory, an immediate cease-fire and a cessation ofall
hostilities by all parties concerned. Draft resolution
S/l5171 made provision for this, It was therefore a
pleasure for Guyana to vote in favour of the resolution.

93. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
This resolution focuses on two elements as a means of
ending the present military confrontation in Lebanon:
a cessation of hostilities by all of the parties and the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon, Paragraphs I and 2 seek to accomplish these two interrelated objectives. We wish to emphasize that these
two objectives are, in fact, inextricably
linked and
that their implementation
must be simultaneous. This,
in our view, is the clear, logical and necessary meaning
of the resolution.

100. Mr. LING Qing (China) (intesps~~trtrtion .rflt1)1
Chinrs~): The Chinese delegation listened attentively
to the statements made by the representatives
of
Lebanon and the PLO. We fully supporlt their stern
and just exposure and indictment of the crimes committed by the Israeli aggressors, and we deem il.
extremely necessary and timely for the Government
of
Lebanon to have called for an urgent meeting of the
Council to consider the question.

94. I need only add that it is the fervent hope of my
Government, which has devoted so much effort to the
resolution of this conflict-and
which even at this very
moment is carrying forward its commitment
to the
task-that
the bloodshed be ended immediately
and
that the conditions be established for a just and enduring peace in the region.

101. On 4 June the Israeli authorities
dispatched
large numbers of bombers to carry out nine intensive
bombing raids on the city of Beirut and its outskirts,
and hit non-military targets in densely populated areas.
Later, Israeli warships joined in the shelling and killed
defenceless innocent civilians, thereby causing severe
loss of life and property damage to the Lebanese and
Palestinian peoples.

95. Mr. KARRAN
(Guyana): Yesterday the Council
met as a matter of urgency [2374th rnwting] to consider
what it rightly conceived to be a serious situation in
southern Lebanon and along the Lebanese-Israeli
border area, and its implications for peace and security in the region.
IO

102. In the light of the situation, the Council, on
5 June, adopted resolution 508 (19821, in which it
expressed grave concern at the massive losses in life
and property resulting from the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, and demanded a cessation of all
military
activities within the borders of Lebanon no
later than 0600 hours, local time, on Sunday, 6 June
1982.
103. However, in disregard of the just public opinion
of the international
community and of the solemn
resolutions of the Council, and in obstinate pursuance
of their policy of aggression and expansion, the Israeli
authorities
blatantly
dispatched once again large
numbers of aircraft and ground troops across the
UNIFIL
area on 6 June to attack the Palestinian
refugee camps and launch a massive act of aggression
against Lebanon, thereby violently trampling upon the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
104. Up to now the Israeli aggression troops have
been driving deeper into Lebanese territory and the
situation
is developing to an extremely dangerous
point. All this cannot fail to draw our serious attention.
105. For a long period of time Israel has been plotting
to infringe upon the sovereignty of Lebanon by dividing
and annexing Lebanese territory; it has been sowing
discord among the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples
and destroying relations between them, in an attempt
to annihilate
the liberation forces of the Palestinian
people. Since April of this year, the Council has held
many meetings to consider the question of the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon. However, the situation in southern Lebanon, far from being alleviated, has in fact
been deteriorating.
The Israeli authorities’
escalation of the war of aggression against Lebanon is not
only another insolent challenge to the Lebanese and
Palestinian peoples and the whole Arab world, but also
a serious step deliberately to exacerbate the Middle
East situation,
thereby endangering world peace
and security.

108. Today, in view of the urgent situation, and
after consultations in the Council, the Chinese delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution in document S/15171. At the same time, I wish to take this
opportunity
to reiterate that the Chinese Government and people will, as always, firmly support the
Arab peoples in their struggle to safeguard their independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and
firmly support the Palestinian and Arab peoples in their
just struggle to restore their national rights and recover
lost territories until they win their final victory.
109. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (irztP,prrtrrtion
,fhm
Russitrn):
The
Council has again been urgently convened to considet
Israel’s direct act of aggression against Lebanon, an
independent
and sovereign State Member of the
United Nations. This morning Israel carried out a
large-scale invasion, using ground, air and naval
forces, against the territory of Lebanon. As the Council is meeting, Israeli troops continue to penetrate
deep into Lebanese territory. The massive incursion by the Israeli aggressors into Lebanon, the barbaric bombing raids on Lebanese towns and populated
areas, as a result of which hundreds of innocent civilians have been killed and wounded, cannot fail to call
forth our wrathful indignation
and vehement condemnation.
110. It is quite clear that what we have here is an
open wanton act of aggression against Lebanon
whereby the ruling circles of Israel are crudely trampling underfoot the most elementary norms of international law, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the many resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 508 (1982), which
was adopted unanimously
by the Council yesterday
[ikid.],
regarding an immediate cease-fire in Lebanon.
With its typical offhandedness and cynicism, Israel
has not only failed to implement that resolution but
unleashed a massive invasion of Lebanese territory.

106. The Chinese Government and people express
strong indignation
and condemnation
of the Israeli
acts of aggression and firmly support the Lebanese
Government
and people in the just struggle against
aggression and in defence of independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

I I I, The cutting edge of Israel’s aggression is pointed
not only against the State of Lebanon. The Israeli
leaders have not hidden the fact that now they intend
to realize the criminal designs they were unable to
carry out in March 6978, that is, to deal with the PLO,
the staunch vanguard of the Palestinian people, which
is fighting for the restitution of its legitimate rights.

107. The Lebanese Government
has launched
many appeals to the Council to take effective measures against the flagrant acts of aggression by the
Israeli authorities.
The Chinese Government
and
people firmly support the just demands of the Lebanese
Government.
In our view, the Council should adopt
a resolution which in explicit terms condemns the
Israeli acts of aggression and demands that Israel
immediately
cease the aggression and immediately,
totally and unconditionally
withdraw its troops from
Lebanese territory so that the independence,
SOVereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon can be
strictly respected.

I 12. The Israeli war machine, sowing death and destruction in Lebanon, has again been put into action in
an attempt to annihilate the valiant fighters of the
Palestinian
resistance movement,
to frighten the
Palestinian people and to break their will and resolve
to struggle for their freedom and independence. There
is no doubt that these attempts will meet the same
fate as all the other previous attempts and that those
who for many years sow the wind will sooner or later
reap the whirlwind. The Soviet Union has repeatedly
warned that the adventuristic policy of the Tel Aviv
ringleaders could produce catastrophic consequences
for the people of Israel.

120. Secondly, in contrast to the attitude taken by
the PLO, there has been no reaction so far from the
Israeli authorities to resolution SO8 (1982). unless wc
are to understand that the massive military operation
to which I have just referred is precisely in response to
the call of the Council immediately
to cease all military activities within Lebanon and across the Lchanese-Israeli border.

I 13. Yesterday the Council appealed to the Member States to use their influence to bring about a cessation of hostilities in Lebanon and across the LebaneseIsraeli border. It is quite clear that that appeal was
made primarily to the “strategic ally” of Israel, the
United States. It would seem that certain persons had
illusions that the acuteness and explosiveness of the
present situation in the Middle East would impel the
United States to actions dictated by a sense of responsibility. Today these illusions have been dispelled.
It is clear that the entire Middle East policy of the
United States, based as it is on all-round unconditional
support of Israel, has given Tel Aviv the go-ahead
for any fresh acts of aggression and expansion.

121. Thirdly, one cannot but wonder for how long
the Council will allow Israel to trample with impunity
upon the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in particular of its Article 2, paragraph 4.
and of numerous resolutions, including the Council’s
resolution 508 (1982). adopted yesterday.

114. The Council must weigh very seriously the
present events in Lebanon. This was an attempt which
was previously planned and carried out by the Israeli
leadership in cold blood in order to plunge the entire
Middle East region into the flames of a new military
conflict to subvert any chance of attaining any just
Middle East settlement.
Israel’s actions his-&vis
Lebanon pose a direct threat to international peace
and security.

122. We believe that the Council cannot simply
gloss over acts such as this latest-and
s,till, as f:a
as we know, continuing-violation
of the indcpcndence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon, coupled as it is with substantial loss of life and
destruction of property. In our opinion, something
more forceful than remonstrations has to be applied in
order to stop the aggressor in his tracks and to deter
him in the future. My delegation stands ready to COoperate fully in efforts the Council should undertake
along this line.

115. We are convinced that the resolution adopted
today by the Council does not fully respond to the
extremely serious and steadily worsening situation
in Lebanon. Unfortunately,
the draft resolution did not
reflect the need to condemn Israel for its fresh acts of
aggression against Lebanon. None the less, taking
into consideration the demand contained in it for a full
and unconditional-and
I stress a full and unconditional-withdrawal
of Israeli troops to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon, the Soviet
delegation deemed it possible to support it.

123. As for the remarks of the representative of Israel
concerning my country, it would be beneath our dignity
to respond to them in any way. No amoun’t of unprovoked rhetoric-which
in mine as well as in Mr. Blum’s
language I would call “chutzpah’‘-is
going to divert
the world’s attention from the fact that Israel has
elevated armed aggression and State terrorism to the
level of instruments of its foreign policy.

116. Mr. NOWAK (Poland): Sir, as this is the first
time my delegation has spoken in the Council this
month, I should like at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of June. My delegation pledges its cooperation in assisting you in the successful discharge
of your important function.

124. The PRESIDENT
(inr~~,./~~c~rali(,,1~;.0/7?Frpr!<.h):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation undel
rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure at its
2374th meeting. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

117. I also wish to express our gratitude to Mr, Ling
Qing for the effective manner in which he presided
over our work in May.
118. My delegation went along with the other members of the Council in accepting the draft resolution
submitted by Ireland, on the understanding that it was
acceptable to the victims of the Israeli aggression, that
is, to Lebanon and the Palestinians. At the same time
we wish to make the following observations.

125. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Yesterday,
the Council
adopted a resolution [rcsolr~tion
SUH (lY8;?)1. In my
statement then on behalf of the League of Arab States,
I said that Israel’s intervention
was a prelude to the
invasion of Lebanon [2374th tncctincq, ptrrtr. Ml I 11
seems that that anticipation has been fulfilled. Today,
another resolution has been unanimously
adopted
by the Council [rrsolution
509 (lYg2)]. Thd unanimity
with which that resolution was adopted indicates the
gravity of the situation that has developed in the
aftermath of Israel’s invasion of Lebanon.

119. First, it is beyond any doubt that Israel has
launched a full-scale attack against its northern neighbour, and there are good reasons to believe that it is
only the first stage of a larger military and political
design.

126. What we are witnessing here is not only the
fact that Israel has invaded Lebanon, but th.at Israel is
attempting to encroach upon the prerogatives of the
Council as well and to undermine its credibility and its
effectiveness, rendering its resolutions
no more
12

than sheer, empty rhetoric. The insults heaped upon
this body both today and yesterday in the harangue
of the Israeli representative represent an attempt to
extricate Israel from any responsibility to comply with
any resolution of the Council. What Israel is trying to
do is to enter into a head-on confrontation with the
international
community. It is trying to undermine the
unanimity
of the Council and to state that it assumes
for itself the right to take international law into its
own hands.

Lebanon in order to continue to play havoc not only
with the destiny of that country and with the policy of
the Palestinian people, but also with the chances for
peace and stability in the region as a whole. Needless
to say, the attack and the insults heaped upon the
PLO today-a usual and habitual attempt to discredit
that organization-are
answered by many factors.
They include the international
recognition
of the
legitimacy of the PLO, not only as the sole representative of the Palestinian people, not only as the leader
of its liberation and resistance struggle, but also as the
symbol of its unity and as the framework of its peoplehood and national unity.

127. What we are confronted with, therefore, is not
only the invasion of Lebanon, catastrophic as that
may be: it is not only the barbaric attacks on Palestinian refugee camps and on Lebanese villages and
towns. We are also witnessing a head-on collision
with the Council and what it represents in terms of
the international
will, international
consensus and
international
legitimacy. We are witnessing an attempt
by Israel to establish a counter-legitimacy
of its own,
one that rejects international unanimity and its right
to define what constitutes international law and jurisprudence.
We are witnessing,
therefore, Israel’s
assumption for itself the right to establish it own laws,
to establish its own hegemony and to undermine
continuously
and perpetually the effectiveness and
credibility
of the United Nations.

13 I. The representative
of the United Kingdom
yesterday spelt out in unequivocal terms that the
representative of the PLO in London was equally
targeted by those groups which have attempted to
assassinate the Israeli Ambassador. It would have
been a matter of elementary courtesy to allow the
judicial system of the United Kingdom to be seized of
the problem before prejudging the issue and circulating
this prejudgement in the Council itself.
132. Furthermore,
there have been attempts at
semantic acrobatics, efforts to slip in half-truths and
untruths and distortions as a pattern by saying that
the PLO undertakes to kill Israelis and Jews. First of
all, let me state emphatically that the attempt by Israel
to assume the responsibility
for protecting, and its
claim to represent, Jews throughout the world is one of
the greatest ideological distortions in contemporary
history. The attempt to insinuate that it is protecting
Israelis and Jews everywhere is an attempt to plant
the seeds of Jewish alienation in the respective national
societies to which they belong and of which they are
citizens. It is predicated on the assumption that Israel
has the right to protect and to speak for Jews throughout the world. I should like to state, on behalf of the
Arab States, that Jews who are Arabs refuse protection of their rights except by their own Governments
and States. And I am sure that the Jews of the United
States, of the United Kingdom, of France, of the Soviet
Union, of all the countries in the world reject Israel’s
claim to be the spokesman for all the Jews in the world
and the protector of their rights. It is this dangerous
ideological
pattern that the Israeli representatives
seek to introduce in order to create an equivocation
and a distortion through which Israel seeks to make
its own terrorism protective of its own policies. In this
way, any criticism of Israel becomes an act of antiSemitism. Any questioning of its policies becomes
subject to an attack, as if Jews have been attacked.
Thus Israel is seeking through identification
with
world Jewry and a sense of belonging to create protective shields for its terrorism against the Arab people
and the Palestinian people. I think that the world
community has now realized and most certainly many
Jews have realized not only that Israel cannot speak
for them, but that Israel distorts their spiritual, religious
and cultural values.

128. In the midst of this situation, in the midst of the
threat to peace that Israel’s invasion of Lebanon
constitutes, it is thus becoming increasingly necessary
and essential that the Council assume two functions,
the first being that of redressing the aggression that
Israel has carried out and the second that of relieving
the world community of the anxiety created by Israel’s
getting away with its contempt for the Council. We
would therefore like to interpret the resolution that was
adopted yesterday and the resolution that has been
adopted today as necessary transitional resolutions
to rectify a basic and fundamental transgression of
Lebanese sovereignty. I say “transitional”
because
we have been warned today, as we were warned yesterday, that invasion is inevitable and the filibuster to
which Mr. TuCni referred today was an attempt to buy
more time in order to circumvent the will of the international community.
129. Hence, it is necessary to state-and on behalf
of the League of Arab States and of the Arab people
I do so-that
the attack on the Council and on its
record of performance is an attempt to extricate
Israel, N priori, from any compliance with the Council’s resolutions. But the Council must see to it that
its resolutions are respected and implemented.
The
Council must also see to it that there is a contingency
plan, one for which we must all be prepared, when its
resolutions are not complied with.
130. By taking the law into own hands and setting
itself up as a counter-legitimacy
to create its own law
based on the new definition that might is right, Israel
is attempting
to violate and exploit a situation in
13

133. We have witnessed today an attempt in this
resolution to interpret the situation so as to divert attention from the central issue. The central issue today is
that Lebanon has been invaded under the pretext of
dispersing the Palestinian people. In this respect we
must come back to the essence. What is taking place
in the south of Lebanon and in the occupied territories
of Palestine are two parts of the same issue. The
attempt by Israel to liquidate the Palestinian people
physically in Lebanon is the other component of
liquidating them politically in occupied Palestine. It is
this genocidal dimension of Israeli policies that is
unravelled and unfolded in the invasion of Lebanon
and the insult to the Council. It is time that we focused
on the central issues and realized that the invasion of
Lebanon is only the latest genocidal manifestation of a
policy of racism that has gone totally mad.

140. The Egyptian Government and people join the
rest of the Arab world and all peace-loving countries
in strongly condemning
the Israeli invasion. The
Egyptian Government
and people are profoundly
shocked and angered by an act so contrary to all the
prerequisites for establishing a solid basis for a just
and lasting peace in the region. The Israeli Govcrnment is fully responsible for all the negative consequences of its totally unacceptable behaviour. Egypt
cannot afford to overlook the inherent dangerous
threat to the security of the region and to the cause of
peace, which have been seriously affected by Israel’s
invasion of a sovereign State. This act, committed on
a hollow excuse, portends dreadful consequences for
the region and can lead only to the further isolation of
Israel. No peace-loving State can tolerate or acquiesce
in such an unjustified act.

134. The PRESIDENT
(intclpr.Pttrtion.~om
French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of
Egypt in which he asks to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

141, The Council is called upon to prevent a return
to all the concepts and doctrines which should have
been abandoned after the initiation of the peace process in the Middle East. It is indeed regrettable lhut
hundreds of innocent people have fallen victim to the
Israeli invasion. The killing of unarmed civilians.
women and children, is a serious escalation of tension
and instability in the region and a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations.
142. The Egyptian Government and people express
their profound sympathy with the brave people OF
Lebanon and the Palestinians.
143. In the light of these regrettable events, the
Egyptian Government
today issued a statement
expressing Egypt’s condemnation
of the Israeli invnsion of south Lebanon and called for the immediate
withdrawal of Israel forces. That stand emanates from
Egypt’s conviction, its support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon und
the right of the Palestinian people to live in peace iind
en-joy their legitimate rights.

135. The PRESIDENT
(intPr.prPtofion,fi’orn
Fwrh):
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
136. Mr. ZAKI (Egypt): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council at a crucial juncture in world events. I should
like also to pay a high tribute to the friendly country
which you represent.

144. The Egyptian Government would like to reiterate the following requirements: first, an urgent, immediate cease-fire in Lebanon; secondly, the: territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon
within its internationally
recognized boundaries:
thirdly, the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of Israeli forces from Lebanon. That is Egypt’s pusition. I hope that I have made it clear.

137. Similarly I cannot fail on this occasion to express
my delegation’s
appreciation
to your predecessor,
Mr. Ling Qing of China, who carried out his mandate
last month as President of the Council in an excellent
manner.
138. The Council meets tonight in the grim mood
befitting this tragic occasion. Once again the tensionravaged Middle East has received another set-back
through Israel’s invasion of southern Lebanon, Indeed,
there is cause for grave concern about the very serious
fall-out of this unwarranted action.

145. Once again, Egypt calls upon Israel to respect
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon and strictly to abide by Council resolution 509 (1982), which has just been unanimously adopted.

139. The Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon is
indeed a serious development with far-reaching implications. It runs counter to Israel’s declared intention
of seeking a comprehensive peace and stability in the
area, threatens world peace and subjects the Middle
East to a new wave of instability and chaos.

146. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
.~~OVI F~*cj~tc.l~l:
The representative of Israel has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply and I call on him.
147. Mr, BLUM (Israel): I should like first to thank
the representative of Guyana for his expressions of
I4

sympathy in connection with the assassination attempt
against the Ambassador of Israel in London.
148, I have duly taken note of the standards of
dignity that the representative of Poland deems applicable to himself. I fully understand, as we all do, the
constraints and parameters within which he operates.
It is against that background that we also understand
the expressions of solidarity with the terrorist PLO,
or-to use his language-the
expressions of solidrmrc~~k with the PLO,
149. The representative of the Soviet Union made
a very predictable
statement-predictable,
that is,
for a State that is the main protector and supplier of
the terrorist PLO and that uses that organization as its
stooge in the Middle East. So I shall not reply to him
in detail, but I shall make one remark. He referred
to my Government
as the “ruling circles of Israel”
@IIYI. I l0 rrhol~c]. It is probably difficult for a Soviet
representative to understand that there are countries
that do not have ruling circles, democracies where
the Government
is democratically
elected by the people. The Soviet Union may have ruling circles and,
~1swe all know. those circles are rather narrow, but
I think it is wrong for the Soviet representative to draw
comparisons between the narrowness of the ruling
circles of his country, on the one hand. and the democratic rPgimes of other countries, on the other,
150. Our scholar.-in-l.esidence.
Mr. Maksoud. has
again delivered one of his customary sermons. I do not
wish to reply to him either. However, I must draw the
Council’s attention to one particular attempt in his
statement to incite various States against their Jewish
citizens --because that is what the latter part of his
Qatcment amounted to [/x~/Y/. 1.32 rrho~~~l.
It has been
widely reported in recent days that the hit list discovered by the British police in the possession of the
PLO terrorists
who perpetrated the assassination
attempt against Mr. Argov included a number of
prominent Jewish personalities in Britain and other
European countries. We also know, of course, that on
ii number of occasions in recent years, the PLO did
perpetrate such crimes against Jews. including Jewish
schoolchildren,
in various countries in Europe. If
Mr. Maksoud had only listened to the list of those
crimes-though
a selected list-that
I included in my
statement, which you described as long, Mr. President, he would certainly have seen fit to refrain from
making those remarks.
151. I now come to the statement made by out
colleague from Lebanon. As I have had occasion to
point out before, Israel has profound sympathy with
Lebanon and all its people in their agony. I personally
can also sympathize with Mr. TuCni in his plight and
his need to please in his statements not only his Syrian
overlords but also the warring factions in Beirut. It is
difficult for me to believe that Mr. Tueni is not aware
of the realities in his own country, but in the unlikely
even that he is not, I should like to refer him to the

statement made in the General Assembly on 14 October 1976’ by his predecessor, Mr. Emile Chorra,
whom we are happy to welcome here in this chamber.
152. Mr. TuCni once again gave LIS his interpretation
of Council resolution 425 (1978). When that resolution
was adopted, the Council was well aware of the problem of Lebanon in its entirety, fully recognizing that
the presence of Syrian troops and of the PLO terrorists on Lebanese soil constituted a major obstacle to
the restoration of international peace and security and
to the re-establishment
of Lebanon’s authority ovet
its own territory. It was with that in mind that the
Council entrusted UNIFIL
with a three-fold mandate:
first, to confirm the withdrawal of Israel forces:
secondly, to restore international peace and security:
and thirdly, to assist the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return ofits effective authority in the area.
153. In co-operation with the Israel Defence Forces.
UNIFIL
in June 1978 successfully carried out the first
part of its mandate. Regrettably, the remaining two
parts of the UNIFIL
mandate have not yet been
implemented,
due to the continuing presence of the
Syrian army of occupation and of the massive presence
of PLO terrorists on Lebanese soil.
154. Mr, TuCni in his statement also referred to the
casualties suffered by UNIFIL
over the years. What
he conveniently forgot to mention is the well-known
fact that the vast majority of those UNIFIL
casualties
were brought about by the PLO terrorists in southern
Lebanon.
155. The representative
of Lebanon also made
reference once again to the Israeli-Lebanese
General
Armistice Agreement of 1949.’ He referred to black
humour. It is really difficult to compete with his
black humour, For surely Mr. TuCni knows that it was
his country that destroyed the Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice Agreement, almost I5 years ago to
the day-on 5 June 1967. I might add that subsequent
to June 1967 the Government of Lebanon also repeatedly demonstrated that it no longer considered the
Agreement in force, by concluding a series of agreements with the terrorist PLO that were totally incompatible with its basic obligations under the Armistice
Agreement, Most specifically, I would like to refer him
to article III, paragraph 3, of that now defunct Agreement, which provided that “no warlike act or act of
hostility shall be conducted from territory controlled
by one of the Parties to this Agreement against the
other Party”.
156. I do not think I have to repeat that provision.
Mr. Tueni knows full well how that particular provision of the Israeli-Lebanese General Armistice Agreement has been carried out by his country ever since
1967. Let me therefore tell you plainly, Mr. TuCni: had
Lebanon been prepared, over the years, to face its
problems honestly and fulfil1 its national and international commitments,
it might not have come to the
sorry pass it has reached.

157. The PRESIDENT
(inter-pretrrtion from Fwnrh):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a statement in reply, and
1 now call upon him.

them, yet he speaks of attacks on schoolchildren.
The two incidents that took place at Kiryat Shmonil
and Ma’alot, where schoolchildre‘n werie involved,
were massacres by Israeli soldiers. Even lsrncli
settlers went into the streets to protest against Moshe
Dayan. who was then Defence Minister of lsr;irl.
who had ordered the storming of the school.

158. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): The representative of Begin made two
points that I should like to comment on.

162. The Israelis have never had any respect ftlr
human life, whether Palestinian or otherwise. l-Ii<
chief, Menachem Begin himself, ordered ithe destruction of the ship Ptrtrirr in 1942-400 Jews were kilIrd
in that attack-in
order to make a political point. Ws
know what kind of respect they have for human life.
Only yesterday, in the attack on the Palestine Ked
Crescent Society’s hospital, a hospital for children.
four newly-born children and four nurses were killedand he speaks of respect for human life.

159. First, he spoke of the question of solidarity
with the PLO and with the Palestinian people. Definitely, the living conscience of the world will have
to express solidarity
with the Palestinian
people.
He will not be very happy about it, because he lives
in one of the most isolated rkgimes in the international
community.
In fact, I do not envy him at this tablehe may have one friend at the United Nations-o]
anywhere else, because of the justice of the Palestinian cause and because of the nature of the rigime that
he represents. He represents a rkgime that has alliances
with the most oppressive and suppressive rkgimes
that exist in this world. It has a strategic alliance with
the crprrrthid rCgime of South Africa. It used to support Rhodesia, Portuguese colonialism
in GuineaBissau and Mozambique.
It continues to have relations only with those rCgimes that are outcasts from
the international
community,
yet it may look around
and see that the cause of the Palestinian people is
being adopted by the overwhelming
majority of the
international community.

163. In the attack of July last year on t:he heart of
Beirut, 500 civilians were killed. I visited peuplr in
Beirut hospital who were maimed; childlren without
limbs, traumatized for the rest of their lives. I do not
think any other State or rigime has so ruthlessly Hnd
indiscriminately
destroyed human life as the Zionist
rlgime. It has no respect for human life, whslhrt
Jewish or other. In fact, the memoirs of Moshe Sharctt
indicate without any doubt that the Zionists used to
send their agents to the Jewish quarters in Arab countries and bomb synagogues in order to induce JCWS to
leave their respective countries and emigrate to PilIe+
tine. Everybody knows that the leaders of the Zitrnisr
movement in Germany instructed the Jewish cornmunity not to resist the Nazi occupation and truded
Jews with the Nazis to allow them to lemigrntc tu
Palestine.

160. This must be a source of concern to him. He
lives in a ghetto that has no relations with the people
around it and which depends for its survival on outside
charity. In order to survive, Israel has to receive an
average of $5 billion from the United States of America every year. Imagine, every Israeli receives an
average of $2,000 of American money every year. In
spite of this amount of charity that is received by the
Zionist Government in Palestine, Israel has one of the
most difficult economic situations with a I I3 per cent
rate of inflation. Crime, drug taking, prostitution
are
the trademarks of the society that he and his colleagues declare that they want to establish for the
Jewish people. In fact, he may be surprised to know
that there are a growing number of Jews, decent
honest Jews like the late Fred Sparks, who have
expressed solidarity with the Palestinian people and
their struggle.
Many Jewish organizations
have
expressed solidarity with the Palestinian
people. In
fact, there are Jews who refuse to have any dealings
with the Zionist State of Israel and prefer to deal with
the PLO. He knows that, but he would like to distort
those facts.

164. I was reading an article the other day in ths
Jrrmr/ev~ Post that said that now they are going from
house to house in Paris, in so-called poor quarters.
to persuade Jews to emigrate to Palestine, under \vhat
they call “Aleya”.
They are collecting people frrlnl
all over the world and lately we have been receiving
in Palestine the most criminal elements, who at:
coming to terrorize our people in their villages and
towns, to destroy their crops, their cars, their houses
and their property, in order to increase the number of’
Jews in Palestine under the banners of Zionism.
165. That is the situation with the Zionists and that
is the danger that is being caused to peace in clur
region, because for every Jew who is recruited to come
to Palestine there must be a Palestinian being evicted
from Palestine in order to create a place for the Jew
who comes from another part of the world, This is the
danger of Zionism. It isolates the Jew from his own
environment,
from his natural habitat and inflicts
damage on the Palestinian by expelling him in order
to create a place for the Jew.

161. The second point he spoke of was the killing of
schoolchildren.
I am sure that everyone around this
table has seen on American television Israeli soldiers
pointing their machine guns at schoolchildren
in the
streets of the occupied West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Everyone has seen them pointing machine guns,
in cold blood, at seven-year-old children and killing

166. This is the problem that we are facing in our
part of the world and it is a very seriouls problem.
16

We have no choice but to fight against this trend of
madness that has dominated our occupied land fat
over

Lebanon: not only attempts to prevent cohesion by
the establishment of settlements and colonial establishments in the occupied territories, distorting the
cultural identity of the Palestinian people and preempting their right of self-determination;
not only an
attempt at territorial expansion and an addiction to
aggression, which has been a characteristic of this
racist regime; but also the clear Israeli intention to
reject any civilized answer to its exclusivist, theocratic,
racist regime in the Middle East.

35 years.

167. The PRESIDENT
(intel.p,.c’tcrtion.f,.otrz French):
Mr, Maksoud
wishes to make another statement.
With the consent of the Council, I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
16X. Mr, MAKSOUD:
It seems that I was targeted,
on the hit list, by innuendo. I condemn the attempt
to distort what I said and to link it, by use of innuendo,
to the suggestion that there were people of Jewish
persuasion on the so-called hit list of the alleged
assassins in London. Well, I did not know, for example, that Mr. Nabil Ramlawi was a Jewish citizen of
any country.

173. Furthermore,
in speaking as Arabs, as Arab
peoples, as an Arab civilization,
we have stated
repeatedly-before
the attempted assassination of
the Israeli Ambassador in London-since
the time of
the inception of our political consciousness, that
Judaism is part of our spiritual heritage. We will not
allow either Israel or any Zionist to claim that it can
tear Judaism away from that heritage. We have declared repeatedly that the Arabs respect Judaism as
part and parcel of the spiritual heritage of mankind.
We do not accept, we re.ject, we categorically dissociate ourselves from the Zionist attempt to encourage Zionism and its frltcr. ego and other component,
anti-Semitism. For both anti-Semitism and Zionism are
predicated on an identical philosophical assumption:
the inevitable alienation of the Jew in society. We in the
Arab world believe in the integration of the human
being, irrespective of ethnic, religious or cultural
itffiliation. That is the civilized answer to Zionism, the
answer the Palestinian constituency and Lebanese
society represent.

169. Furthermore,
this use of innuendo and untruth
-because
I do not want to dignity the statement by
calling it a half-truth-saying
that the hit list included
Jews as targets of the PLO is another attempt at a
smear campaign, through which the lie, by repetition,
is supposed to become a substitute for the truth. The
representative
of the United Kingdom yesterday
stated very frankly that the hit list included the representative of the PLO in London [237&h meeting,
pmvr. 301, and that meant that the .judicial system of
the United Kingdom was in operation to check on the
allegations. Yet Israel, in order to suit its own preconceived notions, instantly declared that this was
the PLO, not taking into consideration either the
British statement or the British judicial system.

174. The PRESIDENT
(inte,p/~>totion $*om Fw~dr):
The representative of Lebanon has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I call on him now.

170. It is now clear and evident that the vengeance
with which Israel attacks Lebanon and the vengeance
with which it seeks to cause haemorrhage to the
Palestinians not only stems from its own conception
of the Lebanese and Palestinian people as the human
obstacles to its unfolding transgression and expansion,
but reflects its view of the Lebanese society, which
has been and continues to be, despite the ravages of
Israel’s onslaughts, a resilient expression of a pluralistic society, while the Palestinian national constituency refuses to mirror the Zionist ideology,
becoming inclusive of people of diverse religious
affiliations.

175.

Mr.

TUENI
(Lebanon) finterprettltiou
from
Soon we shall be discussing the sex of angels,
while people perish on Saturday, the sabbath, and on
Sunday, the Christian sabbath, in my country.

FwIK~):

176. I should like very briefly to make one point for
the record: Mr. Blum keeps quoting-or
rather misquoting-my
very distinguished
predecessor and
teacher, Mr. Edouard Ghorra, not Mr. Emile Ghorra.
He is present here and I have known him for the better
part of my life,

171. It is now evident that Israel’s targeting of Lebanon for its barbaric invasions and its attacks on the
Palestinian community,
pre-empting its emergence as
an independent Palestinian State, is designed not only
to suit and accommodate the expansion of the Zionist
State into Palestinian and Lebanese territory, but also
to prevent these societies from generating their own
democratic pluralism, which Israel rejects by its own
definition.

177. In 1979 I had the pleasure and honour of writing
a letter to the President of the Security Council-I
do
not recall the precise date: 1 do not have the memory
or the machinery of Mr. Blum, and I am sorry I did not
think to note it down-with
which I enclosed a letter
from Mr. Ghorra stating that he was constantly being
misquoted by Mr, Blum’s predecessor and by Mr. Blum
himself. I will be pleased to place a copy of that letter
at the disposal of the President, should Mr. Blum be
interested in reading it. Maybe he can find something
else there. I should like to add that I was a member

172. The Council should note that we are witnessing
not only the Zionist targeting of Lebanese territory
and an attempt to establish military and strategic
hegemony over Lebanon, more particularly southern
17

--

of the Cabinet when Mr. Ghorra spoke, and I have no
reason to dissociate myself from what he said.
178. One other point, just for the record: the representative of Israel says-and
has repeated-that
he
holds Lebanon fully responsible for the actions of the
PLO. I would remind him that this body holds his
country responsible for the very presence of the PLO
in my country. Indeed, when he speaks of the plight
of my country he seems to think that we forget-and
we shall not forget-that
what started the destabilization of Lebanon were the repeated attacks by Israel
on Lebanon since 1968, in violatidn of the General
Armistice Agreement of 1949,’ long before previous
Governments of my country had signed any of the
agreements he referred to.
179, I should like also to refer you, Mr. Blum, to
the very unique articles of the Armistice Agreement,
which state very clearly and unequivocally
that the
Security Council alone can annul that Agreement, even
if both parties, my friend, should want to rescind the
Agreement. Once again: I do not have your memory
and I do not have the text in front of me, but it may
easily be obtained from the Secretariat.

181, We may accept Mr. Blum’s variations on the
principle of vicarious responsibility
in internatinnal
law. However, we have no lessons in patriotism to
learn from anybody. Lebanon’s determination to keep
Lebanon for the Lebanese and the Lebianese altin?
needs no proof, and I shall not accept thlat it should
be challenged.
(intc~p,.etcrtioMfi.l)t}Z
Frcr~chj:
182. The PRESIDENT
The representative of Israel has asked to speak in r3xercise of his right of reply, and I call on him.

183. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I wish to thank the rep.
resentative of Lebanon for having corrected !ht
mistake which I made with regard to the first name
of Mr. Ghorra. I stand corrected.

180. But beyond legalism, does it not strike the
Council as odd that, whilst the Israeli representative
invites us to conclude peace with his country, he
rejects as defunct an armistice agreement which we
insist should be implemented?

Litho in United Nations. New York

*
.-

-

1
