20

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

(d) To authorize the High Commissioner to make
appeals for funds to enable him to solve the refugee
problems referred to in sub-paragraph ( c) above;
(e) To approve projects for assistance to refugees
coming within the scope of sub-paragraph (c) above;
(f) To give directives to the High Commissioner
for the use of the emergency fund to be established
under the terms of paragraph 7 below;
6. Authorizes the High Commissioner, under conditions approved by the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme, to make appeals for the
funds needed to provide supplemental temporary care
and maintenance to, and participate in the financing
of permanent solutions for, refugees coming within
his mandate and otherwise not provided for ;
7. Further authorizes the High Commissioner to establish an emergency fund not to exceed $500,000, to
be utilized under general directives of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme,
and to maintain this fund from the repayments of the
principal and interest of loans made by the United
Nations Refugee Fund and from voluntary contributions made for this purpose;
8. Decides that appropriate financial rules for the
use of all funds received by the High Commissioner
under the terms of the present resolution shall be
established, in consultation with the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, and in
accordance with the Statute of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations;
9. Requests the UNREF Executive Committee to
exercise in 1958 such functions incumbent upon the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme in conformity with paragraph 5 above as it
deems necessary, with a view to assuring the continuity of international assistance to refugees falling
within the scope of paragraph 5 ( c) above;
10. Requests the High Commissioner to include in
his annual report a statement on the measures which
he has taken under the terms of the present resolution.
723rd plenary nieeting,
26 November 1957.

2. Authorizes the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to use his good offices to encourage
arrangements for contributions.

723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1188 (XII). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations is to develop friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Recalling further its resolution 545 (VI) of 5 February 1952 in which it decided to include in the International Covenants on Human Rights an article which
should provide : "All peoples shall have the right of
self-determination",
Reaffirming the principles embodied in the abovementioned resolution that all States, including those
having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories, should promote the realization of that right, in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations,
Considering that disregard for the right to self-determination not only undermines the basis of friendly
relations among nations as defined in the Charter of
the United Nations but also creates conditions which
may prevent further realization of the right itself,
Believing that such a situation is contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms that it is of international importance
that, in accordance with the purposes and principlts of
the Charter of the United Nations:
(a) Member States shall, in their relations with one
another, give due respect to the right of self-determination;
( b) Member States having responsibility for the
administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories shall
promote the realization and facilitate the exercise of
this right by the peoples of such Territories;

2. Decides to consider further at its thirteenth ses.. sion the item "Recommendations concerning internaThe General Assembly,
tional respect for the right of peoples and nations to
Having considered the problem of the Chinese refuself-determination", including the proposals contained
gees in Hong Kong, in accordance with the resolution
in Economic and Social Council resolution 586 D (XX)
adopted by the Executive Committee of the United
of 29 July 1955.
727th plenary meetinq,
Nations Refugee Fund at its fourth session, 6
11 December 1957.
Acknowledging the heavy burden placed upon the
Government of Hong Kong in dealing with this prob1189 (XII). Freedom of information
lem, and the efforts made to alleviate it,
A
Recognizing however that the problem is such as to
be of concern to the international community,
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the need for emergency and
Considering the need to bring the text of the draft
long-term assistance,
Convention on Freedom of Information 1 to the attention of the increased membership of the United Nations,
1. Appeals to States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and to nonRequests the Secretary-General:
governmental organizations to give all possible assist(a) To circulate to Member States the text of the
ance with a view to alleviating the distress of the
preamble and nineteen articles of the draft Convention
Chinese refugees in Hong Kong;
1167 (XII). Chinese refugees in Hong Kong

• Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supp!ement No. 11 (A/3585/Rev.1),
annex I, para. 10,'.

• Ibid., Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document
A/AC.42/7 and Corr.I, annex.
