30

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

its Committee on Fisheries and also of regional and
other specialized fishery bodies;
2. Urges the United Nations specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations concerned to take
measures for the further improvement of international
collaboration, in relation to fisheries development and
conservation, and of technical assistance, where requested by developing countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Direct9r-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation with Governments of States Memhers of the
United Nations ancl with other international organizations concerned, to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-ninth session on the specific measures which have been taken bv Governments of Member
States and by the internation;l organizations concernecl
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the Economic and Social Council to report
thereon to the General Assernbly at its twenty-fifth
sess1011.
1745th ¡,lenary merting.
17 Decrmber 1968.

2414 (XXIII). lnternational co-operation on questions related to the oceans
The General Assembly,
Reafjir111i11g the considerations set forth in its resolution 2172 (XXI) of 6 December 1966,
Considering the growing interest of the world community in problems related to the oceans, as they hold
promise of providing a rapidly developing world with
increasingly needed resources,
Being aware that the present knowledge of the ocean
and its resources and of the marine environrnent is
limited and incomplete,
Recognizing the need for extensive exploration and
research in order to develop the wealth of the sea for
the benefit of ali mankind, irrespective of the geographical location of States, taking into accpunt the special
needs and interests of developing countries,
Having given preliminary consicleration to the report
entitled "Marine science and technology : survey ancl
proposals" 3º prepared by the Secretary-General under
General Assembly resolution 2172 (XXI),
Talling into account the comments of the Advisory
Committee 011 the Application of Science and Technology to Development, 31
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1380 (XLV), 1381 (XLV) and 1382 (XLV) of
2 August 1968,
Recalling the report of the Ad Hoc Comrnittee to
Study the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor beyond the Limits of X ational Jurisdiction, 32
Ta!?ing into account the activities in this field at
present being carried out by the United Nations. the
Unitecl Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and its Intergovernmental Occanographic
Commission, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the Unitecl Nations and its Committee on Fisheries,
the Worid Meteorological Organization and its Panel
,on Met~orological Aspects of Ocean Affairs, the Inter-

Governme11tal Maritime Consultative Orga11ization, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other specialized agencies, and also intergovernmental organizations, various Governments, universities, scientific a11d
technical institutes and other 11011-governmental organizations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "Marine science and technology : survey and proposals";
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to review further this report at its forty-seventh session, taking into account such views as may he expressed by
GoYernments of Member States, by the Advisory Committee 011 the Application of Scie11ce a11d Technology to
Development and by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the
Limits of N ational Jurisdiction ;33
3. Endorses the concept of a co-ordinated long-term
programme of oceanographic research designed to assist
in a hetter understanding of the marine environment
thr0ugh science a11d to increase, in the interests of world
eco110111ic development, the resources availahle to all the
people of the world;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Economic ancl Social Council at its forty-seventh session
a cornprehensive outline of the scope of this long-term
programme, taking into account such scientific recommenclations as may be formulated by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United
N ations Educatio11al, Scientific and Cultural Organization within its terms of reference and in co-operation
with other interested international organizations;
S. Recommcnds that the United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ancl its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission shoulcl
consider strengthening the existíng marine educational
ancl training programmes a11d initiating new programmes in connexion with the implementation of the
long-term programme of oceanographic research;
6. Reconime¡¡ds further improvement of international
co-operation in relation to fisheries clevelopment and
conservation, taking into account the important role
playecl hy the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the Unitecl Nations and its Committee 011 Fisheries as
well as the ·work of regional and other specialized
fishery bodies;
7. Invites Member States and organizations dealing
with marine pollution, especially the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization ancl the International Atomic Energy Agency, to promote the adoption of effective international agreements on the
prevention a11d control of marine pollution as may be
necessary;
8. Recognizes the importance of the meteorological
aspects of ocean science and calls upan the VI' orld
:'.\1eteorological Organization to continue its activities
in this fielcl in clase co-operation ,vith other interestecl
organizations;
9. Invites the Secretary-General. in consultation with
the United Nations Development Programme, to consicler the possibility oí exte11ding technical assistance
sen·ices to the Governments of Member States which
may request them in relation to the development of
mineral resources of their continental shelf areas;

ao !bid.
31 Ojficial Records of tite General AsJembly, Tu·enty-third
Sessio11 . .411nrxcs, agen¡l;i item 41. d"c11ment .-\/7204.
32 !bid., Twent:)'-lhird Srssion, agenda item 26, doc11ment

A/7'?;30.

33 Established by the General Assembly on 21 December 1968
1111der its resolution 2467 (XXIII). See Official Records of
the General Assembh·. Tii•enty-third Sessio11, Seco11d Committer, 1246th meeting, para. 3.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Seeond Committee

10. Calls upon the Secretary-General to pursue the
task of collecting and disseminating available information regarding the mineral and other resources of the
sea-bed and the ocean floor beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction and teclmiques appropriate for their development and of providing the assistance which the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and
the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of N ational Jurisdiction may request for the solution of related issues;
11. Rcquests the Secretary-Gen_eral, in ~o-operation
with the United Nations Educat1onal, Sc1ent1fic and
Cultural Organization and its Intergover1:mental
Oceanographic Commission, the Food an_d Agncul~ure
Organization of the United Nations ~nd 1ts Cor~um~tee
on Fisheries, the World Meteorolog1cal Orgamzat1on,
the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and other organizations concerned, . to report,_ through
appropriate channels, to the Econom~c and Social Council and to the General Assembly at 1ts twenty-fifth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of
the present resolution.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 Deceniber 1968.

2415 (XXIII). Externa! financing of economic
development of the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalnng its resolution 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
1966 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1183
(XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Recalling further its resolutions 2274 (XXII) of
4 December 1967 on the flow of externa! resources to
developing countries and 2276 (XXII) of 4 December
1967 dealing with the outflow of capital from developin~ countries and debt-servicing burdens of these
tnes,
Taking note of decisions 27 (II) on the aid volnme
target34 and 29 ( II) on improving the terms and conditions of aid and alleviating the problems of externa!
indebtedness 35 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on 28 March 1968,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the externa! financing of economic developmeut of ihe developing countries,38
N oting with appreciation that some developed conntries have reached and even surpassed the 1 per cent
target as defined in decision 27 (II) of the United
Nations Conference 011 Trade ancl Development and that
others have announced definite time-tables for the acceleration of the flow of assistance, have set up snbsidiary targets for official flow ami have made provision
for future annual increases in official hudgetary allocations for assistance in arder to reach the target within
the time-limits accepted by them,
N oting with concern that:
(a) In recent years the flow of financia! resources
from developed to developing countries has remained

c'fn-

34 See Prnrrcdings of thc Unitrd Natio11s Cn11fcrc11cc /111
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l
and Acld.1, ReñMf m,d An11c.,·cs (lJnit~d )/ations publication,
Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 38.
SD /bid.., p. 40.
38 United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.68.II.D.10;
O/flcial Records of thc Economic and Social Council, Fortyfifth Session, Anne:res, agenda ítem 7, documents E/4495 and
E/4512.

31

relatively stagnant and that there has been a declining
trend in the transfer of resources as a proportion of the
gross national product of developed countries,
( b) Certain advanced countries have not so f:ir bec_n
able to accept the aicl volume target as dcfined 111 dec1sio11 27 (II) of the United Nations Conferencc on
Trade and Development,
(e) In recent years there has been an increase in the
degree of tying aid to procurement from clonar countries,

( d) The reverse flow of financia I resources 011 account of clebt servicc from cleveloping to developed
countries further increased in 1966 and 1967 and it has
been estimated that, if current trends of borrowing and
repayment continue, net lending would become negative
by 1970,37
(e) Fifteen months after thc termination of the
period for which the first replenishment was intended,
the second replenishment of the International Development Association has not materializcd and that this has
impeded the efforts of planned economic development
of a number of developing countries,
(f) The inability of multilateral financia! institutions
and multilateral development programmes to attain thcir
resource target threatens to undermine their ahility to
render their tasks satisfactorily and, in certain instances,
hampers their fttnctioning in a continuing and steady
manner,
l. Endorses decision 27 (II) of the Unitecl Nations
Conference on Trade ami Development, which includes
the recommendation that each cconomically advancecl
country should endeavour to provide developing conntries annually with a financia! resources transfcr of a
mínimum net amount of 1 per cent of its gross national
product at market prices in terms of actual dislmrsemcnts, having regard to the special position of those
countries which are net importers of capital;
2. Recomniends that, as a key element of thc international development policy for the Second Unitecl
Nations Development Decade, economically advanced
countries which have not already done so should accept
1972 as the target year for the attainment of the aid
volume target, as defined in decision 27 ( II) of the
ünited Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and take urgcnt appropriate action to achieve this objective;
3. Further rccoinmends that efforts should continue
to he made to reach agreement on a target for net
official financia! resources transfers within the 1 per cent
target;
4. Endora·cs decision 29 (II) of the Unitecl Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on improving
the terms and conditions of aid and alleviating the problcms of externa! indebtedness. and urges developed
countries to exert maxinmm efforts to implement this
decision;
5. Strongly appcals to Governments of States memhers of the International Development Association to
make the second replenishment of the Association cffective from early 1969;
Cí. Rcq11csts :Member States to giyc long-term pledges,
whencver possihle, and to considcr seriously other proposals to enable international financia! institutions, international development programmes and relevant
37 See E/4539, para. 7.
