UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2557) a. . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . 1
Adoptionoftheagenda

,,...,.,......

a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Letter dated 4 September 1984 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16731) . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , , .

1

SIPV.2557

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2557th MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 7 September 1984, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2557)
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dated 4 September 1984from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16731)
The meeting was called to order at 4.iO p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 4 September 1984 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16731)

1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 4 September 1984from the
representative of Nicaragua to the President of the
Security Council [S/16731]. The first speaker is the
representative of Nicaragua.
2. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) [interpretationfiom Spanish]: On 1September in the small town of
Santa Clara, department of Nueva Segovia, four children were gathering fruit in the countryside while their
mother was preparing food for a training centre. Suddenly, three small aeroplanes and a helicopter dropped
from the sky, frightening the children. They ran to the
buildings in search of protection, not knowing that
those structures were the target of a terrorist band that
opened fire on the school, killing those children and a
maintenance worker and wounding two women.
3. Every parent knows what the death of a child
means,but for Nicaragua those deaths are particularly

painful because they are part of a sad chain of similar
deaths that have had to be confronted in the past four
years by our mothers and fathers, our brothers and
sisters. During this period, several thousand Nicaraguans have been the victims of terrorist attacks from
abroad. For a small nation of approximately 3 million
persons, this is a truly tragic figure.
4. Just as we mourn the deaths of our own people, on
this occasion and for the first time two American families are mourning the deaths of two of their children on
Nicaraguan soil, a situation which, in addition to being
regrettable, is one which is of concern to us becausewe
do not want either Nicaraguans or Americans to die
because of the unthinking policy of the Reagan Administration whose logical result, in continuing this senseless and overt war, would be more deaths of other
American citizens. While we regret the deaths of our
own citizens, we regret the fact that in that attack two
United States citizens died.
5. Our Minister for External Relations called the families of the Americans who died and offered our assistance in the return of their bodies. They were invited
to come to Nicaragua to claim them. The families
expressed their appreciation for the information
provided by Minister D’Escoto Brockmann, because
the only news they had received before then came from
the United States massmedia. We have since learned
that the State Department is exerting pressure on
Mr. Parker, the father of one of those killed, telling him
that because of our intransigence the negotiations for
the return of the bodies might be delayed several
weeks, whereas it is they who did not want to recognize
that citizens of this country were involved and it is they
who are now delaying the process of the return.
6. Just five months and five days ago-to be exact,
between 30 March and 4 April-we last appeared before this body, which is entrusted with safeguarding
international peace and security, and denounced the air
and naval war, including the mining of our ports, that
the American Administration through its Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and its mercenaries was waging
against my country and our revolution.
7. On that occasion we denounced before the international community and the members of this Council
the direct involvement of United States citizens, members of the CIA and of the United Statesarmed forces in
those criminal acts which are violations of international
law. We stressed the State terrorism that is the offi-

cial policy of the present United States Administration
in Central America, in particular against Nicaragua,
pointing out that turning other countries of the region
into aircraft carriers of their own fleet for the conduct of
their so-called covert war involved serious risks for the
stability of the region and placed us on the brink of a
regional war.

tion, to take provisional measures, which were proclaimed in its opinion of 10 May 1984. In this connection
I quote paragraphs 1 and 2 of that opinion:
“The United States of America should immediately cease and refrain from any action restricting,
blocking or endangering access to or from Nicaraguan ports, and, in particular, the laying of mines;

8. We recall that on that occasion Mrs. Kirkpatrick
and other members of her delegation cynically evaded a
response to our ac&sations by vetoing a draft resolution submitted by Nicaragua [S/16463] which received
13 votes in favour and 1 abstention and which basically asked that Nicaragua be allowed free exercise of
its right to self-determination
and respect for its
national sovereignty and independence by an end to the
blockade of its ports,

“The right to sovereignty and to political independence possessed by the Republic of Nicaragua, like
any other State of the region or of the world, should
be fully respected and should not in any way be
jeopardized by any military and paramilitary activities which are prohibited by the principles of international law, in particular, the principle that States
should refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or the political independence of any State, and the
principle concerning the duty not to intervene in
matters within the domestic jurisdiction of a State,
principles embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Charter of the Organization of
American States.“’

9, In connection with that debate [2525th and 2527rh
to 2529t11 meetings], its denunciations, its development
and its outcome, in which alarge number of Members of
the United Nations expressed concern and amazement,
it is noteworthy that just a few days later the United
States Government, in contradiction to the statements
made by top members of its delegation before this forum, publicly acknowledged its direct participation
in the mining of our ports through the use of mother
ships and’of Pirafia speedboats guided by CIA experts
-exactly
what we had denounced during that debate.
The United States Government acknowledged the direct involvement of its personnel in such speedboat
attacks a few months earlier on oil storage facilities in
the Nicaraguan port of Corinto, as a result of which we
had to evacuate 25,000 persons from the port.

13. Subsequently the United States Government once
again cynically declared that it was not at that time
carrying out any action contrary to the recommendation of the International Court.
14. I wanted to make those preliminary comments,
which might be described as a recounting of recent
history, because the acts of aggression, far from coming
to an end, have continued in different forms, like those
in the first three months of the year which prompted our
previous appeal to the Council.

10. I believe it important to remind the international
community, before referring to the facts that have compelled us to convene the Council once again, that just
five days after the conclusion of that debate my Government decided to lodge a complaint against the
United States of America before the International
Court of Justice in order to deal with violations of
international law brought about by the criminal policy
of State terrorism and the acts of aggression systematically carried out against the Sandinist people’s revolution.

15. On this occasion we do not intend to stress the
various aspects of’the covert war waged by the CIA,
which we have already thoroughly denounced in the
debates in March, even though the guiding hand of the
Agency is constantly discernible in all these actions. Gn
the contrary, we wish to stress now what is becoming a
direct American presence in various forms and manifestations, which in recent days has resulted in the
downing of a C-47 aircraft and a UH-SOOD helicopter
and the deaths of two United States citizens.

11, It is of interest to recall that at that time the United
States, which throughout its history has proclaimed
itself the defender of international law and has used the
International Court whenever it suited its interests, said
it would not recognize the Court’s jurisdiction on this
issue for a period of two years, thus trying not to face up
to the justice of our complaint and its consistency with
the policy of truth and legality that characterizes our
revolution.
For her part, Mrs. Kirkpatrick
not only
questioned the apolitical nature and,impartiality
of the
Court, comparing it with the General Assembly, but’
also called into question international norms against
intervention and the use of force.

16. We are extremely concerned about the increasing
involvement
of United States citizens, CIA mercenaries, in the no-longer-covert war against our country.
Throughout the past four years we have been alerting
the international community and the Government and
people of the United States to the consequences of this
increasing involvement.
17. We are convinced that the members of the Council
will recall that since the beginning of this year there has
been a series of air raids on our territory in which
citizens of the United States as well as of Honduras
have died. It will be recalled that on 10 January an
American helicopter entered the Nicaraguan region of

12. It is also worth recalling that at that time we requested the Court, in view of the gravity of the situa2

Jalapa. It later fell in Honduran territory, with the death
of American mercenary Jeffrey Waft. On 8 May a helicopter was shot down in our territory near the port
of Potosi, a United States UH-1D helicopter of the
Honduran air force coming from the Isla de1 Tigre
in Honduran territory. Eight Honduran soldiers were
killed in the crash.

25. What did the United States Government know
about the activities of six United States mercenaries
operating from Honduras at the end of August 1984, and
when and how did the information reach it? What did
the United States Government know about the activities of a group which calls itself “Civilian Military
Assistance”, and when and how did that information
reach it? Why is it that the United States, which supposedly had been investigating that group since April
1984, took no action to prevent it or its members violating the law of the United States? In particular, why
did it not begin legal proceedings under Title 18, Section 960, of the United States Code? How does the
Government of the United States justify the persecution of individuals
participating
in illegal military
activities against Dominica and Haiti when it closes its
eyes to those who do the same against Nicaragua? What
contacts has the United States Government had with
any of the six mercenaries? When did those contacts
take place? What contacts has the Government of the
United States had with the group Civilian Military
Assistance, and when did those contacts take place?

18. Today we appear before the Council to denounce
two new incidents. On 27 August a United States C-47
air&aft from the El Aguacate air base in the department
of Olancho, Honduras, entered our territory. It was
downed, resulting in the deaths of eight mercenaries,
including the pilot Anastasio Somoza Portocarrero,
Lieutenant-Colonel
of the exSomozan
Guard, an
acknowledged assassin of our people and a mercenary
in the service of the CIA-but,
of course, a “freedom
fighter” of President Reagan.
19, The most recent incident, in which two United
States citizens died, occurred on Saturday, 1 September, when a UH-SOOD helicopter and three push and
pull airplanes entered our territory in tactical combat
formation and attacked the patriotic military service
school in Santa Clara, in the department of Nueva
Segovia. Those combat planes fired from 12 to 16 rockets at the school before the helicopter was downed.

26. What contacts have there been between the Government of the United States and Tom Posey, and when
did they take place? Did the United States Government
help Posey in his contacts with the Honduran military
forces or in his trip to Honduras last January?

20, Who were the Nicaraguans killed who were added
to the long list ofheroes and martyrs of our country, and
what were they doing? This time they were four children and a construction worker who were gathering
fruit, as well as two women who were wounded while
doing civilian work at the school.

27: Was the United States Government informed of
the presence of the mercenaries in Honduras before the
attack on Santa Clara? When and how was it informed?
Does the Government of the United States intend to
compensate Nicaragua for the loss of life-four
children killed-caused
by the attack in which the American mercenaries took part?

21. Who were the United States citizens, and what
were they doing? While the Reagan Administration
is
thinking up the answer, its own people and journalists
are giving it to us.

28. Can two ordinary American citizens enter United
States military bases in Honduras and even train mercenaries in flight and combat techniques? Was the
United States Government informed that the mercenaries were providing military training at an air base
-Jamastran-built
by United States military forces?
When and how was it informed? Can two ordinary
American citizens make use of CIA planes or helicopters without the consent of the United States intelligence staff of the base? Can they carry aerial navigation maps with two flight plans: the first departing from
the El Aguacate base, built by the United States Army
on Honduran territory, and heading for Las Vegas; the
second departing from Toncontin towards Jamastran,
and from this base, also built by the United States,
going towards Santa Clara in our territory? Copies of
these maps with the flight routes have been provided to
the members of the Council. Was the United States
Government informed that two of the mercenaries were
piloting a CIA helicopter? When and how was it so
informed?

22, Dana Parker and James Powell are not just ordinary American citizens, as President Reagan and his
spokesmen would have us believe, as they try to evade
any responsibility for that action and cynically blame
the United States Congress for the deaths because of
cuts in ClA funds.
23. Can two ordinary American citizens travel with
such impunity to Honduras? We remember the group of
American nuns that wanted to visit Honduras at the
beginning of this year for a religious vigil at the border
with Nicaragua. When they landed in a commercial
aircraft the aircraft was surrounded by Honduran military personnel and the group was obliged to leave the
country immediately.
24. Can two ordinary United States citizens have contacts with their embassy in Tegucigalpa? Here again
what comes to mind is the fact that those same American nuns when surrounded by Honduran military personnel at the airport asked to contact American officials, and even though those offtcials were present at
the airport they refused to help them.

29. Only United States citizens closely linked to the
CIA can enter and make use of all the infrastructure that
that Agency has set up in Honduras as a spearhead for
3

aggression against Nicaragua, As the Minister for
External Relations of my country, Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann,
has stated, there is no-operation
against military or economic targets in my country that
is not directly authorized by the American CIA.

“Two Americans involved in aiding Nicaraguan
rebels said today”-5
September-“that
they received assistance from United States Embassies in
Honduras and El Salvador in their effort to provide
military equipment to anti-Communist forces in Central America. ”

30. We are also concerned that, in violation of United
States laws, mercenaries are being hired through American magazines and that there are groups such as the socalled Civilian Military Assistance that with complete
impunity transport military equipment and train and
participate in combat with President Reagan’s “freedom fighters”. It is important to recall that only two
days ago The New York Times quoted an article in an
American magazine in which an American mercenary
boasted that he had personally killed 43 Nicaraguan
citizens on Nicaraguan soil. We are concerned, and it
constitutes a danger to peace in Central America, that
that group--Civilian
Military Assistance-has
stated
publicly that it has more than a thousand American
mercenaries now carrying out the same activities,

That was published in The New York Times on 6 September, reported by Philip Taubman.
“The Treasury Department has issued an arms
dealer’s license to [Tom] Posey. In his application he
stated: ‘It is my intention to purchase weapons and
military
materiel to send to El Salvador with the
permission of that Government’.”
That

was published in The Boston Globe and The
Post on 6 September, reported by George
Lardner, Jr.
Washington

33. There are many other quotes that could be used by
the State Department to get to the bottom of the denunciations publicized in the American press if it really
wanted to investigate who the mercenaries are and
what links they have with the CIA and thus really
enforce its laws.

31. Therefore it is clear to everyone-and
the photographs we have distributed to Council members
demonstrate this-that
both the C-47 aircraft and the
UH-SOOD helicopter are of United States manufacture
and origin, that the latter was armed, and that they
flew combat missions from airports built by the United
States in Honduran territory. It is relevant to ask
whether the mercenaries flew their own planes from
New Orleans to Honduras. If they did, did they not
have to turn in a flight plan to the United States Air
Force? What reasons did they then give for that flight?
If they were under investigation by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation
as early as April 1984, as has been
published in the press, then how did United States
Immigration
deal with this when they left New Orleans?
Who received them in Honduras? Did the mercenaries
who entered Honduras have a licence to export weapons to Honduras?

34. The last time we appealed to the Security Council,
the representative of the United States, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, in a moment of lucidity stated:
“By now the Council must be quite familiar with the
thrust of the Nicaraguan complaint, it having been
put before this body in one form or another on some
six occasions over the past two years. The details
change, but the substance of the complaint remains essentially the same.” [See 2525th meeting,
pat-a. 73.1

35. For the first time the representative of the United
States said something true about Nicaragua. Of course
the details change in so far as the Reagan Administration and its CIA seek new methods to attack Nicaragua:
the formation of mercenary task forces, the mining of
our ports, air and naval warfare, the destruction of
civilian and economic targets and now these latest attacks. But as she herself said in the statement I have just
quoted, the substance of the complaint remains essentially the same: the State terrorism practised by the
Reagan Administration
with the sole purpose of overthrowing our Government and thus preventing the
political, economic and social development of the people of Nicaragua and of the other Central American
peoples.

32. We hope that these and other questions will be
answered by the United States Government, whether
by the State Department or by the United States Mission to the United Nations, since even members of the
United States Congress, the press and ordinary citizens
are looking for answers to prevent further bloodshed in
Nicaragua on the part of anyone. In any case, to make it
easier for the State Department and the United States
Mission to reply to these and other questions, I wish
to quote three textual references from various United
States journalists:
“Congressional sources stated yesterday that the
Central Intelligence
Agency knew that a United
States paramilitary group was sending men to Nicaragua, but it did nothing to detain the volunteers,
two of whom died in a rebel air raid,”

36. That official policy-State
terrorism-manifested
through the actions of the CIA and its mercenaries can
also be seen through the direct military presence along
the coasts and on the territories of Central America, in
the constant holding of joint military and naval manoeuvres and in the building of bases and other military
installations
in Central America.

That was published in the New York Daily News on
6 September 1984 and reported by Barbara Rehm.
4

37, Because the effect of this is to exacerbate tensions in the region and to obstruct the process aimed at
finding a negotiated political settlement, I shall offer
some facts concerning the American military presence
in the Central American region. We are having a brief
summary of that presence distributed as a Security
Council document [S/16744, annexl.

43. Our people and Government know from their own
experience the meaning of this whole buildup of the
United States military presence in Central American
territory and waters in the last three and a half years.
What has that buildup meant for our people? It has
meant that more than 7,391 of its finest sons-an average of more than 2,266 Nicaraguans per year-have
been murdered.
It has meant losses of more than
2,275 million cordobas in production and social areas
and in infrastructure. The Commander of the Revolution, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinator
of the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction,
during
the main event of the celebration of the fifth anniversary of the Sandinist people’s revolution, stated:

38. First, with regard to naval activities, there have
been several in recent months: the Patrolling the Gulf
manoeuvres were held between 30 May and 6 June,
with the participation
of two warships and with the
alleged objective of detecting arms trafficking to
El Salvador; the air-sea manoeuvres carried out by the
CV-67 aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy and its task
force from 15 to 23 July in Atlantic territorial waters of
N@aragua; and those carried out by the Surface Action
Group off the Central American coastline. Nor can we
Fail to mention the large number of American warships
which constantly patrol Central American waters,
especially the waters close to Nicaragua.

“The percentage of Nicaraguan victims killed
during three and a half years of imperialist aggression
is 0.3 per cent of the population, while the percentage
of American victims killed during the eight and a half
years of the criminal and senseless adventure against
the heroic people of Viet Nam and against its own
people was 0.1 per cent.”

39. Secondly, as to air activities, between April and
August-that
is, in a five-month period-there
has been
a total of 231 reconnaissance flights-in
other words,
spy flights-over
Nicaraguan territory by American
aircraft. This amounts to nearly 1.5 flights per day.

44. Our people and Government also know from their
own experience the devastation and disasters that come
from living under a bloody dynasty, which was the
creation of the United States of America and was able
to stay in power for45 years thanks to the United States
of America. During that period nearly 200,000 Nicaraguans were murdered. In the final stage of the war
of liberation alone, between September 1978 and July
1979, approximately
50,000 Nicaraguans were killed,
five of our principal cities were partly destroyed, and
we suffered heavy losses in the area of production.

40. Thirdly, with regard to military manoeuvres and
exercises, the following have taken place: the Relampago II manoeuvres, in which United States and
Honduran troops participated; Granadero I, already
mentioned in the earlier debate in the Security Council
-two-stage
manoeuvres involving the participation
of 6,500 United States, Salvadoran and Honduran
soldiers; and Operation Lempira, which was also
conducted in two stages with the participation
of
1,500 United States and Honduran soldiers. We may
soon be witnessing, in late 1984 or early 1985, the Ahuas
Tara III manoeuvres. This provides a sampling of the
large-scale and small-scale manoeuvres conducted by
the United States since early 1984 in Central America,
all of which only serve to heighten tension in the region
and make it more difficult to find a political solution.

45. As a result of heroism, tenacity and pain, therefore, we are a peace-loving people. We are a people
which seeks peace and fights for peace, which builds
housing for peace, which educates its people for peace,
which establishes health programmes for peace, which
promotes the people’s culture for peace, which exults
in peace and which struggles in the mountains to maintain and defend that peace to which it so greatly aspires
and to achieve which it has shed so much blood.

41. Fourthly, in connection with the permanent
American military presence in Central American territory, there are at present 1,400 United States soldiers
permanently stationed on seven American bases and
engaged in a wide range of activities. Moreover, there
are plans to increase that number to approximately
2,000 troops in the next few days.

46. Let our enemies and attackers make no mistake:
they will not,impose peace by war. They may destroy
us, but they will never conquer us. We shall be able to
reconquer peace in the countryside and in the mountains regardless of the time or sacrifices required.
Therefore, the international community and the Security Council must take specific preventive measures to
maintain peace, Mr. Reagan cannot try to impose his
will without a care for the universal cry for peace or for
the costs which could result for his own people and for
other peace-loving peoples.

42. It is well known and interesting that the presence
of American soldiers in Central America-particularly
in Honduras-has
been unceasing and at a senior level.
Among them we would cite General John Basey, of the
United States Joint Chiefs of Staff; General Wallace
H. Nutting, chief of Readiness Command at McDill,
Florida; General John A. Wickman, United States
Army Chief of Staff; and General Paul Gorman, chief of
the United States Southern Command in Panama, who
has visited that country on many occasions.

47. Unfortunately,
the Central American panorama is
dark indeed, and political solutions seem increasingly
difficult to achieve. One should not do as the United
States is accustomed to doing and apply a double standard as one’s everyday political norm. One should not
:
5

-one must not-claim
to support the multilateral negotiations and bilateral talks now under way while at
the same time brazenly waging war and making efforts
to increase aggression. One must be serious and
responsible.
48. High-level spokesmen of the United States Government, including President Reagan himself, Secretary of State Shultz and Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
continue
to threaten the Sandinist people’s revolution and the
Government of National Reconstruction. Their statements, which could clinically be classified as the result
of paranoid reflexes, augur destruction and death for us
in the near term. They attempt to obstruct the process
of institutionalization
which is being developed by the
revolution, and their sole objective is to isolate us internationally and prepare the political terrain for the invasion which that Government so much desires.

adoption of Marxism-Leninism.
It has systematically
persecuted free institutions, including synagogues,
schools, the private sector, the free press, minorities
and families and tribes throughout Nicaragua. We
support the continuation of assistance to Nicaraguan
freedom fighters. Nicaragua cannot be allowed to
remain a sanctuary.”
52. Before continuing, I wish to recall that in the
Council’s earlier debate I invited. . Mrs.
to
_--. Kirkpatrick
visit Nicaragua whenever she wished. We extend again
that invitation, so that as a good functionary of a republican Government she can see that we are not persecuting anyone in Nicaragua. On the other hand, such
things can be seen on the streets of New York-for
example, in the treatment of blacks as second-class
citizens. An attempt is made to argue that this is the
type of thing one sees in Nicaragua.

49. Just two months ago President Reagan, reviving
his anti-Communist
rhetoric during the ceremony concerning the captive cities, took the opportunity to direct
at my country accusations of being puppets of the Soviet Union. At the same time, he praised his “freedom fighters”, who are none other than CIA mercenaries. More recently, various United States officials,
including the President himself, have on several occasions made statements in which they did not discard the
possibility of direct intervention in Central America,
including Nicaragua, if certain conditions existed that
warranted such intervention-for
instance, the wellknown accusation of interference in the civil war being
waged in El Salvador.

53. The dangers of war are stalking Central America,
Its consequences, costs and results are difficult to predict. It is perhaps easy to predict where they originate,
because we know who the attacker is; we know which
nations ate being attacked. It will, however, be very
difficult to predict when and where the war will end. We
believe that it is very important to unmask publicly the
sole party responsible for the situation of tension and
war now being experienced by Central America. It is
the United States of America, which, through its
aggressive and war-mongering policy, is preventing the
achievement of a political solution to Central American
problems.

50. At the present time, given the military failures of
their mercenaries and seeking ways to restore morale,
to distract our forces and thereby relieve the pressure,
the CIA is developing new fighting tactics, with the
presence of American mercenaries. It is trying in this
way to keep its forces active and belligerent, with the
goal of hampering the electoral process. At the same
time, the aim is to be able, through training and military
equipment, to convert these forces into a mercenary
army that could serve as a spearhead during an invasion. All this, I repeat, is without any thoughtof the cost
that this involves for the people of the United States. It
is directed solely to the electoral consequences,

54. In that respect, I wish to affirm emphatically,
on behalf of my Government, that Nicaragua is not
and never will be a threat to the security of any Central American State-much
less to the security of
the United States. Do not worry: we are not going to
invade Colorado. Such an “invasion” is being given
wide publicity in a film now being shown in United
States cinemas. On the contrary, it is precisely the
United States that constitutes a real threat to the security of the Sandinist people’s republic, which the
United States is openly attempting to destroy through a
war of aggression.

51. References to Nicaragua which appear in the recently approved Republican platform are also of great
concern. They promise a future that is grimmer still and
even more dangerous for my country. I shall quote
these references verbatim:
“Today, democracy is under assault throughout
the hemisphere. Marxist Nicaragua threatens not
only Costa Rica and Honduras, but also El Salvador
and Guatemala. The Sandinist regime is building the
largest military force in Central America, importing
Soviet equipment, Eastern bloc and PLO advisers
and thousands of Cuban mercenaries. The Sandinist
Government
has been increasingly brazen in its

55. We are confronting an extremely serious situation, a situation that at any time could lead to agenuine
regional conflagration. The responsibility is in our
hands; we must act decisively.
56. Before concluding, I should like-although
my
delegation has already had the honour of congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month-to
tell you personally
that I am convinced that your political skill, abilities
and revolutionary origins ensure that you wilI conduct
the work of the Council very successfully. I wish also to
congratulate Mr. Bassole of Burkina Faso on the excellent work he did last month. It was exactly what we had
expected of him.

57. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.

hand we are aware of the presence of numerous Cubans
and Libyan military and security advisers in Nicaragua,
and it is possible that some might have engaged in
military
activities,
as Colonel
Qaddafi recently
claimed. The Libyan leader said he had sent troops and
arms to Nicaragua to help the Sandinist Government
fight the United States on its own ground. Libya’s
military involvement, in Nicaragua is not new, as was so
clearly underlined by last year’s surreptitious shipment
of military equipment to Nicaragua, which was stopped
in Brazil.
63. The presence of Libyan personnel, together with
Soviet bloc, Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO),
Basque and other foreign military personnel in Nicaragua, is of serious concern to the United States and to
other countries of Central America. One central objective of the Contadora process is precisely the removal
from Central America of such foreign military personnel. Colonel Qaddafi’s boast of Libya’s military presence in Nicaragua, combined WithNicaragua’s extraordinary military buildup, again underlines our concerns
about the true nature of the Sandinist rdgime and the
threat, it poses to its neighbours. Sandinist Interior
Minister Tom& Borge recently lauded Libya’s “solidarity without frontiers”, an echo of the well-known
Sandinist goal of “revolution
without frontiers”.

58. Mr. SORZANO
(United States of America):
I have listened with care to the statement by the representative of Nicaragua that we have just heard.
I should like to say that the United States rejects it as a
description of our role in the region. We note, however,
that, this is the seventh time that the Sandinist regime
has sought to use this forum, not, as mandated in the
Charter, to resolve the most urgent problems of peace
and security in the world but, instead, as a mere
instrument for its own propaganda.
59. We also note with interest that this is not the first
time that Nicaragua has come to the Council, on whatever pretext-as it has done today-just
as more legitimate forums, most particularly the Contadora process,
were beginning to arrive at solutions to the grave problems in the region, solutions which, I might add, would
cause the Nicaraguan Government to recommit itself to
the democratic system of Government it once solemnly
promised the world and its own people it would have.
60. The United States, for its part, has worked and
continues to work diligently on behalf of realistic diplomatic and political solutions in Central America. This
has included active diplomacy in the context of the
Contadora process, including, just yesterday, genera1
high-level talks in Manzanillo,
Mexico, between the
Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
Mr. Tinoco, and United States Special Envoy for Central America, Mr. Shlaudeman. These meetings between Nicaragua and my Government underscore our
commitment
to and the importance of the Contadora
negotiations as an avenue towards resolution of the
crisis in Central America. Many hoped and felt the
Contadora process had begun to yield progress despite
Nicaraguan intransigence on many of the 21 Contadora
objectives, including the reduction of arms and military
personnel, elimination of foreign military advisers and
troops, an end to support for subversion, adequate
means of verification and control and steps towards
democratization.

64. But Nicaragua has other support as well. In addition to Libya, approximately 9,000 Cubans are now in
Nicaragua, and of these some 3,000 are military and
security personnel attached to the Nicaraguan armed
forces and to internal security and intelligence organizations, from the general staff down to individual battalions. The rapid buildup of Nicaraguan military
strength from 1979 to the present could not have been
possible without the presence of the Cuban military and
security advisers and large-scale arms and equipment
shipments from the Soviet Union. Military and/or civilian advisers from the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Libya and East Germany
. . .
are also active in Nicaragua. Their apparent mission IS
to build a Sandinist-controlled
political apparatus and
to expand Nicaragua’s military and security forces to
unprecedented levels. Crucial to the Nicaraguan sup
port system for subversion in Central America are the
officers and representatives of guerrilla and subversive
groups from elsewhere in Latin America as well as from
the Middle East and Africa. These include the PLO,
Argentina’s
Montoneros,
Chile’s Movement of the
Revolutionary
Left, Spain’s Separatist Basque Homeland and Liberty, and Uruguay’s Tupamaros.

61. However, the Sandinist’s baseless allegations of
aggression by my Government and by neighbouring
Governments of Central America lead me to conclude
that their all-too-familiar
pattern of running to the Security Council at crucial junctures in the negotiating
process is in fact a Sandinist tactic designed to deflect
attention once more from their reluctance to negotiate
in good faith and settle their problems with their Central
American neighbours. During the past years, Nicaragua’s approaches to the Security Council have been
designed to distract from the underlying problems of
the region and to undermine the Contadora process
they profess to support. The Sandinists as usual seek to
turn reality on its head.

65, Their search for support of their failing revolution
has also led the Nicaraguan Government into other
despicable activities, Formal charges have already led
to the indictment of senior Nicaraguan officials who
have been implicated in international drug trafficking.
Certainly Nicaragua’s
desperate need for hard currency and its desire to foment instability by providing
arms to Latin American guerrilla groups are sufficient
motivations to prompt its regime’s involvement in illegal international drug trafficking.

62. The United States has not sent personnel to Nicaragua in order to destabilize its rkgime. On the other
7

indicated that they would not have been scheduled had
it not been for United States pressure. Arce added that
a Sandinist election victory would result in a “red constitution”
and perhaps the removal of the “facade of
political pluralism” and the establishment ofthe “party
of the revolution, the single party”. Commandante
Bayardo Arce asked rhetorically,
“Why should we
communists wear different shirts if in any case a real
and concrete socialism is being built through the
Sandinist-front
strategy?”

66, So while it is here now accusing others of mercenary activities, the Nicaraguan rdgime itself has for
purely mercenary reasons entered into the illegal international narcotics traffic. Thus on 17 July the United
States Government filed an official complaint in the
United States District Court for Southern Florida, in
Miami, charging one Nicaraguan, and not a low-ranking
Nicaraguan-Frederic0
Vaughn, an assistant to Sandinist Interior Minister Borge-and
two Colombians
with possession, conspiracy to distribute, and importation of cocaine.

71. We should not be surprised, therefore, after this,
among many other admissions of what the Nicaraguan
Government is and what it seeks to do, that there are
many people in the world who oppose them. That is
natural. Some of the opposition is inside and some is
outside their country. Some private American citizens
have apparently been involved in this event. But it has
been common for both sides in the Central American
conflicts to solicit and receive aid from private
American groups. The guerrillas of El Salvador and the
Nicaraguan
Government have themselves appealed
through representatives in the United States for private
American aid. There are no reliable figures for the total
value, of course, but it has been estimated that it has run
into the millions of dollars.

67. But that is not all. Nicaragua, while trying to
persuade this Council of its beleaguered status due to
the alleged activities of my country, has actually been
denying justice and democracy to its own people at
home. A Miskito Indian representative recently called
on the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to
denounce the systematic extermination
of ethnic Indians in Nicaragua-and
I make this reference keeping
in mind the apparently off-the-cuff remarks of my Nicaraguan colleague about the conditions in New York
City.
68. The Reverend Silvio Diaz Thompson, in a speech
to the Commission in Geneva on 13 March 1984, listed a
whole series of human rights violations which had been
perpetrated by the Sandinist rBgime since it came to
power in Nicaragua in 1979 against minority Indian
groups such as the Miskitos, the Sumos, the Ramas and
the Creoles. The cases he describes include massacre,
torture, summary execution, rape, forced labour, disappeared persons, mass exodus into the neighbouring
countries of Honduras and Costa Rica, the burning of
churches and houses and religious persecution. On
5 January 1984 some 200 Sandinist soldiers crossed into
Honduras to the communities of Kiwastara and Soumlaya and attacked, raped and murdered the 28 Miskito
families which had been living there as refugees since
1981. Diaz Thompson said that a survivor of the massacre, Carmelo Vargas, recognized the Sandinist leader
who led the attack, Sonder Escobar, and that the Government of Nicaragua had full responsibility,

72. Some Americans also work for the Sandinist Government. According to an article by Dan Williams in the
Los Angeles Times of 27 August, 700 or more Americans work in Nicaragua in support of the Sandinist
Government,
some in ranking positions of the rCgime+
They are part of a large brigade of foreign Sandinist
sympathizers known as “internationalists”;
some are
volunteers and some are paid. But, despite those facts,
neither El Salvador nor Honduras has ever come before
this body to complain about the activities of non-governmental volunteers. Only Nicaraguauses the Council
for this purpose.
73. I shall conclude by stating once more that the
United States is not trying to overthrow the Sandinist
Government.
Our relations with Nicaragua have deteriorated
because, instead of keeping their promises about human rights and pluralistic democracy, the
Sandinists have developed increasingly close military
ties to Cuba and the Soviet Union, tightened, their
internal repression, supported guerrilla insurgency in
EI Salvador and terrorism in Honduras and Costa Rica
and continued
an extensive military, buildup that
threatens the security of their neighbours.

69. The Government of Nicaragua has, of course,
announced elections for 4 November, after much indecision and delay. The leadership of the Sandinist National Liberation Front has, however, said that they
will not be “bourgeois” elections and will only serve to
“ratify” the revolution. Accordingly the Nicaraguan
Government has hindered the opposition’s access to
the media and its ability to organize rallies.

MORA (Nicaragua) Werpre74. Mr. CHAMORRO
tation from Spanish]: At one point or another as
I listened to the representative of the United States
make his statement, I got the impression that this was a
reflection of United States policy throughout its history, particularly in Latin America. He made a number
of references that rather amazed me, because we would
really like to have that power. He referred to SO many
revolutionary
movements in Latin America which Nitaragua was helping that we would need to have the

70. But the Council does not have to depend on our
characterization and impression of the upcoming elections in Nicaragua. Let us hear from one of the Sandinist leaders himself, Mr. Bayardo Arce. The 8 August
edition of The Miami Herald reported the remarks
made by Bayardo Arce during a mid-May meeting with
the Central Committee of the Nicaraguan Socialist
Party. According to the Herald, Arce labelled the upcoming Nicaraguan elections as “bothersome”
and
-.
8

power of the United States to be able to do that. That is
just the kind of thing the United States has been doing in
Latin America for the past century. There have been,
I believe, some 100 acts of intervention, including a
number in Nicaragua in the 30 years of our history.

you haven’t wanted to sell us any. We shall continue
acquiring weapons wherever and whenever we can, so
long as the United States continues its acts of aggression against us, because we cannot fail to defend our
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

75. But I have asked to speak only because certain of
the expressions of the United States representative
caught my attention. They really surprised me because,
in our view, they mean that the moral values of American society are lower than one would have expected.
To justify his defence, he mentioned that Nicaragua
complains to the Security Council on any pretext, and
that it does so in general when there is a process of
negotiation in Central America, whether Contadora or
Manzanillo.
He does not know how little value the
United States Government-and
Mr. Sorzano is its
representative-ascribes
to the citizens of that country
who died on Nicaraguan territory while participating in
armed action. If he claims that that is not a sufficient
reason to complain to the Security Council, the primary
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, then he really attaches very little
value to United States citizens. And that amazes me,
since in Nicaragua we are very much concerned at the
death of any one of us, and for the death of one of us we
would have recourse to the Council as many times as
necessary.

79. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretationfiom
Russian]: The character of the statement of the representative of the United
States, Mr. Sorzano, compels me to ask to be allowed
to speak to make a number of observations.
80. First, the statement of the American representative to the effect that the United States does not
intend to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua is
fallacious from the beginning to the end, because in
parallel with that and other similar statements the
United States virtually openly has continued to finance,
arm and train mercenaries whom it has been sending to
Nicaraguan territory.
81. Secondly, why is the United States doing that?
We have heard from the representative of the United
States the old refrain of a Soviet or Red threat. But the
issue lies elsewhere than in that non-existent threat. In
March of last year we had an opportunity to remind the
representative
of the United States that history has
known 81 instances of United States intervention
against Latin American countries. The overwhelming
majority of those instances of intervention occurred
when the Soviet Union did not exist. The reason for
United States acts of intervention against Latin American countries is its consistent policy of not allowing the
autonomous economic, political and social development of Latin America and attempting to impose on
Latin American countries the kind of system preferred
by the United States.

76. On the other hand, I want to make clear to
Mr. Sorzano that, yes, in Nicaragua United States citizens have been regularly joining work brigades that
tackle production tasks and develop solidarity. It could
be, as he mentioned, that there are some technicians
being paid with what little money my Government has.
But in point of fact, unless I am sadly mistaken, none of
them have been participating in armed actions, as did
the two Americans who recently died in Nicaragua. The
Americans who are in Nicaragua are engaged in peaceful civilian constructive work, not in military activities,
which is more than one can say for the CIA mercenaries
in El Salvador and Honduras.

82, Since March 1983, when I cited the list of United
States interventions in Latin America, there has been
another case of United States intervention against a
small Latin American country, Grenada. As of today,
the Iist of instances of United States intervention
against Latin American countries now appears as follows: against Mexico, 14 acts of intervention; Cuba, 13;
Panama, I 1; Nicaragua, 10; the Dominican Republic, 9;
Colombia,
7; Honduras, 7; Haiti, 5; Puerto Rico, 3;
Guatemala, 2; and, lastly, Grenada, 1.

77, With regard to the Manzanillo talks Mr. Sorzano
mentioned, it is true that yesterday the fifth round of
talks between Deputy Minister Tinoco and the Special
Envoy for Central America ended, as I mentioned in
my statement. We are concerned and grieved to see
the United States, the greatest empire in the world,
applying a double standard: that while it meets with an
underdeveloped country like Nicaragua, with barely
three million people, and goes through the motions of
seeking political solutions to the problems of Central
America, at the same time it attacks us and sends
Americans to die on Nicaraguan soil. That duplicitous
policy reveals the lack of sincerity on the part of the
Wnited States Government.

83. So as of today, the United States has on 82 occasions used force against a total of 11 Latin American
countries. These are facts that the United States representative will not be able to deny.
84. I have one final comment having to do with the
way that United States representatives, both in the
Security Council and outside it, keep bringing up this
“Red threat”. This persistence compels me to repeat
the description of United States policy that was given in
this same chamber three years ago. The present policy
of the United States in the international arena reminds
one of the conduct of a mad bull which sees the colour

‘78. Another point which I have made several times in
Security Council debates is that indeed we do have
Libyan, Soviet and French weapons, and we have
American weapons left from the time of Somoza, since
9

red everywhere. It sees red everywhere not because it
is actually there but because its own eyes are filled with
the blood of madness.
85. Mr. SORZANO
(United States of America):
I could not let pass this opportunity provided by my
colleague of the Soviet Union to talk a little about
history.
86. It is indeed true-but
I am not quite ready to
ascertain the exactitude of the numbers provided by the
Soviet representative-that
in the past the United
States has intervened in Latin American countries. It is
equally true that those countries today are sovereign
and independent nations; for proof of that one has only
to look up the records of the last sessions of the General
Assembly and see how many of them voted against us.
87. On the other hand, how many interventions has
the Soviet Union committed and how many is it committing right now? There are 135,000 troops in Afghanistan engaging in total demolition of entire villages,
producing millions of refugees, not to speak of the
countries of Eastern Europe that were invaded by the
Soviet Union and continue to be under subjugation.
If anyone does not believe that, I challenge him to find
any one of those countries voting against the Soviet
Union during the last session of the General Assembly,
88. So each country has a history; no country is perfect. But I would be willing to state that American
intervention pales compared to the intervention of my
Soviet colleague’s country.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

89. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretationjkwz
Russian]: A characteristic feature of American diplomacy, including in the
Security Council, is that American representatives
never engage in battle on the battlefield itself. They are
always moving off in diversionary manoeuvres. This
means that United States representatives are not prepared to argue the substance of a question under discussion. The United States representatives were saying
here that the Latin American countries which were at
some time in the past the recipients of intervention by
the United States are now living happily. But what if the
United States were to look southwards to its Mexican
neighbour? The result of United States intervention
against Mexico was the annexation of more than half of
Mexican territory. Ten states in the United States were
carved out of Mexican territory-six
in their entirety,
four partially.
90. The PRESIDENT:
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue consideration of the item on the
agenda will be fixed in consultation with the members
of the Council.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

NOTE
’ Military
(Nicaragua

and Parmilitary
v. United States

Justice publication No. 499).

00300

Activities
in and against Nicawh
of America)
(International Court of

go-61313~January

1993-2,050
