UhvTED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

Yh’AR

th
MEETING: 22 NOVEMBER 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
., ,

Page
1

. ,. . ,. , ,,.

1

Complaint by Bcnin:
Letter dated 4 Novcmbcr 1977 from the Permanent Representutivc of Benin to
the United Nations acldrossed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2437) , ( . . , ) , . , , . , , . , . ( * . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , ) . . . ( ,

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2047)

Adoption

of the agenda

. , , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , ,. , .

, , . . . ,. . , .. . , . , , . .

. . . . . . . .

s/w.2047

.
NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sec1kt.y CuurzciL The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

20437TH MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 22,iVovember
Prc:ridmr: Mr. Mansur R. KIKl-IlA
(Libyan Arab J amahiriya).

1977, at 3 p.m.

right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

P~scnf: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Slates of America and Venezuela.

5. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Cuba, Guinea
and Madagascar to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when they wish to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2047)

At the ievitation
of the President, Mr. Ala~dn [Cuba),
Mr. Kondd (Guinea) and Mr. RabataJika (Madagascar) took
the places reserved j’& them at the side of the Council
chamber,

1. Adoption of‘ the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)

6. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation
fi’om French):
Mr. President, my delegation congratulates you on YOUI
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
November. My delegation is pleased to set you presiding
over the Council at a time when it resumes consideration of
the question of the barbarous aggression by international
imperialists against my country of Sunday, 16 January
1977. My delegation has no doubt that you will glide this
discussion with serenity, jn a spirit of responsibility and
with the sense of integrity which we know you to possess,
and that, through the efforts of the members of the
Council, this discussion will reach specific conclusions
satisfactory to my country.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p. m,
Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)

7. The relationship which unites our two countries and
our two peoples covers several fields and becqmes stronger
every day. It could not be otherwise since our two peoples
are resolutelv committed to the revolutionary struggle for
the total liberation of Africa, our beautiful and rich
continent, from all forms of colonial and imperialist
domination. Our two peoples are resolved to defeat the
subversive manoeuvres of international imperialism and its
plans of aggression and colonial reconquest in Africa. It is
with great admiration that we follow the many-sided
struggle of the Libyan people, under the enlightened
leadership of Colonel Qadhafi, to build a socialist society.
That is why we feel such great pride at seeing YOU preside
over the Council at this time.

1. The PRl%SlDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request made by the Permanent
Representative of Benin in his letter of 4 November 1977,
addressed to the President of the Securjty Council and
circulated in document S/l 2437.
2. Members of the Council are aware that the item on
today’s agenda was considered by the Council during the
months of February and April this year. Two resolutions on
the matter were adopted: resolution 404 (1977) of 8 Febrnary and resolution 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977.
3. I should like to inform the members of the Council that
letters have been received I‘rom the representatives of Cuba,
Guinea and Madagascar, in which they request that they
should be invited to participate in the discussion.

8. I wish to thank you and all the members of the Council
for the efforts made for a meeting today of the Security
Council to study once again this very important question
which has deeply affected the people of Benin as a whole. 1
take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his assistance, which enabled us to
draw up and issue, under resolution 405 (1977), an

4. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
those States to participate in the discussion, without the
1

evaluation report of the extensive damage caused t0 our
country by the barbarous aggression of Sunday, 16 January
1977 /see S/12415]. I also wish to thank the friendly
States Members of the Organization which, since that
aggression, have continually shown their constant and
militant solidarity with the Beninese people.

"The
imperiafist
armed
aggression of SUllda)‘,
16
January 1977 against our country, the l’e0l~le’s liepublic
of Benin, the successive armed attacks 011 the people’s
Republic of Mozambique,
the I'eOllte'S
Republic of
Angola, Zambia and Botswana, the armed conflicts which
have been provoked or stirred
up at VariOuS places ill 01~
continent by international imperialism, are significant
examples, Furthermore,
the new mercenaly training
camps which have opened here and there and the
clandestine disembarkation in our subregion :Ind elsewhere of regular troops
of foreign imperialist armies in
Africa, in preparation for new over-all invasion plans
covering the People’s Republic of Benin, the sister
Republic of Guinea, the Republic of Angola and other
independent and sovereign countries of Africa, S~IOW the
furious and criminal determination of: all these odious
monsters to go even further in the intensification of mass
crimes against the peoples of Africa and the States which
fight with perseverance and devotion for their independence and true sovereignty.”

9. The enemies of Africa and of the Beninese revolution
continue their dirty work. They spread slander and lies
about my country. They endeavour to distort the real sense
of the complaint by Benin to the Security Council.
Shamelessly and with malice they proclaim that by requesting another meeting of the Council my country seeks above
ail to obtain international aid. I wish to say now for
everyone to hear that the new Benin is resolutely committed to the path of honour and dignity. It is precisely
because our people does not wish to hold out its hand to
those who plunder its resources that it has proclaimed to
the world, since 30 November 1972, its determination to
free itself totally, completely and definitively from foreign
domination in order to build a Benin politically independent and economically master of its own resources, a Benin
determined to make its modest contribution in the concert
of nations to establishing healthy relations of economic
interdependence. Therefore, if Benin asks the Council once
again to take up consideration of this question, it is in order
to take stock of the situation since the adoption of
resolution 405 (1977).

Thus in Africa, and particularly in our stlbregion, a serious
situation exists. International imperialism threatens the
independence, sovereignty and security of defenceless small
States such as my own.
13. Let me continue my quotation:
“It should also be noted that, unlike the period of
disorganization that followed the imperialist armed aggression on Sunday, 16 January 1977, today, in the ranks
of the Beninese and African reactionaries the attempts to
reorganize those reactionary ranks are tmder way in firm
and discreet liaison with imperialism within the framework of intensive preparations for a new plan For
generalized armed aggression combined with internal
sedition and subversion.

10. We wish to take stock of the situation for two
essential reasons. The first is that the additional information gathered by us has confirmed that the aggression of
Sunday, 16 January 1977 against the People’s Republic of
Benin, far from being a simple affair of isolated adventurers, was indeed an operation organized by international
imperialism to put an end to the revolutionary process
which began in our country on 26 October 1972. We said
this last April and we reaffirm it today, and even the
Western press, in particular the press in Paris, has finally
accepted that this truth is well-founded.

“The Central Committee of the Party of the People’s
Revolution of Benin is following closely the new criminal
plans for invasion and subversion which international
imperialism continues to design against our country, our
people and our revolution. The Central Committee is
watching
this situation with revolutionary care and
vigilance.”

11.
The aggression
of 16 January 1977 is part of the
imperialist plans directed against Africa and al1 the thirdworld countries. On this point there can be no shadow of
doubt;
we say it categorically. All attempts to create
confusion about the tragic events of 16 January 1977 are
doomed to failure.

14. It is clear: imperialism has not disarmed, It is hatching
new plans of aggression, new plots, It is meticulo1lsly
preparing its weapons against the People’s Republic of
Benin.

12. The Central Committee of the Party of the People’s
Revolution of Benin is categorical on this point. It is stated
in the final communiquB of the sixth session of the Second
Committee of the Party of the People’s Revolution of
Benin, which met at Cotonou from 25 July to 1 August
1977:

15. Since the adoption of resolution 405 (1977), the
Government of the People’s Republic of Benin has taken
certain steps to go deeper into the information on the
criminal mercenaries who acted on the orders of imperialism on Sunday, I6 January 1977 at Cotonou.

“Cornered in their last trenches by the revolutionary
forces, the imperialist forces, those decadent forces of
history, did not even conceal their diabolical game. In
fact, they openly and cynically resorted to reactionary
violence, armed invasion and every form of provocation
and pressure based on a planned redistribution of zones
0f intervention and missions among the imperialist
Powers for the colonial reconquest of our great, rich and
beautiful continent, Africa.

16. In pursuance of paragraph
10 of resolution
405 (1977), the Government of the People’s Republic of
Benin undertook bilateral contacts with some foreign
Governments whose nationals and whose infrastructure had
served
the
imperialist armed aggression 0f Sunday, 16
January 1977. In various letters addressed t0 those Governments by the Beninese authorities, they were asked to
2

co-operate with Benin under paragraph 10 of resolution
405 (1977) and to provide any information in their
possession so as to permit further light to be cast on the
identity of the criminal mercenaries who had taken part in
the aggression. Some countries replied and we are deeply
grateful to them.

aggression.It is a question of life or death for our
revolution.
21. Since 16 January 1977 and sinceit denouncedto the
worId the main instigator of that act of aggression,Benin
has continually been subjected to pressuresand discriminatory economic measureson the part of the imperialists. Not having succeededwith their armed aggression
and not wishing in any way to renounce their diabolical
task of arrestingthe revolutionary processin our country,
having decided to perpetuate the exploitation of our
wealth, they are endeavouringto plot at the economicand
financial levels.Thus there hasbeen a vast campaignwhich
has led to a total modification of our trade and financial
relationshipswith somepartners. Most of the negotiations
for credits that were under way or even concluded have
been broken off. Our importers have been refused any
postponementof payment deadlinesand must settlein cash
al1 their importations of goods and services.The smallest
supplier requires that credit should be establishedand
confirmed by a bank in his country and this compelsour
national banks to freeze considerablefunds abroad. The
effect on our investment programme is incalculable, for
many current negotiations are at present frozen. We lack
credit and those sameaggressors
are using their influence,
vis-&vis international financial institutions, to sabotageand
to thwart the realization of our developmentprojects.

17. But the Government of Benin has been especially
surprised by the silence, maintained to this day, by the
Government of France, a country with which Benin
continues to have privileged relations, The silence on the
part of the French Government contrasts with the statements made by its representative on the Security Council,
Ambassador Leprette, who, on 7 April 1977, said in this
chamber:
“I can say here that investigations have been undertaken by the French Government, on its own initiative
and in accordance with its own legislation.” /2001st
meeting, para. 63. /

My delegationwould like, through the Council, to ask the
French representativewhat have been the resultsof those
investigations.What body have they been transmitted to?
What has happenedto the French mercenarieswho left
Paristo assaultCotonou? On the other hand, the French
representative
stated:
“I saidto my colleaguefrom Benin during the first part
of this debatethat hisGovernmentwould no doubt deem
it useful to place directly before the French Government
the complaints that Benin might have in this matter. I
note, three months after the events, that no representations have beenmade to the French authorities.” /Ibid.,
para. 64.1

18. At that lime we said what we thought about that
statementby the representativeof France. But how can we
understandthat the step proposedto usshouldbe met not
merelywith silence,but even with irritation on the part of
the Frenchauthorities? The peopleof Benin, the victims of
aggression,
do they not have a right to draw the obvious
conclusions’?

22. Benin hasvery soundreasonsfor beingconcernedand
for denouncingbefore the Council the new threats posed
by imperialism to our national democratic people’srevolution.
23. Now 1 should like briefly to refer to the questionof
international mercenaries.The utilization by international
imperialism of mercenariesto destabilize the progressive
regimesis a danger for international peace and security.
Obviously the caseof aggressionagainst Benin offers the
Security Council an exceptional opportunity to adopt
effective measuresto eliminate that scourge. All States
membersof the international community must pool their
efforts in that struggle.
24. In askingthe Council to take up againconsiderationof
this question, the Government of Benin wishesto confirm
its determination to publicize that act of aggression
and to
bring legal action againstthe mercenaries.The Government
of Benin considersthat the international community must
now seriously study the question of international mercenaries with a view to ending their use against the
sovereignty, the integrity and the territorial independence
of small and practically defencelessStates. My delegation
considersit essentialfor the Council againto askall States
whose nationals took part in various degreesin the
aggressionof Sunday, 16 .Ianuary 1977againstthe People’s
Republic of Benin to co-operate with Benin in order to
arrest and put out of action thosemercenarieswho are still
alive.,Such sincereco-operationand the positive resultsthat
would follow would be the only firm proof of the good
faith which someproclaim.

19. Do we not have a right to draw conclusionsafter the
additional information gathered by us through inquiries
provesbeyond any doubt that high-level French officials at
Cotonou were aware of the barbarous aggressionlong
beforeits execution andthat two French agentsat Cotonou
participatedin the preparationand execution of that crime
againstour people? The French authorities know very well
that the Governmentof Benin has always approachedthis
questionwith a high senseof responsibility. They know
perfectly well the humanitariantreatment we have given to
thosedastardly agentswho acted at Cotonou. The entire
world knows the rigorous treatment reserved for such
agents.
20. But the people of Benin will continue to act in
accordancewith the maintenanceof good relations with
France and asks only that its inalienable right to true
independenceand its national sovereignty should be respected.The people of Benin will tirelessly continue with
its efforts to cast more light on this ignoble act of

25. The secondreasonfor which we have requestedthis
meeting of the Council is to introduce our evaluation
report. kiragmph
7 of resolution405 (1977) states:
“Reyucsts the Secretary-Generalto provide appropriate
technical assistanceto help the Government of Benin in
3

peoples of: the world, has the right to a happy life, and that
is why it decided to fight to build on the African soil of
Benin a society in which there will bc a good life for all
Beninese men and women. Whoever places obstacles on our
path wili be fought mercilessly. The people of Benin,
hard-working and courageous, will fight with determination
and sacrifice to defend its territory against the invasions
and aggressions of inerceiiaries in the pay of international
imperialism.

assessing and evaluating the clamagc resulting from the act
of armed aggression committed at Cotonou on I6
January 1977”.
21;. In keeping with the foregoing, the Secretary-General,
at our request, provided us with two expert consultants:
Mr. hli Assern of Egypt and Mr. Marcel Kheir of Lebanon.
These two expert consultants visited Cotonou frorn 27 June
to 26 July 1977 and worked in close co-operation with the
members of the National Evaluation Commission. I take
this opportunity to convey to those two expert consultants
the warm thanks and recognition of the people and
Government of Benin.

31. As far as damages are concerned, we ask only for
justice and not for charity. Benin can stand on its own feet,
as it has constantly proved to the world. We know that the
struggle will be a long and difficult one but we shall
overcome because our cause is just.

27. On the basis of the statistics available after this year’s
harvest, the National Evaluation Commission drew up the
revised report issued as document S/12415. The figure
appearing in that report is $US 28 million, that is. 7 billion
WA francs. This figure refers essentially to material
damages and human losses suffered by our people; it also
includes the losses suffered by our agriculture and our
industry as a result of the barbarous aggression and all the
unforeseen expenses sustained by our budget in meeting the
cost of the many missions that came to our country and the
many missions we had to send abroad, not to mention the
expenses involved in all the security measures which we
adopted and which arc still in force in the People’s
Republic of Benin.

32. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Benin
for his kind words addressed to me and to my country. I
wish to assure him of the solidarity of Libya with Benin
and to endorse what he said about the co-operation and
solidarity between our leaders, our peoples and our two
sister countries, in our joint fight for the liberation and
progress of Africa. 1 would assure him again of our
unshakable support.
33. The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
ii statement.

28. This figure is far from compensating for the innumerable sacrifices our people will still have to endure to
safeguard its indcpendcnce, its freedom and its sovereignty
in view
of the frenzied determination of international
imperialism to put an end at any price to the revolutionary
process that has been begun in the People’s J<epublic of
Benin. In order to arrive at this new evaluation, we have
had to conli.ont many obstacles placed in our way by
imperialism to prevent justice from being done on behalf of
our people. Certain imperialist offices in Benin have spared
no efforts to prevent a correct evaluation of the damages
resulting from the aggression, and to close the file on this
question.

34. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (itlterpretation J?vm
l+ienclz): Mr. President, the dclcgatioii oI‘ the Democratic
Republic of Madagascar wishes to offer you its fraternal
congratulations on this occasion when you are guiding the
work oL‘ the Security Council in such a worthy and
responsible manner, and to express to you its feelings of
gratitude for having given it permission to participate in a
dcbate whose importance is only too well known to you in
the context of the struggle that your country, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, and mine are waging, with the same faith
and the same zeal, side by side with the forces of progress
and genuine revolution.
35. The dedication you have shown during the debate on
the aggression perpetrated against Benin, the objectivity
with which you have discharged your responsibilities as a
member of the mission of inquiry sent by the Council to
Cotonou, to mention only two qualities among inany
others, are for us an additional source of reassurance when,
at the rcqucst of the People’s fiepublic of Benin, we are
resuming consideration of the question of the aggression to
which Benin was subjected.

29. Publication of the evaluation report and the flavourable echo it found among friends who have helped us in
healing the wounds of the aggression represent another
victory over the obscurantist imperialist forces. The fact
that many countries have announced to us their intention
to participate actively in the forthcoming donors’ conference is another indication that the militant and active
solidarity with the pcoplc of Benin gives us the courage to
continue our struggle for national liberation, thus crcaling
the objective conditions for building a socialist society in
the People’s Republic of Benin.

36. In Security Council resolution 405 (1977) all Members
States were requested to consider taking measures to deal
with the violation of the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the State of Benin. Those measures are not new
since they arc merely a repetition of those that were
adopted in 1967 when other mercenaries were used in
Zaire.

30. The people of Benin, basically a peace-loving people,
aspires only to l’recdom, to real independence, to sovereignty, to prosperity, to peace and to security inside its
borders, to peace with all its neighbours, to pcacc with all
the States of the world. Our choice of the socialist path of
development is not a whim. We have made it with full
knowledge of what is involved. It was dictated to us by
history, by the history of the political domination and
economic plunder of our country. Our people, like all

37. However, it is necessary, in order to refocus on the
debate which is resuming after eight months of patience
and gestation, to recall certain principles that the Organization endorsed, as well as the measures that we planned to
4

t,&e in order to deal both with the aggression and with the
use of international mercenaries.

armed aggressioncommitted at Cotonou on 16 January
1977. 1dOWeVer,
that assessment,
which rernairlsa theoretical one, does not addressthe political aspectof the
problem,namely the fomenting of plots hatchedabroad.

1 do not thillk
there
is any needto go back over the
pronouncedagainsta11y State which persists
in permitting or tolerating the recruitmentof mercenaries 46. Also, to our knowledge,Statesrequestedto do so by
as WC11 i1Sthe prOViSiOn
of facilitiesfor InercenarieS
with
a
Benin in view of certain responsibilities
have not provided
view to overthrowing the Governmentsof State>Members the Council with all the information they might have
of the United Nations.That point isnow aEce$&d,
and it iS
concerningthe events of 16 January 1977which could shed
orlly for those
WhO
have in bad conscienceand who,
additional light on those events. Following the debatesin
wittingly or LIIlwittillfily,
he
mistakenly trallsgressed April last, it would seem that we are faced wjth two
against that decisionto claim that it wasperemptory
alld
situations:either we accept the conclusions
of the Security
unrealistic.
Council mission of inquiry,] chaired by Mr. Illueca of
39. It is alS0 necessaryto stressthat, in that same Panama,supportedby the Beninnationalreport /S/12319/
resolution, the Security Council condemnedall forms of Add.l/ requestedby the missionof inquiry-and in that
e>tterIld
illtCrfk!rcllcc
ill
the
internal
affairs uf Member case, in accordance with the practice of the Security
Council, there would no longer beany needto go back over
States, including the use of international mercenaries
to
all this becausethe facts are establishedand it is up to the
&stahih
StlllCS or to violate their territorial integrity,
Councilto draw the necessaryconclusions-orwemust take
sovereigntyor indcpendcnce.
into account the statements made at meetingsof the
40. That would require no comment if, despite the Council-statementscf which moreoverthe Councildid not
protestsand pressures
which havebeenbrought to bearat a take note in its resolution 405 (1977)-thus giving them a
certain level for the adoption of a declarationto that effect degreeof verisimilitude even thoughthe personswho made
within a given framework, theseprovisionshad beenacted those statementsnever ceasedto arguethat they werewell
upon. Unfortunately, that is not the cast for, sinceApril
disposedtowardsBenin,
1977, there hasbeenno lack of interferencein the internal
affairs of certain Member States in our continent--and 47. In our view, the Security Councilmustremainstrictly
objective and base itself qn the conclusionsof its own
everyoneknowswhat I am referringto.
missionof inquiry with regard to the implicationspointed
out by the mission.However, sincewe are meetingin a
41. The Council also requestedall States to exercisethe
utmost
vigilance againstthe dangerposedby the recruit- placein which exchangesof viewsand dialoguearethe rule,
the Council can only askthose who havemadepromises
to
ment, training and transit of mercenaries
in their territory.
keep them, for if, on the one hand,it hasbeensaidthat the
aggression
againstBenin was a “murky business”and that,
43. That set of principles which normally would have
on the other hand, those who are pulling the stringsarc
scrvcd asthe bais for a better understandingof relations
most unwilling to revealthe full details,that wouldatnount
amongStates unfortunately has not beenrespected;withto a real evasion on the part of certain States of their
out my citing specific cxamplcs, the membersof the
responsibilitiesunder the Charter. We can only profoundly
Security Councilknow what we aretalking about.
deplore that dubious attitude which is basednot on mere
caution but on a desireto protect oneselfor to protect the
43. Thus, it hasbeen dcmonstratcdthat when the impe- international criminalswe call mercenaries.
What we should
rialist Powersor certain circlesalliedto thosePowersdecide do is to ask all States: first, to enter into a solemnand
to defend what they believe to be their interests,the
unequivocal commitment with regardto the useof merprinciples,rccornlnend;ltionsand decisionsof the Organiza- cenariesin conformity with paragraphs
2 to 6 of resolution
tion have110 value and that, whatcvcr the protestsmadeby
405 (1977); secondly, to enter into an equally solemn
the internationalcommunity, thesePowersand their allies commitment to help the Security Council to determine
cio not hcsitatc to resort to the most barefacedsubterfuge responsibility and possiblesanctionsfollowing the armed
to promotetheir economic,political and military purposes aggression
of which Benin was the victim; thirdly, to enter
under cover of a so-calledideologicalcrusade,in which into a commitment to preserve,sinceit hasnow been
their own public opinion believeslessand less.
demonstratedthat the caseof Benin cannot be an isolated
one, all the principles contained in the Charter, the
44. We could discussat length the definition of inter- Declaration on the Inadmissibilityof Intervention in the
Ilational mercenariesand the USC that might be madeOf DomesticAffairs of States,the Declarationon Principlesof
them under cover of’ the principles of the Charter. It
International Law concerning Friendly Relationsand Coneverthelessremainstrue that the practiceis reprehensible operation among States and the Definition of aggression.
when the objectivesof those who recruit the mercenaries That is what it will cost for us to ensuretruly effective
arc in direct contradiction with the principlesof the respect for the right of every State freely to chooseits
charter itself and the peoples’aspirations011 which it is
political, social and economic systems without being
based.
threatened directly or indirectly, implicitly or not, by
subversivetactics, tactics which hardly do credit even to
45. At another level, resolution405 (1977) hasnot found
their spineless and cowardly perpetrators, the neoany practical applicationeither. Of course,we mustpay a
colonialistimperialists.
tribute to the Secretary-Generalwho hasgiven the Benin
1 see ojpcia[ /<ecords of the Security Council, Thirty-Second
Government appropriatetechnical assistance
to help it to
Year,
Special Supplement No. 3.
determineand assess
the damageresultingfrom the act of
38.

cOlldemflatioll

5

48. We have dwelt on the political aspect of this item on
our agenda in the firm conviction that international peace
and security will remain threatened, especially from the
standpoint of small States, unless we can count on the
guarantees contained in the Charter and the automatic
nature of those guarantees, and as long as we feel that the
international community is hesitating to honour its collective commitment under the Charter to rebuff aggression, to
come to the assistance of the victims and to determine
international responsibilities quite separately from any
considerations of power or ideology.

States concerned to co-operate in ensuring that these
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Benin should ceaseonceandfor all, and, on the other hand,
for the international community, once it hasbeenproperly
establishedthat such a violation took place, to do evcrything possibleto help Beninto guard againstall dangersand
to rehabilitate itself economically,socially and politically,
54. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to thank the represcntative of Madagascarfor his kind words to me. I assurehim
of friendship and solidarity betweenLibya and Madagascar.

49. It is this responsibility that Benin is invoking in
submitting its report in document S/l 2415, which contains
the assessment of the datnage resulting from the act of
aggression of 16 January 1977, an assessment which,
moreover, is called for in paragraph 7 of resolution
405 (1977) and which only confirms in its tnain lines the
contents of the first Beninese national report issued in
document S/123lX/Add.l.

55. The next speakeristhe representativeof Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
56. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba)(irzterptatiorz jkmz Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and mcmbcrsof
the Council for granting us the opportunity to take part in
this debate. This is not the first time that I havetaken part
in discussionsin the Council under your presidency, but it
is always a pleasurefor me to take the opportunity to
convey our greetingsto you andto expressour satisfaction
at seeingyou leadthe activities of this important organ. WC
know of your personalqualifications,of your commitment
to the. principles of the Charter and of your loyalty vis-h-vis
the struggle of peopleseverywhere in the world to exercise
their national rights, and all this convincesus that a debate
of the importance of the presentone is favoured by your
excellent leadership. That is also the case becauseyou
representa Government and a peoplewhich, in the African
continent and in what is known asthe third world, take a
stand of militant participation in the efforts of all those
fighting for their liberation. Becauseof all this, Libya, its
Government and its representatives,are very dear to all the
peoplesof Africa, Asiaand Latin America.

50. We would recall that when that last report was put
before the States members of the Security Council, sotne of
them made unfavourable comments both on the submission
of the report and on its contents, even attributing to the
Beninese Government intentions which should not again be
mentioned here in order not to disturb the calm atmosphere of this debate.
S 1. Does a country which has self-respect and which,
moreover, has suffered from imperialist and capitalist
aggression, not have a right to say what damage has been
caused by that aggression as well as the economic and social
consequences? Property damage and injuly to persons are
certainly quite easy to assess and we do not think any
delegation can question them.
52. It could be argued that the consequences of the
aggression to the national economy and to the security
efforts of the People’s Republic of Benin rnay be open to
differing assessments. It none the less remains true that
those consequences are real and we thank the Beninese
authorities and the United Nations for having given us an
idea of their magnitude although that certainly does not
fully reflect the true situation. But those who have suffered
from aggression and occupation will understand that these
figures can be no more than indicative and reflect only the
short-term effects felt by the country. In this connexion, it
would have been interesting, following a political analysis
of the situation and the continuing attempts to subvert the
Beninese rdgime, to calculate all the harm that that might
causeto the economy of the country,

57. The Security Council is consideringonce again the
situation which has resulted frotn the dastardly attack
committed against the People’sRepublic of Benin on 16
January this year. The investigationsand evaluationson the
spot have allowed usto appreciatethe extent of the damage
causedto that peopleasa result of a totally unwarranted,
cowardIy act of aggression
committed not only againstthe
Government of the People’sRepublic of Benin but also
against the citizens of Cotonou and the surroundingareas,
who were victims of an unprecedentedattack for which
there can be no possible
justification.
58. The documentation before the Council clearly shows
how serious were the material damagescaused to the
People’sRepublic of Benin,totalling approximately $US 28
million. Naturally, ashascorrectly beenpointed out in the
statemmt
of AmbassadorBoya, that figure is far from
reflecting the true magnitudeof the direct and indirect
lossesof Benin resulting from the attack of 16 January;
neither that figure nor any other can even remotely reflect
the implications in termsof suffering causedby lossof Iife
and the injuries that resultedfrom the aggression,
or of the
sacrificesand the efforts Benin hasmadeand mustcontinue
to make in order to guarantee its independence and
territorial integrity.

53. The figures we set in the report in document S/12415
are purely indicative, as I said, and can be interpreted
differently by different people, but they arc above all
indicative of the efforts that a country like Benin must
make to protect its independence,its territorial integrity
and its freedom in the face of all the manoeuvresto which
it is exposed.That is why my delegationthinks it necessary,
on the one hand, for the United Nations, as we repeatedly
said when the aggressioninflicted on Benin was under
discussion, to concern itself at the political level with
throwing all possible light on the events and to ask the
6

59. It is, to say the least, curious that some circles should
have attempted to question the validity of the request of
the People’s Republic of Benin that the Security Council
should consider this question. It is curious indeed that there
should be any doubt as to the right or, I would even say,
the duty of a State to use the procedures and means
established in the Charter for seeking just and peaceful
solutions to problems affecting it. We need only for a
moment imagine the international outrage and upheaval
that would have ensued if another State, for example a
developed capitalist State of Europe, had been the victim of
an aggression such as that suffered at Cotonou on 16
January.

Benin has known how to maintain firmly, coherently and
with dignity an international policy that has given that
country a place of honour among all the progressive forces
of the world.
63. III the words of a distinguished African Head of State,
President Ahmed SBkou Tour& there is a desire to
recolonize Africa. That intention was manifested at dawn
on 16 January of this year at Cotonou. But Africa has
enough strength and will to safeguard its independence and
to move forward along the path of affirmation of its
self-determination and freedom, as is precisely demonstrated by the heroic effort of the people of Benin under
the leadership of the Party of the People’s Revolution. It
has firmly and decisively met the aggression of *January, the
plots and subversive plans of today, and the sabotage and
hostile activities in the economic and financial fields,
Acting on the basis of a decision by its own people, on the
basis of its will not to move backward and with the support
of all the revolutionary peoples of the world, we are certain
that, as stated by its representative a few moments ago,
Benin will overcome all its enemies.

60. But in no other case would there be so much
justification for asking the Council to take appropriate
action as there is in this case, in which a complaint is made
by a small State, a State with limited material resources, a
peace-loving State that has never been in conflict with any
other State, which has never been the object of criticism or
international censure, which has never demonstrated anything but an internationalist vocation to live in peace and
co-operation with the rest of the international community.
It is precisely in cases such as this, the case of a country
with limited defence potential that has been the object of
undoubted aggression that has produced innumerable and
irreparable damages, that the Security Council must demonstrate whether or not it is in a position to fulfil its
obligations under the Charter.

64. An important aspect of this debate is the role being
played by mercenaries as instruments to cut short African
independence. In this connexion, I feel that the statement
just made by Mr. Rabetafika, the representative of Madagascar, has been sufficiently enlightening. He has clearly
pointed out the importance of this matter and the urgency
with which the Security Council and the United Nations
must take appropriate action on it.

61. Resolution 405 (1977) establishes an obligation on the
part of the international community; it draws attention to
the duty of all States to co-operate in order to arrive at a
complete clarificatjon of the events of 16 January-‘not
merely in order to satisfy any particular curiosity, but to
guarantee that the attack will not go unpunished and that
other States, like Benin, with limited resources and small
territories, do not become the victims of aggressions such as
that about which Benin has informed the Council. The
resolution also sets forth the responsibility of the international community to help to repair the damages caused
by the aggression against Benin. The information we have
now received strengthens our conviction that all States
must co-operate effectively to ensure that events such as
that of 16 January will not occur again and that the
assistance needed by the Pcoplc’s Republic or Benin is
provided generously and promptly.

65. 1 should like to conclude by reaffirming once again
our support for and solidarity with the people and the
Government of the People’s Republic of Benin and to
reiterate to them our decision to continue to co-operate
with them on the basis of our comtnon revolutionary
principles and in the assurance that under the leadership of
its Govcrntncnt and Party the people of Benin will face up
to all obstacles and achieve the objectives of the people’s
revolution.
66. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Cuba
for the kind words he addressed to me and my country. 1
should like on this occasion to affirm to him the admiration, support and appreciation of Libya for the positive and
decisive role played by Cuba in the struggle for economic,
social and political liberation in our present world. In fact,
Cuba sets an excellent example of how a small nation can
resist pressure, intimidation and bIackmai1 and participate
positively in the struggle and fight to shape the course of
history.

G2. In his statcmcnt, Ambassador Boya provided us with
an analysis of cvcnts as they have evolved since January,
which clearly indicates that the plans for aggression and
imperialist attempts to stop the revolutionary process in
Benin and seek the overthrow of its people’s Government
have not ceased and that Benin continues to be the object
of threats which should cause us all grave concern. If the
imperialists wish to halt the course of the Beninese
revolution, if they arc not satisfied with the progress of
events in that country, that is precisely because, first, Benin
is undergoing a profound people’s revolution which opens
up for its people the path to the construction of a socialist
society that will make possible the true and full emancipation of its workers and will ensure for them a future which
will appropriately crown the process of liberation frotn the
colonial era and bccausc, secondly, the People’s Republic of

67. The next speaker is the representative of Guinea,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
68. Mr. KONDE (Guinea) (irztcrpretution from hwzch):
May I first of all express to you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Security Council my gratitude for
having been allowed to participate in this debate. I should
also like to congratulate you on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of November and
to offer you my best wishes for success at this time when
7

you are directing the resumption of the Council’s debate on
a question intimately linked in its importance and scope
with the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are sure that your great experience will contribute to
the success of these deliberations. This is also the place to
pay a deserved tribute to the militant action of Libya, you1
great country, in the community of nations and to stress
the fraternal and cordial links which happily exist between
our two peoples.

resolution demanding exemplary punishment for all those
who had prepared, encouraged, organized and perpetrated
the aggression against the Republic of Guinea. For its part,
the Security Council, after its investigation in Guinea,
adopted resolution 290 (1970), which declared the aggres.
sion to be an act of serious threat to international peace
and security and in which the Council declared itself
grieved at the loss of life and extensive damage caused b!
the armed attack and invasion of the Republic of Guinea
and endorsed the conclusions of the report of the Special
Mission to the Republic of Guinea.

69. More than six months ago, the Security Council
considered the complaint of the People’s Republic of
Benin, the victim of a most savage aggression on 16 January
of this year. That debate happily led to the adoption of
resolution 405 (1977).

75. We certainly do not like to think in this, the last
quarter of the twentieth century, that States which clainl to
be to some degree civilized can have recourse to such
retrogressive methods as the use of merccnarics to overthrow the Governments of independent and sovereign
States, as was the case in Cuba, Guinea, Benin and
elsewhere. The problem of the use of mercenaries is not,
however, such an isolated problem as some people would
have us believe. We know that, like the need for aggression
which engenders it, the use of mercenaries is an integral
part of the same complex and systematic plan of intcrnational imperialism which, in its arrogance and stubborn.
ness, thinks that it can halt the process of change and turn
back the clock in order, on the one hand, to maintain its
position indefinitely and protect its selfish interests
throughout the world and, on the other hand, to thwart the
efforts made by the third world to replace the old
economic system by a new economic order which provides
for a fairer sharing of the resources of the world. We art’
convinced that the Security Council and the Genera!
Assembly must now take immediate and effective measures
to co-ordinate the struggle against international inercenaries, that gangrene which is eating away so dangerously
at the moral values of our so-called civilizcd world.

[The speaker read out paragraphs 2, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of
resolution 40.5 (1977)./
70. In the light of the provisions of resolution 405 (1977)
which I have just quoted, the Council thus had to meet
again to assess the situation which has remained before it
since April 1977. That is what prompts us today to launch
an urgent appeal for consideration of the request of the
sister Republic of Benin to obtain the just compensation to
which it is entitled.
71. The aggression against Benin was one of the attempts
of imperialism to get its hands back on a country engaged
in its national reconstruction, a country whose only crime
is that it has chosen true independence by decisively
rejecting imperialism and neo-colonialism.
72. The Republic of Guinea, which suffered one of the
most treacherous acts of imperialist aggression, is in a good
position to assess the situation resulting from the abortive
attack of 16 January 1977 against the People’s Republic of
Benin.

76. AS we have said in previous debates, we now rcaffinn
our militant and total solidarity with the people and the
Government of the People’s Republic of Benin and WChupc
that the Security Council will take all the neccssar)
measures to give effect as quickly as possible to its
resolution 405 (I 977) with a view to enabling that countiy
to bind up the wounds of war.

73. It is a happy coincidence that the present debate is
taking place on 22 November-now
known as Africa Day
by a decision taken by the Organization of African Unity at
Lagos in December 1970 following the aggression against
the Republic of Guinea. As I speak, the lights have just
been extinguished at Conakry following the great demonstrations which every year mark this historic date of the
victory of the whole of Africa over international impcrialism. On 22 November 1970, the stubbornest adversaries
of the Guinean revolution--those very people who had so
many reasons to have confidence in Imperialisms-were
taken aback. At dawn, boats had landed mercenaries,
purely and simply to reconquer Guinea, a country that had
rebelled against neo-colonialism.

77. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his kind words addressed to me and to IIIY
country. I should like to reciprocate and tell him that WC in
Libya shall never forget the eminent role of Guinea k the
liberation of Africa. We shall never forget that Guinea was
one of the first victims of mercenaries and that its fa~~o~~s
“110”
to colonial control triggered the real revolution ill
Africa.

74. The Council is sufficiently we11 aware of the effects
that that operation, even though it failed, had on a
population undergoing the fast of Ramadan: hundreds
dead, including women, old people and children, We are
particularly happy on this anniversary of 22 November to
offer members once again the sincere gratitude of the
people of Guinea for their unrcservcd support in our time
of trial. A few days after the aggression, the Organization of
African Unity held a special meeting from 9 to 12
December 1970 at Lagos and adopted unanimously a

78. Mr.
LEPRETTE (France)
(interpretation
jigs
French): The French delegation has heard with the greatest
attention the statement tnade by the representative of
Benin.
79. As 1 have already clearly said in previous statements to
the Council on 8 February /1987th meeting/ and then 011
7 April /ZUUlst meeting/, France is particularly devoted to

I
8

the principle of respect for the independence of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. That principle is
one of the bases of our foreign policy and can brook no
exceptions. I added at the time that its application was even
more imperative in the case of countries like Benin, with
which France has relations based on mutual respect,
friendship and co-operation.

82. Having noted that documents communicated by the
Beninese authorities to the mission of inquiry sent by the
Security Council mentioned individuals who were termed
French nationals, the Government, as is known, on its own
initiative and in accordance with its laws, undertook an
investigation, The investigation produced nothing. The
Government of Benin, through its Ambassador in Paris, was
informed on 8 August of the conclusions of our investigation. It is true that the mysterious circumstances-surprising
for an operation of that nature in that the perpetrators of
the raid left “documentary evidence” on the spot-cast
doubts on the value of the documents appended to the
report of the mission of inquiry. Wemust observenow that
our investigation is over, that those doubts appear well
founded.

80. The French delegation, 1 recall, approved without
reservation on 8 February the sending of a Security Council
mission to study the events of 16 January at Cotonou. On
7 April, it strongly condemned all forms of the use of
mercenaries. It expressed the desire that this debate should
lead to a greater awareness of the problems connected with
that form of action. Is there any need for me to repeat
today that that position still stands?

83. We certainly understand the emotions causedby the
raid of 16 January on Cotonou. Such action by adventureseekersagainstindependent African States is one of the
scourgesof our times. France supports the efforts of
international organizationsto end such inadmissibleinterventions in the internal affairs of States. But we cannot
allow any accusationof ourselveswith regard to eventsin
which, 1 repeat,we were not involved in any way.

81. That being said, I cannot allow my country to be
accused without proof on the basis of facts that France
condemns, but that are still far from being clear. The
French delegation wishes to make quite clear, as it did
before the Council on 7 April, that it denies that the
French Government or any of the French services had any
responsibility for the preparation and execution of the raid
of 16 January on Cotonou. France formally condemns that
operation.

Tl?emeetingroseat 5.30 p.m.

9

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the ivorld.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write lo: United
Nations.
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont on vente dans Its librairies
et les agenres
depositsires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
nuprtis de vatre lihmire
ou adressez-vous
k : Nations
Uniea. Section des ventes. New York ou GenPve.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
