IAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

22 MAY 1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2362)

*,*,*.*

Adoption of the agenda . . . . ..,.,a

..,,.

,,..,,,,,.

* .,.,,...,,.,,

. .,,,.,.........

.*.*

*..a . . . . . . e........

Question concerning the situat.ion in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(h) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100). . , . . (. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , , . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . , . . . . . *

1
1

1

SlPV.2362

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rind
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2362nd MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 22 May 1982, at 3 p.m.
Pw.sic/c/rt:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

I%~.s~~llt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland. Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

2. In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2360th meeting, I invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, Uruguay
and Venezuela to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2362)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Question concerning the situation in the region
of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Cc11 Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15037);
(1)) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to’ the President of the
Security Council (S/ 1.5099);
(v) Letter dated 2 1 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S! I5 100)

Adoption of the agenda
Tlw

rigrnclrr

II*CIS

ocioptcd.

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Mnlvinas):
(n) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(I>) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressedto the President of the Security
Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100)
I.

The

3. The PRESIDENT
(intelp,L’totiorl
Ji-om
c’hiI should like to inform members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Bolivia. Canada, Cuba, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Honduras, New Zealand, Nicaragua and Peru.
in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
IIC~.Y~~):

PRESIDENT

(intr,pr~~trrtior?- . .

fkom

C’hi-

nc~sc): I should like, at the outset of this meetmg, to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama,
Mr. Jorge E. Illueca, for attending the Council
meeting. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him.

4.

The

PRESIDENT

(into.~r.rtcrtit,II

.fi.~~??

<‘hi-

~c~.vc~):
I should like to inform members that I have just
received two letters, dated 22 May, from the representative of Argentina to the United Nations. which
will be distributed during the course of this meeting
under the symbols S/IS 102 and S/ 15103.
Mr, de PINIEs
(Spain) (intr,p~c~tritifj/l
.fhll
-5 .
.yl>l//li,v/l): I should like first to extend a special greeting
to the Foreign
Ministers who are honouring us with
their presence. Regrettably, this is a true measure
of the tragic hour through which mankind is living.

United Kingdom, through the mediation of the Secretary-General, would yield the desired results. But
we can wait no longer. We are faced with the historic
responsibility of ending this senseless war and paving
the way for negotiations and peace.

The hour is critical and the circumstances most
adverse. Their presence here will highlight these
debates. Nevertheless, I would have preferred that
they should not have had to come to New York.
because this is a time of extreme gravity. M.ay I extend
a special welcome to Mr. Illueca, the Foreign Minister
of Panama, which is a member of the Council, to
Mr. Costa Mindez, the Foreign Minister of Argentina,
and to Mr. Zambrano Vclasco, the Foreign Ministet
of Venezuela.

IO. My delegation’s attitude in regard to the Malvinas question was reflected in my statement of 3 April
to the Council [235&/z nzccfin!: 1. Nevertheless, as
there have been further developments, I shall try to
summarize as briefly as possible the most important
points of our position.

6. Mr. President, 1 should like to congratulate
you on the skill and diplomatic flair with which you
are discharging your functions at a particularly decisive
and critical time both for the United Nations and for
world peace. I am especially grateful for the promptness with which you have been informing us, the
members of the Council. about the grave crisis which
is developing in the Malvinas Islands.

I I. At the beginning of the crisis, my Government
expressed its concern over the situation created in the
Malvinas and pointed out Spain’s consistent position
on the substance of the problem, to the effect that
decolonization should take place by ensuring Argentine territorial integrity and safeguarding the interests
of the population. On the other hand, the Government of Spain stated that it was opposed to the use of
force as a means of settling disputes and insisted that
the channels for achieving a peaceful solution through
the United Nations should be kept open.

7. I should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his good offices in the conciliatory mission he has
been carrying out with the utmost diligence, sparing
neither effort, firmness, skill nor perseverance. My
country also wishes to place on record the debt of
gratitude we owe the Secretary-General, because we
believe that had it not been for his efforts and tireless exertions the situation would have been far more
critical and the positions of the two parties to the conflict would have been even further removed from the
objective Spain desires: the cessation of hostilities
and a negotiated understanding on the substance of
the problem. Unfortunately,
the Secretary-General
himself felt that it was his painful duty to inform the
President of the Council that the negotiations he had
undertaken with the Council’s support offered no
prospect of an end to the crisis or preventing intensification of the conflict.

12. On I May, on being informed of the British military action, the Government of Spain warned of the
dangers of unleashing a generalized and massive military action in the archipelago, which would inevitably lead to grievous loss of human life. At that
time, my Government pointed out the very grave
responsibility of allowing the escalation to continue
unchecked and described this in advance as a serious
historical mistake. That prediction and omen have
unfortunately been confirmed in the intense confrontation in the American hemisphere and the distressing
breach between two continents.
13. His Majesty King Juan Carlos I addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General
dated 5 May, from
which I shall quote the following paragraphs:

8. The Government of Spain deeply deplores the
fact that it was impossible to arrive at an understanding
and a contractual arrangement which, in strict application of the doctrine of decolonization, would from the
outset have spared us violence by making possible
the peaceful restoration of Argentine territorial integrity. This would have prevented a war for which
there is no justification and a terrible breach between
two peoples belonging to the same Western civilization.

“I cannot remain unmoved by the confrontation
between two peoples, nor can I contemplate, without
deep emotion, the loss of human life which this
entails.
“I believe that there is a just and honourable
solution to every problem through talks and peaceful measures, in a spirit of peace. without reaching
irreparable consequences.

9. In the circumstances, and as is indicated in the
Secretary-General’s
letter to the President of the
Council [S//SOUC,l. we members of the Council must
be fully aware of the responsibility which is incumbent
upon us under the Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council is the proper body to act effectively and to prevent an irreparable loss of human lives
and the escalation of a conflict the consequences of
which are becoming disastrous for world peace.
A formal meeting was postponed during the last few
days simply because we still hoped that the negotiations then under way between Argentina and the

“For my part, I offer with the utmost selflessness
all my goodwill and assistance in order to contribute
in any way which may be deemed appropriate to the
attainment of peace and justice.”
14. In spite of that appeal and those of several
heads of State made during those days, the conflict
was aggravated and military confrontation dramatically
intensified. In these circumstances, we must with the
utmost urgency take a decision reflecting the neces2

20. We must energetically take up the SecreturyGeneral’s proposal again and build upon it. with the
thought that with the appointment of his reprcsentative and a team of observers chosen from among the
parties to the dispute, a beginning could he made in
establishing the bases of a future negotiation.
21. The PRESIDENT
fi/?tcJr’/Jl.rtolio,lfiw~r C’hiWSC~: The next speaker is the representat& of Uruguay. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

13.

C’cs%ltiOn

--thllSc

shl)Uld

of hostilities,
1X

the

priol-ities

negotiation
of

()iIr

action.

22. Mr. AZAR GOMEZ (Uruguay) ~i/~~~~rpr.c~ttrtior~.fi’orn S/~r/li.s/zj: The delegation of Uruguay is grateful for having been given the opportunity to participntc
in this meeting on a matter of such gravity and of such
special concern to my Government, as a peace-loving
country and as a Latin American country.

and peace
CeSSa-

cj0il of hostilities, because too much blood has already
been s;hed in this conflict,
;\ conflict that began with
gin Wt of ~OKC and that, through warlike escalation
;tnd cxtcnded military action,
has become a tragic
histtjrica]
CITUI’
:~nd
is opening
an ubyss of misundersli\ndilng
]?ctwecn Ibero- America
and Europe that
SPain. US it IRC~I~CI* of both the J&ropean and the
ItWWArnerican
communities.
deplores more deeply
thun any ather country,

23. At appropriate times and in various international
forums, Uruguay has repeatedly stated its position
regarding the rights of sovereignty of the Argentine
Republic over the Malvinas Islands and their dependencies, a position that we now most energetically
reaffirm.

16. Negotiation
to put an end to the colonial situati0n in the Malvinas should
be undertaken without
reservations
and with the determination
to dispel
the long absence of the negotiating
spirit that cannot
be ovczrlookcd when making
a true evaluation of the
conflict.
17.

!\nd,

24. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay,
Mr. Estanislao Va]d& Otero, at the Twentieth
Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of the Organization of American States (OAS), convened in accordance with the provisions of the InterAmerican Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, stated:

at the end of uur

effort, in which we must
peace-an honourable,
nt’goti:ltcd
peace, u just peace that will result from
p~tcifir: i\nd concerted action and never from the imposition of military force, which is of necessity painful
;lnd
l~recarious.
History
abounds with examples
that p’rovc
the stubborn
sterility
of violence, the
~~s~]cs~~ess of solutions brought about by war and
bc;lrir:ly the seeds of death. destruction and the invasivc virus of new discords and violence.

“Uruguay and Argentina gained independent
life in the first half of the nineteenth century. They
come from the same noble Hispanic roots. and
together they undertook to engage in i1 heroic struggle for the recovery and defence of their nationnl
sovereignties, In their joint history. they have hitd
to face and vanquish foreign interventions aimed at
interfering with their consolidation as independent
and sovereign nations.

not give in to discouragement,

“Today, however, like our sister republics of
America, we are present here, independent and
sovereign. That is the lesson of history that some
Governments seem unable to understand. thinking
as they do that America can be a propitious ground
on which to carry out their colonial nspirihls.”

thnt hope of achieving
peace and removing
the
sc:l~lll’gc
of war .-+, peace based on the provisions
of the charter rind of United
Nations resolutions-mY
countl-y is prepared to support a draft resolution that,
in ;1CC:C)rdance with the principles
I have enunciated,
kvill bring ilbl~llt a peaceful solution.
18.

‘Nith

19. ,4s the Secretary-Genera]
in his stutement to the Council,
bear very much in mind:
-bIt relnains my belief

25, Mr. ValdCs Otero also stated:

indicated yesterday
one that we should

*‘America is present and united. Colonial i\spiK\tions run counter to the path of history and the
norms of law, and any victory that might be achieved
by weapons will only be the source of flittIre dfering by the civilization which we Americans and
the British share-not our civilizution, but r!fthel
that of our children and of future generiltll~ns.

that an agreement along the

lines developed in the exchanges over the Past tyo
wceks, incorporating the approaches suggested In

my i~idc-m~moire
of 19 May, could restore Peace
in tile south Atlantic
and open the WaY for an
endul.ing
solution
of the long-standing dispute
between two Member
States”
[2360th lW’tin%
prriw. 21 I.

26,

Argentina’s

historic;\!

C!iilimS

tl)

Soverr’ignty

over the Mn]vjn;ls lshmds and their dependencies are
3

sound and clear. The territories in question were
part of the Vice-Regency of Rio de la Plats attached
to the Naval Station at Montevideo, and thus could
hardly be considered to be land subject to an appropriation rkgime.
27. In 1833, Britain, through an act of force, occupied the Malvinas Islands; an act of force can bestow
no rights. Not only did Argentina never consent to
that act of despoliation, but from that moment it began
to make, through diplomatic channels, its claims fat
the full restoration of its sovereign rights.
28. As we see it, the present situation must be
analysed within the context of and in the light of the
fundamental
principle of the territorial integrity of
States that is clearly reaffirmed in paragraph 6 of
General Assembly
resolution
1514 (XV), which
enshrines the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and which
states:
“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible
with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.”
29. One of the most fruitful tasks of the United
Nations has been that of leading to independent life
scores of nations that today occupy with supreme
dignity their places in our assemblies. We now face
a specific instance in that long and noble process of
decolonization,
and Uruguay is doing no more than
applying the general principles set forth in the Declaration on fhe Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
30. We firmly support the convening of this meeting
and we make a strong appeal to the Council to see
that solutions permitting the restoration of pegice in
the South Atlantic will emerge from it.
31. Seeking solutions through war operations, such
as those now taking place, can only satisfy temporary political interests by attempting
to legatize a
situation of force which must be viewed as contrary
to international law, and as jeopardizing-at
the cost
of young lives-the
undertaking of negotiations that
will lead us to the much desired peaceful solution of
the dispute.
32. Uruguay has with great concern followed. day
by day and minute by minute. the situation created by
the conflict involving the Malvinas Islands and theit
dependencies. In particular, we wish to state that
we have in the last few days followed very closely
the development
of the negotiations carried out by
the Secretary-General.
33. We should like at this stage to place the greatest
emphasis on our profound respect for the objective,

calm and measured way in which the Secretary-Genera1 has conducted the negotiations,
ensuring, by
means of his meticulous negotiating procedure, orderly
contacts between the Governments.
34. We regret that that negotiating
procedure.
which had been tacitly accepted by both parties, \vi\s
interrupted by the submission on 17 May of :I draft
interim agreement on the conflict by the representative
of the United Kingdom,
3s. We believe that the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral made a substantial contribution
to clarifying
the basic points of difference between the positions
of Argentina and the United Kingdom; both Governments, in the light of those differences, should analyse
the inevitable necessity of resuming negotiations,
for it is clear that the only course which can put an end
to bloodshed and to the threat to world peace is peaceful negotiation to bring this dispute to an end.
36. As Latin Americans, we are pleased to see a
willingness to negotiate amply demonstrated by the
Argentine Government
which, despite its uncontestable rights of sovereignty over the islands, agreed
to begin negotiations within the framework of Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations, that is.
without prejudice to the rights, claims or positionufthe
parties concerned.
37. In this very forum, too, Argentina has stated
its readiness to comply with the provisions of resolution 502 (1982), a willingness which it could nut put
into full effect owing to the dispatch southwards.
immediately
following the adoption of that resulution, of a powerful fleet whose warlike preparations
and subsequent warlike actions clearly violate the
spirit and letter of resolution SO2 ( 1982), thus leading
to a series of hostilities which had not taken pklCe at
the time of the adoption of that resolution.
38. We most vigorously condemn these hostilities.
which are now taking place openly in the form of iI
bloody attack launched against the Malvinas Islands.
39. A formula must urgently be drawn up to put an
end to the armed attacks. We call on the Council to
make every effort to seek for a measure which would
call for the following:
I. Immediate cessation of the hostilities. Beyond
the central purpose. which is that of saving many
innocent young lives, this would also halt a far-reaching
military escalation with unforeseeable consequences.
an escalation which would make an urgent solution
more difficult by further alienating the parties.
2. A formal mandate to be given to the SecretaryGeneral to resume negotiations aiming at a peaceful
settlement of the dispute. The tireless efforts made
by the Secretary-General
to bring about a solution of
the problem, and the formulas which he submitted at

various times to the parties to help them to come to an
agreement, constitute. in our view, sufficient grounds
for the Council, acting in fulfilment
of its responsibilities, immediately
to entrust to the SecretaryGeneral the task of resuming negotiations.
3. Conservation of and respect for the six points
on which essential agreement had been reached. In
his statement to the Council yesterday, the SecretaryGeneral informed us that in his opinion essential
agreement had been reached on six points [i/>id.,
prrrrr. 151, which, in our view, should form the fi-amework for resuming the negotiations.
40. In maintaining the positioq we have just set out,
our aim is not to damage one set of interests or promote
another set.
41. Uruguay is acting in defence of the principles
it has always upheld. We do this, of course. with the
fervour which has always marked our defence of just
and noble causes.
42. Our only weapons are the constant protection
of law, and freedom, which are indispensable factors
for any achievement in the higher sphere of the wellbeing and coexistence of peoples.
43. At this difficult time, we must remain fuully aware
that we are controlled by the world. The United
Nations must act immediately,
without limitations
and with a sense of urgency, to find a just, peaceful
and lasting solution, based on respect for the rules of
international
law, and to bring about an immediate
cessation of hostilities, which would have a calming
effect, ensure a lasting peace and normalize relations
between the nations.
44. That is what is expected of us now, for it is the
reason for having founded the United Nations, whose
very existence is also at stake.
45. In that connection, we must recall that the failure
of the League of Nations. and its end, came about
precisely because of its ineffectiveness in avoiding the
crisis of the 1930s. All that is not so far in the past
that we can forget it in the present circumstances.
46. The PRESIDENT
(int(J/p/‘c’tc/tion
,fi~~m C’hiH(J.SO):I should like to inform the members of the Council that I have just received letters from the representatives of Colombia, El Salvador and Paraguay, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote. in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Chattel
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

47.

The

PRESIDENT

(i~zt(Jrpr-cttrtioil

,fhi?l

(‘hi-

/I(J.Y~):The next speaket- on my list is the Minister fol
Foreign Affairs of Vent~~~~ela,
Mr. .fOSd Alhcrto
Zombrano Velasco. I welcome
him and invite him
to take ;I plnce at the Cuuncil
table and to m:tke his
Statement.

VELASCO
(Venezuela)
48. Mr. ZAMBRANO
(i/rtcJ,pl.c’trrtio,~,f;.c~ln Sprrui.vh):
Allow me to cungratof the presidency
ulilte you, Sir. on you1 assumption
of the Council for the month of May. We are sure
that your long and distinguished
diplomatic career,
which we Venezuelans
have been particularly able to
appreciate. will enable the Council, in this particularly
difficult time for the Organizntion.
to exercise its
responsibilities in accordance
with the Charter of the
United Nations,
49. Venezuela requested
a hearing in the Council
because of the special
interest
it takes, as a Latin
American nation. in the crisis caused by the warlike
conduct of the United
Kingdom
against the Argentine Republic in an area defined as a security zone by
the Inter-American
Treaty
of Reciprocal Assistance.
SO. Latin America is a family of peoples. We cannot
stand aloof from anything
that occurs
there. Any act
of aggression against one of its members affects it as
a whole and is therefore
unacceptable.
51. The organ of consultation
of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
clearly expressed the
solidarity of our nations
with the Argentine Republic
at this difficult time in its history.
52. On the occasion
of the Twentieth Meeting of
Consultation of Ministers
of Foreign Affairs of the
Organization of American
States (OAS), convened in
Washington on 28 April,
in accordance with the provisions of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance, Venezuela
criticized
the procedures of
the Security Council,
which
enabled permanent
members. with their right of veto, to enjoy a system of
concealment and impunity
in order to wage war or to
protect the warlike adventures
of their allies. with the
certainty
that no sanction
or warning from the Council would affect them.
5.3. The support given to British aggression by the
United States has an unpredictable
effect on the lift
of the present regional
ot-F~~nizntion--thc
()AS-+nd
the hemispheric security
system embodied in the InterAmerican Treuty
of Reciprocal
Assistance. The
future of these instruments
cljncerns 1x11own n;\tion:\I
intcrcsts. Whilt hils occurred
gives c;lusc for profound
dkction,
in Pal-ticulalwith reg~i to the future‘.
WC think. furthcrmor-c,
that world l~nlancc and intercontinental relations art’ being s~ri~)usly affcctcd by
thi+, tlxgic conflict.

its European allies, which distrust the purposes and the
scope of the armed action undertaken by it,

54. Accordingly, my country asked to take part in
this meeting of the Council. The conflict taking place
in the South Atlantic is much more than a bilateral
confrontation
between the United Kingdom and
Argentina. Given its nature and consequences, it
affects to a greater or lesser degree all the other States
in Latin America and relations between Europe and
Latin America.

64. Thirdly. the warlike presence of nuclear submarines in the area defined by the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance as a hemispheric
zone of security constitutes a use of nuclear energy
for non-peaceful purposes, in violation of commitments subscribed to by the United Kingdom itself
which have made Latin America the only nuclearfree zone in the world, The United Kingdom has
thereby created an extremely serious threat to pence.

55. Venezuela comes to the Council in the name of
peace. We wish to make our critical points of view
heard. We wish to reaffirm our solidarity with the
Argentine Republic. We are acting in accordance with
the positions and stands which we have taken. We
hope that the Council will be able to prove its effectiveness by bringing about an immediate end to the war,
the essential pre-condition of any subsequent civilized
effort-political
and diplomatic-to
resolve the crisis.

65. Fourthly, the declaration of a sea and air exclusion zone around the Malvinas Islands constitutes.
under international law, a hostile act against not merely
the other party to the conflict but the other members
of the international community.
Not satisfied with its
declaration. Great Britain proceeded to violate its
own provisions by sinking the crLIiser(;(JncJ/.~// Rr/,qr~r~~r~
outside the 200-mile area.

56. Venezuela has very serious comments and
ob.jections to express regarding Council resolution SO2
(1982). We have described it as biased and procolonialist,
with solid arguments to support OUI
emphatic charge.

66. Fifthly, the United Kingdom
has established
another IOO-mile zone around Ascension Island, which
constitutes a serious threat to civil aviation of States
outside the conflict.

57. Venezuela is here as a result of a cry for peace,
a yearning for peace, increasingly acute as the wal
drags on and worsens.

67. Sixthly, to confirm once and for all the falsehood of the claim of self-defence made by the United
Kingdom, that country proceeded to decree a 12-mile
blockade off the coast of continental Argentina,

58. Despite our criticism of resolution SO2 (1982).
we think that complete compliance with that resolution by both the United Kingdom and Argentina would
have made possible a peaceful settlement.

68. The United Kingdom is seeking to justify all its
breaches of resolution 502 ( 1982). which it presented
itself, by invoking the right of self-defence as enshrined
in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
However, that Article only endorses such a right until
the Security Council has taken the necessary measures to maintain international peace and security.

59. In the organ of consultation of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance and in the United
Nations, Argentina has expressed its willingness to
comply fully with that resolution provided the United
Kingdom also strictly complies, but the United Kingdom has ignored the resolution, which it had proposed,
and has embarked on a tragic warlike adventure which
has already cost many innocent lives and which it is
necessary to being to an end immediately.

69. Accordingly,
since the Council had adopted
resolution SO2 (1982). the United Kingdom could not.
without gravely violating the Charter and the resolution of the Council, engage in all the hostile acts to
which we have referred.

60. The actions of the United Kingdom since the
adoption of resolution SO2( 1982) constitute clear violations of,that resolution.
61. First, there was the decision to dispatch the
fleet, clearly contrary to the demands of the Council,
which called unequivocally on both parties to cease
hostilities immediately.
The British decision constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

70. As has been said. one cannot invoke self-defence
in this case as that would only apply, following the
adoption of a resolution by the Council. if the state
of hostilities continued without interruption. which
clearly has not happened. On the contrary. the United
Kingdom’s actions led to a new opening of hostilities.

62. Secondly, the diplomatic activities carried out
by the United Kingdom within the European Community to bring about the imposition of trade sanctions
against Argentina constitute an unprecedented act
of economic aggression, carried out in blatant violntion of all international law.

71. There is no rule of international law that justifits the United Kingdom’s
armed action which hi!5
brought war to the American continent. No Provlsion of the Charter can bc used to justify this irrationill
conduct.
72. From tho very moment that the United Kingdom
dccidcd to resort to the Security Council for the adL)P
tion of the necessary mcasurcs for the maintcnanc~ of

63. The arrogant conduct of the Government of the
United Kingdom has produced a split in the unity of
6

international peace and security. it entrusted the Council with the exercise of the attributes which the Charter
confers upon it for such purposes.
73. The United Kingdom
obtained
a resolution
which has come in for serious criticism.
But not
satisfied with that, it proceeded, on the one hand,
not to fulfil it and, on the other, to allege, in clear
violation of Article S I of the Charter, a supposed
exercise of self-defence in order to attack Argentina.
The United Kingdom resolved to act as if the Security Council had decided to impose sanctions on
Argentina and had commissioned
the British fleet to
carry them out. The British Government
has made
a mockery of the world system of collective security.
74. The purpose of this conduct appears merely to
be to use the decision of the Council as justification
or an excuse for action which is shocking the world
today and which has cost hundreds of human lives.
75. While the United Kingdom
was carrying out
all these activities which we have described, threatening peace and security, the Council did not deem it
fit. for the preservation of peace, to adopt other measures apart from those contained in resolution SO2
Il982)-neither
measures that do not entail the use of
armed force, referred to in Article 41 of the Charter,
nor measures which do entail the use of force, pursuant
to the provisions of Article 42.
76. The United Kingdom
is thus trying to get a
comprehensive right to use force on the strength of its
capacity to paralyse the Council through its right of
veto.
77. Therefore, the British action runs counter to the
most elementary human rights, to the Charter of the
United Nations and to all the practice of the Organization in connection with decolonization.
From this
point of view, it is unacceptable for an attempt to be
made to justify ruthless aggression by alleging adherence to the principle of the rule of law.
78. This principle cannot be used to justify an
injustice backed up by the USC of force, in accordance
with colonial practices. That is why we have insisted
that this problem must be fully analysed, taking into
account the historical, geographic, political and ethical
background, since if that is not done legal principle
will be stripped of its fairness and reduced to the law
of empire. in the twentieth century, to cover all colonialist abuses.
79. While all these events were taking place, an
intense effort to find peace was being carried out by
the Secretary-General.
In that process. once again
Argentina’s willingness to be flexible about its position
in order to find a peaceful solution to the problem and
to save hundreds of innocent lives was very clear.
Argentina tailored its conduct to the lines set forth by
the International Court of Justice in this connection;

in other words, it acted diligently to find a way to
reconcile positions so that negotiations
would be
meaningful nnd not become a mere exercise in intransigence.
80. However. once again this effort ran up against
the inflexible arrogance of the British Government.
What the British Government is seeking is the restoration by force of its colonial title in South America.
It is an exercise in imperial doctrines which are selfperpetuating. If we follow this logic. violent occupntion dragged out for 150 years cannot hope to be
reimposed except by war.
81. The same British attitude to the just and continuing claim of Argentina is not unrelated to the origins
of the present conflict, Heedless and impatient.
England refused to carry out its international
obligation to preserve peace. Thus, we have a story of intransigence and violence by the United Kingdom.
82.

As President Luis Herrera

Campins

said:

“While it is true that, as the Charter of the United
Nations states, one may presume that the aggt’essor is the person who first resorts to force, SUL.I a
conclusion is not inevitable but a mere presumption.
“Violence
and force adopt subtle methods in
order to hold sway. The neglect, disregard, unplcasantness and, on many occasions., even contempt
shown for years in the face of the proposals and
claims of the weakest addressed to the most powerful
are part of these subtle forms of violence.
“Peaceful efforts to solve the problems
have
come up against the indifference of the international
community
and the peevishness of the powerful
who have normally involved themselves in these
disputes. The weak nations see that the strong can
use force with impunity, They are helpless witnesses of the prolongation of conflicts sustained by
powerful countries, This state of affairs constitutes
encouragement of the use of force.”
83.’ The international community
is witnessing with
amazement and indignation acts of aggression committed by a Government which has the gall to violate
the very norms which it promoted.
including those
which it arbitrarily established unilaterally.
Indeed.
the British Government proposed the text for Cauncil resolution SO2 (1982) and staked out a war zone
around the Malvinns Islands which its own forces with
utter treachery then procccdcd to violate. The dispatch of the aggressive fleet and the criminal sinking
of the cruiser C(gnc~~*tr/Rl~lgr~rr~o outside the exclusion
zone, which, totally contrary to law, had been cstablishcd by the United Kingdom, arc clearest proof of
the contempt of the present British Government
fol
the law and for their own stan&trds
of conduct.
British aggression, thcrcforo. is not ;I struggle for the
defence of the rule of law, ;IS they claim. but an uttcmpt
to rcstorc the law of empire.

II

-- .

84. The British Government has declared. in the
words of the Prime Minister herself. that it is necessary to punish those who seek territorial advantage
by force. It is thereby seeking to justify a priori the
escalation of military action against Argentina. If the
circumstances were not so tragic. such a declaration
would be amusing, since, if this principle were to be
applied. no citizen of the United Kingdom could go
anywhere in the world without exposing himself to
the punishment to which the head of the British Covernment refers. The British Empire extended its
colonial domination around the world through the
brutal, systematic and calculated use of force, committing innumerable acts against the dignity of peoples. How can we, in Latin America, not react to
these acts of aggressive folly by Her Britannic Majesty’s Government against the Argentine Republic!

91. The Council has been convened in connection
with un extremely dangerous situation which has
come about in the area of the Malvinas (Falkkrnd)
Islands. According to available reports. the United
Kingdom has begun large-scale military operations
which are leading to an exacerbation of the military
confrontation in the entire area of the South Atlantic.
This has already taken and continues to take hundreds
of human lives. Premeditated
bloodshed continues:
the massive use of force is creating a growing threat
to international
peace and security: and all this !is
causing the greatest concern to the international
community.
92. The Security Council, to which the Charter uf
the United Nations has entrusted the major responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, is duty-bound to consider the prevailinlg
situation and to take the necessary measures to restore
peace. In such circumstances, there is every justification for holding meetings of the Council.

85. The attitude of the United Kingdom seems to
be that, assured of impunity for its warlike behaviour
and shielded by the privilege of permanent membership of the Council, it is determined to prevent speedy
and effective efforts to achieve peace.

93.

At the meeting of the Council on 3 April
rnct~ting 1, we emphasized that the issue of the
Malvinas (Falkland) Islands is first and foremost part
and parcel of the problem of decolonization of territories seized at one time by colonial Powers the worl:d
over. The clear position of the United Nations i’n
favour of an unconditional end to the colonial status of
these islands has been reflected in the fact that this
territory was included by the General Assembly iin
the list of territories whose colonial regimes shou!ld
be terminated, in accordance with the Charter and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence 1.0
Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in GCIICM~
Assembly resolution I.514 (XV).
[23SOr/7

86. The Venezuelan Government has condemned
the British escalation and it condemns the new aggressions. The loss of innocent young lives, Argentine
and British, in the South Atlantic because of the
anachronistic political stubbornness of the present
Government of the United Kingdom must be halted.
87. We dispatched a mission of solidarity and peace
to Europe to inform various democratic countries in
the European Community of Venezuela’s position
and that of Latin America in this conflict. Our envoys
have glimpsed a marked shift in European public
opinion. which is noting with growing concern the
possible consequences of British aggression, which
bears all the signs of having been undertaken without
advice from any other nation. Europe refuses to continue unconditional support for the English adventure.

94. The issue of the Malvinas (Falkland) Islands
has been repeatedly dealt with in decisions of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. At the Sixth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Havana in September 1979.
the heads of State or Government,
in taking UP the
issue of the Malvinas Islands, “firmly reiterated their
support for the Argentine Republic’s right to the restttution of that territory and sovereignty over it and
requested that the negotiations
in this regard be
speeded up.“’

88. We are sure that the countries of the third world
and the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries are becoming aware of the repercussions
of this tragic adventure, which ignores the progress
of history and jeopardizes the peaceful efforts to
satisfy the most precious and justified aspirations
to live in peace and freedom.

95. This position in support of Argentine sov~cignty over the islands was reaffirmed in decisions of
the Co-Ordinating’Bureau
of the non-aligned countries,
adopted after the present conflict arose. Nevertheless.
the British Government has remained deuf to these
appeals. disregarded General Assembly decisions.
refrained from a peaceful settlcmcnt of the dispute
with Argentina on sovereignty over the Malvinirs
(Falkland) Islands and continued with all its encrBY
to hold on to their colonial status. This is the l’ol’t
c;msc of the armed conflict which has arisen in the
South Atlantic.

89. We must insist that too many hnvc died. OUI
consciences as indignant and horrified witncsscs
compel us to call for peace, immediate peace, an
immediate cease-fire. This is the least that the Council can demand, and it should have done so sooner.
90. Mr.
TROYANOVSKY
(Union
of Soviet
Socialist Republics) finfc,‘~,‘c’ttrtif~/~ ,fi+~/n /<//.s.vitr/l):
First of all. I should like to welcome the Ministers foi
Foreign Affairs who have come hcrc to take part in
the work of the Security Council.
I

8

--

Y’
96. On 3 April the Council adopted resolution SO2
(1982). The Soviet Union saw substantial drawbacks
in that resolution, which lay mainly in the fact that
there were no important anti-colonialist
aspects in it,
aspects which cannot fail to be borne in mind in a
final and just settlement of this conflict. Nevertheless, the resolution was adopted by the Council. inasmuch as many of the members felt that it might heIp
to bring about a settlement of the conflict. The resolution was also accepted by Argentina.
97. As the Secretary-General
stated yesterday in
the Council [236&h 177~~ti~g], at the first stage some
progress was achieved in bringing the positions of the
parties closer together. However, at a subsequent
stage the Government of the United Kingdom clearly
stiffened its position, resorted to the language of
ultimatums
and virtually
broke off negotiations,
openly resorting to the use of armed force in order to
restore the colonial status of the islands. These activities cast doubt on the sincerity of the statements made
by the British Government to the effect that it was
prepared to comply with the provisions of resolution 502 (1982).
98. The question then legitimately
arises: did these
statements, as weII as the very participation
of the
British Government in talks aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement, not serve simply as a diplomatic covei
for military preparations and for an expansion of the
scope of military operations?
99. As a result of the current large-scale invasion
of the Malvinns (Falkland) Islands by the armed forces
of Great Britain, the talks on settling the conflict have
been torpedoed. Subsequently,
the armed conflict
has intensified. Responsibility
for this is clearly borne
by the Government of the United Kingdom,
which
has embarked upon a military solution of the issue. It
is acting in the spirit of bygone colonial times, as if
we were living not at the end of the twentieth century
but in the times of Queen Victoria.

provides that it is precisely the Security Council
which may decide what measures not involving the
llSe Of armed force, and possibly including complctc
Or Partial interrUptiOn of economic relations, should
be employed to give effect to its decisions,
102. The imposition of economic sanctions against
Argentina by the United States and the IO mcmbcl
States of the European Community demonstrates
that the Governments of those countries, in violation
of the requirements of the Charter, have undertaken
unilateral acts without any authorization from the
Council. It is quite natural that that decision taken
by Western countries was interpreted by Argentina
and other Latin American States as an act of economic
aggression,
103. We cannot fail to note the fact that. when the
issue of imposing sanctions against South Africa arises.
we hear a flow of words to the effect that this is virtually impossible because of so-called existing legal
difficulties and that the imposition of sanctions would
involve virtually a change in constitutional law. and
SO on and so forth, whereas when the issue of imposing
sanctions against a developing country arises, then it
becomes clear that this can be done virtually in one
day and with a single stroke of the pen.
104. The NATO countries hastened to demonstrate
their solidarity with the United Kingdom. They are
clearly pleased by the fact that the United Kingdom
is attempting to “punish” a developing country.
Indeed, some observers have written that what is
involved in this case is not only putting Argentina in
its place but also showing other developing and nonaligned countries that the imperialist world still has an
arm long enough to stretch across 16,000 kilometcrs.
105. One trusts that not only the Latin American
countries but other developing countries as well will
draw the necessary conclusions from this dcmonstration of imperialist solidarity.
106. The military adventures at present embarked
by the British Government are nothing othei
than a recurrence of colonial wars. to which. it had
seemed, we were to return no more. However. the

upon

100. Hence, the energetic efforts of the SecretaryGeneral have unfortunately not been able to improve
matters. These efforts enjoyed the broad support of
the Council, including that of the Soviet Union.
101. It is quite clear that the Government
of the
United Kingdom would not have embarked upon
seeking a solution of the issue by armed force had
there not been agreement and direct support by the
United States. It should be noted that military activities were undertaken by the United Kingdom immediately after Washington openly declared its solidarity
with the policy chosen in London. Other members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Grganization
(NATO)
acted in the same spirit. The economic sanctions
imposed on IO April against Argentina by the Western
European countries are. among other things, in direct
contradiction
with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular, Article 41, which

prcscnt conflict shows that such wars have not yet been
expunged
from the policy of some Western States.

107. The Soviet Union favours the speedy adontion by the Council-and I emphasize “speedy”--of
i, cease-fire and a cessation of military operations in
order to put the conflict on the road to ~1 peWefUl
settlement.
We believe that the efforts of the Secret;~ry-Gene~c~l
at finding ways of overcoming tensions

in the South Atlantic by 21 peaceful SdLlth
to the
cc)nflict shcjuld be continued on the hSiS of ir Security
Council mandate.
108.

As president Brezhnev stated on 4 NW:

“If
they
arise dangerous
WmpliGltklnS
cClnflict situations
in the western hemisphere.

NId

it

is precisely because there are forces which are
attempting to retain or restore positions of domination and to impose a foreign yoke on peoples.

of his efforts and proposals throughout the mediation
process, as well as of the progress he had achieved
~~is-&r~is the original positions of the parties in dispute,
all within the framework of and in accordance with
the objectives of Council resolution SO2 (1982).

“They do not shrink from threats and pressure,
from blackmail or blockades, or from the use of
arms; nor do they stop at activities which hark back
to the time of colonial plunder.

116. The fact that the representatives of the Governments in dispute did turn to the negotiating table
for several weeks and that they did accept the approach
set forth in the Secretary-General’s
aide-mimoire
of
2 May constit.uted grounds for encouragement, which.
notwithstanding
subsequent events. did commit the
parties to pursue their efforts at a negotiated solution.

“Here, as in other parts of the globe, the Soviet
Union bases itself on its policy of principle: the
elimination of existing and the prevention of future
hotbeds of tension, the inadmissibility
of interference in the internal affairs of other States and peoples, and the settlement of disputed issues by peaceful means, around the negotiating table.”

117. According to the Secretary-General’s
report to
the Council, at the end of last week there was, in his
view, essential agreement on a broad range of issues,
covering the nature and duration of the arrangement,
the procedures for a cease-fire and a mutual withdrawal of forces, termination of exclusion zones and of
coercive economic measures, administration
of the
territory, and the basic outlines of a peaceful settlement
of the dispute.

109. The PRESIDENT
firzt~~~pr.cttrticlr?jbom ChiI~(JSO): The next speaker is the representative of
Mexico. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
110. Mr. MUNOZ
LED0 (Mexico) (irztcrprctation .fic>rn Spnnisl?): I wish to thank the members of
the Council for their invitation to my delegation in
response to the Mexican Government’s request to take
part in this debate on the Malvinas Islands and the
grave events that have occurred in the southern tip
of Latin America, leading to a breach of the peace
and dangerously threatening international security.

118. Based on these initial results, the negotiations
were further encouraged when, on I9 May, the Secretary-General submitted a new aide-mCmoire, highlighting those points on which no agreement had yet
been reached, The reactions of the parties to that aidemimoire led to a stalling in the dialogue, but nothing
justifies the resumption of hostilities.

I1 I, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on YOUI
assumption of the presidency of the Council and am
gratified that the consideration of this delicate issue is
taking place under your wise and impartial leadership.
We are certain that this meeting can lead to effective
and timely decisions that will put an end to the conflict
and promote a just and lasting solution to this longstanding dispute.

119. Whatever the obstacles in the path of the
reaching of agreement by States on disputed issues.
this new military escalation is unacceptable. It is in
blatant violation of Council resolution 502 ( 1982) and of
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

112. I should like also to welcome the participation
in this debate of the Foreign Ministers of Argentina,
Panama and Venezuela, Latin American countries with
which Mexico has had a long-standing, close relationship.

120. The Mexican Government
was distressed to
hear the news that British forces had begun military
operations in the Malvinas Islands, which resuhed in
a breaking off of the negotiations that were under WaY
in the United Nations. In those circumstances. it
yesterday issued a communiqu6
which reads. in substance, as follows: first, the Government of Mexico
regrets the continued use of force to settle this international dispute: secondly, it considers that there is
no legal basis for a Member of the United Nations
unilaterally to arrogate to itself the right to implement
a Security Council resolution without having received
a specific mandate to that end from the Council itself;
and thirdly, the Government of Mexico appeals once
again to the parties for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and for resumption of the search for a negotiated solution within the framework of the United
Nations.

I 13. We also welcome the presence here of the
Secretary-General,
who has spared no effort or risk
in the fulfilment of the essential mission of maintaining
the dialogue between the parties and of opening the
road to negotiations to restore peace.
114. The tireless dedication and lucidity of the
proposals submitted by the Secretary-General in the
course of his invaluable efforts have been unanimously
recognized by the international
community,
with
explicit thanks from the two countries directly involved
in the conflict. For its part, my Government has
instructed me to reiterate to you, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, our utmost respect and support.

121. The President of Mexico,
Mr. Jod
LGPez
Portillo. has stated time and again his support fol
the efforts made by the Secretary-General
and ‘.-is
expressed his confidence in the capacity of the United

115. Yesterday we listened to the balanced report
in which the Secretary-General [ihid.] gave an account
IO

-L

Nations to live up to its responsibilities
at such a
serious time, when war has reached the shores of
Latin America. He has emphasized that the United
Nations means all of us, all the peoples of the world,
and that we must work together so that the Organization is not left in isolation, devoid of our political
support.
I22. The hostilities taking place in the South Atlantic must be stopped, as must all kinds of threat or
coercion, which only tend to worsen the crisis in interregional terms. This conflict should not provoke a
resurgence of colonial attitudes and wars of domination, which we thought were things of the past. Let
us make sure that this crisis does not become a perverted and anachronistic version of the North-South
dialogue.
123. In no case are there grounds for invoking Article 51 of the Charter to justify the use of force, since
this would presuppose that the question of sovereignty
had been resolved in the eyes of all parties and this,
of course, is what caused the dispute in the first place.
It is up to the Security Council and the Security Council alone to take the necessary measures to maintain
or restore international peace and security.
124. The key difference between the modern international legal order, which stems from the Charter, and
those that went before is the existence of a system of
collective security in which the sole legitimate use of
force rests with the United Nations. Outside this
framework, any use offorce in relations between States
is illegal, and any war is unlawful.
125. This is the position which my Government has
taken with regard to all international
disputes. As
regards this dispute, it became clear on 6 April that
Mexico had supported in the United Nations and in
regional forums the validity of Argentina’s claim over
the Malvinas Islands, and that continues to be OUI
position. However, we would point out that States
must do their utmost to settle their disputes by peaceful means, and we reject the use of force to settle
this or any other conflict.
126. We said at that time that Mexico’s position was
based on a sincere Latin American spirit, since in OUI
region a large number of territorial conflicts are still
going on which, if they were not peacefully resolved,
could endanger peace in the continent and friendly
relations among the Latin American republics. We
stated at that time that the resolutions of the Security
Council must be heeded and we appealed to the parties to the dispute to begin negotiations to allow reason
and justice to prevail over military might.
127. Today, we reiterate this appeal and we reaffirm our essential solidarity with the fair claims of all
peoples and nations and in particular those of Latin
America, whose countries, like our own, have suffered
from the violation of their rights and from all forms
of colonial domination.

128. Everybody must accept, as the General Assembly recognized in resolution
1.514 (XV) and in many
other specific resolutions, that colonialism is a thing
of the past, All those involved in the process of its
elimination must avail themselves of the lessons of
history and bring to bear all their intelligence and
imagination to conclude this process at the least cost
to themselves and to international
security in order
to provide the basis for a new era of co-operation among
nations.
129. Only yesterday [iAid. l* the representatives of
Argentina and the United Kingdom stated here theit
willingness to continue
negotiating.
The Council
should make use of this offer and take into account
the result of the enormous efforts made up to now by
the Secretary-General in order to supplement and
reinforce resolution 502 ( 1982) and to specify a framework in which negotiations to end the conflict can take
place.
130. The Council should immediately take the steps
it deems appropriate to avoid a worsening of the
crisis and to halt the useless loss of lives which is
taking place. It should also encourage the negotiations which were under way and which have been
interrupted and keep this matter under consideration
until it is finally settled.
131. The Mexican Government
addresses a respectful but urgent appeal to the countries to the dispute
to end their military confrontation
and to return to
the path of peace in the conviction that no military
victory can serve to generate rights or, in the long
term, to improve their respective positions. We would
only be running the risk of seeing the conflict assume
unforeseeable proportions.
132. The PRESIDENT
(intop/.c~ltrtion
,fiwm C’hiThe next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

tzrsc):

ROA KOURI
(Cuba) (itllPr’l,r’l’ttrtict~~
In congratulating
you, Sir. on you1
assumption of the presidency of the Council during the
month of May, I should like to express my gratitude
to you and to the members of the Council for allowing
me to speak in the important
debate that is now taking
place on the situation in the Malvinas Islands. I feel
sure that your ability and impartiality will enable the
Council to arrive at a just solution, one to which ull
the Members of the United Nations, and the States of
Latin America in particular,
aspire.
133.

Mr.

,fiotn

Spmish):

134. Little more than u week ago. President Fidel
Castro addressed an urgent message to the heads of
State or Government
of the non-aligned countries
because of what he described as
“the real possibility that in the coming hours the
Government of Great Britain, with the support and

co-operation of the United States, will launch its
air and navnl forces in new, large-scale acts of
aggression against Argentina.

United Kingdom has persisted in mnintnining its colonial domination over that territory and has repeatedly
dragged its feet rather than enter into a serious negoti&g process that. in accordance with the principles
set forth in the Charter and in relevant United Nations
resolutions, would restore Argentine sovereignty over
the territory of the islands.

“A colonial war,” President Castro stated,
“which. because of its nature and evolution the
imperialist Powers are attempting to convert into a
lesson for all the countries of the third world that,
whatever their political or social regime. strive to
protect their sovereignty and territorial integrity. is
about to enter its most painful and criminal phase.”

119. Thot British obstinacy and prevurication--a
combination of imperialist haughtiness and ninotcenthcentury arrogance that so singularly characterizes the
present Government of the United Kingdom-finally
led to the aggression that today so poignantly affects
the world and is shattering peace and security in the
Americas.

135. The invasion of the Malvinns Islands by the
United Kingdom, with the unconcealed support of the
United States. has already begun. This shameful
episode seeks to re-enact the despoliation the British
Empire carried out in those same islands in 1833, when
it expelled the Argentine population and its government and, in a typical act of piracy, took possession
of that inalienable part of the territory of the Argentine
Republic.

140. That action means a flagrant violation of the
most basic principles of international
law. of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the terms of
Security Council resolution 502 (1982). which was
sponsored by the United Kingdom itself. It further
implies an attempt to return to the obsolete stage of
gunboat diplomacy and colonial methods that are
unacceptable in our era.

136. Since that long-ago date, the people of Argentina. with the support of the other peoples of OLII
America. have never ceased to claim their rights over
the Malvinas Islands. The international community,
as proved by the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly within the framework of the historic debate
on decolonization,
has unequivocally
pointed out
the colonial nature of that British despoliation.

141. At a time when in every part of the world
there is an increasing demand that there be no break
in the negotiating process with regard to the Malvinas, the British Government.
with the shameless
support of North American imperialism,
is seeking
to seize by force that which by law does not belong
to it. Cuba repudiates this intolerable aggression and
reiterates its solidarity with the Argentine people. who
are fighting to defend their sovereignty.

137. The Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Lima in
August 1975 was equally categorical. The Lima
declaration states:

142. As was stated in the I May declaration
Revolutionury Government of Cuba:

“The non-aligned countries. without prejudice
to ratifying the validity of the principle of selfdetermination
as a general principle for other territories, strongly support in the special and particular
cast of the Malvinas Islands, the .iust claim of the
Argentine Republic, and urge the United Kingdom
actively to continue the negotiations recommended
by the United Nations in order to restore the said
territory to Argentine sovereignty and thus put iIn
end to that illegal situation which still persists in the
southern part of the American continent.“?

of the

“The total hypocrisy of the so-called inter-Americnn system forged by the United States imperialists
to serve their own interests is revealed now when,
after a direct attack of which a country of Latin
America is the victim, the North American Government *joins the aggressors and offers them its unrestricted military and political support. The true
nature of the Inter-American
Treaty of Rcciprocnl
Assistance is thus laid bare and. once again. the
peoples of Latin America and the Carribbeun are
made aware of who their historical enemy is.”

That firm position of principle taken by the members
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries hits been
ratified time and time again: at the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana in September 1979. and in
successive ministerial meetings and meetings of the
Co-ordinating Bureau held at New Delhi and in New
York.

143. This is the hour of Latin American solidarity.
The cause of the Malvinas is the cause of the Argcntine people and, therefore, the cause of Latin Ameriw
irnd of the Caribbean.
144. It is necessary to halt aggression and to impose
the rult of law. It is the duty of all peoples of the
world to support Argentina in its fight for sovereignty
against the colonial war that those who. in recent
ccnturics. tasted the bitterness of defeat in their
repeated attempts to trample underfoot the homeland
of San Marten arc now trying to force upon it.

138. Over those years-and with total contempt for
the opinion of Member States, for United Nutions
resolutions and for the explicit will of the Argentine
Government
to solve the question of the Malvinas
Islands through negotiations-the
Government of the
I2

145. As President Fidel Castro stated in his message to the heads of State or Government of the nonaligned countries:
“It is in the interest of the defence of each and
every one of our countries, and above all of humanitarian solidarity with the people of Argentina and
the English soldiers being sent into combat, that we
raise our voice in the strongest terms to condemn
the continued hostilities and that we renew OUI
appeal that a solution to the conflict be found, a
negotiated political solution that will respect the
sovereign rights of Argentina.”
146. My Government profoundly regrets that the
negotiations undertaken by the Secretary-General with
the parties to the conflict were broken off by the United
Kin.gdom. We consider that the peace efforts of the
Secretary-General
contain the key elements for a
peaceful solution.
147. The grave situation, with the unfortunate
of young, valuable lives, demands an immediate
to the violence.

loss
halt

1451. Britain’s unilateral action, under the pretext
of carrying out resolution 502 (l982), in fact violates
that resolution’s terms: it seriously threatens the peace
and security of the region and is a prelude to an escalation
of the conflict, with unforeseeable consequences.
150. The economic sanctions imposed-also
unilaterally-against
Argentina by the members of the
European Community constitute a serious precedent.
They are not provided for in the Charter and thus lack
any vestige of legality.

152, The PRESIDENT
(inrc~p~c~t~ltioir ,fhm
c’ki11c.s~~):The next speaker is the representative of Bolivia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
ORTIZ

SANZ

155. We regret to have to make further remarks now
condemning the ominous course of warlike events
which have worsened the situation, damaging the
prospects for a peaceful negotiated
solution.

157. The sinking of that vessel, which was not
engaged in a military action. caused the loss of hundreds of Argentine lives in the waters of the South
Atlantic, not far from Amet-ican soil, but many thousands of kilometres from the seat of the British Crown.
Attacks continued against Puerto Argentino and Puerto
Darwin, and against the unarmed ship A!fi;r.c~ Sohrrrl
and the fishing boat Nrr~-j-lrl. The nggression is now
culminating
in landings and massive invasion operations.

I5 I. It is now for the Council to speak. The peoples of Latin America trust that, in accordance with
its mandate under the Charter. the United Nations
will cause reason, justice and the rule of law to prevail.

1.5’3. Mr.

154. On a previous occasion in this very chamber
[2.%%h nwrJting), Bolivia expressed its opinion on the
problem of the Malvinas IsIands, an opinion which
can be summed up in two points: unconditional support for the cause of the restoration
of the Argentine
Republic’s sovereignty over those islands, which are
a legitimate part of its tert-itory.
and rejection of the
use of force as a way of seeking a solution to international disputes. We reiterate both of those points.

1.56. On 3 April, resolution 502 (1982) was adopted;
it called for a cessation of hostilities and a withdrawal
uf Argentine forces and urged the Governments to seek
a diplomatic
solution to their differences. Insisting
solely on the withdrawal of the Argentine forces, but
contravening the primary provision which demanded
a cessation of hostilities, and thereby closing the path
of negotiations, the Government
of the United Kingdom announced that a powerful fleet-which
included
two aircraft carriers and the most modern and sophisticated weaponry-would
immediately
set sail to
recapture the Malvinas Islands.
The attack was
carried out through the occupation
of South Georgia
Island, the bombardment of the main airport of the
islands and many other warlike actions. The Rritish
navy-which in other circumstances took part honourably, in those same South Atlantic waters, in military
engagements which contributed
to the salvation of
the world from the threat of fascism-sailed
this time
nearly from one pole to the other to keep a less glorious
engagement: to attack with n nuclear submarine and
sink an Argentine vessel which was located outside
the 200-mile zone of exclusion
proclaimed by the
London Government itself.

148. Cuba, which supports the full implementation of Council resolution SO2 (1982) in all its parts
-d:espite its obvious limitations regarding the colonial
nature of the problem-considers
that it is now the
obligation
of the Council to take effective measures
airried at putting an end to the hostilities and to issue
a formal mandate to the Secretary-General to resume
his efforts with the Governments of the United Kingdom and Argentina, so as to achieve a solution that is
honourable
and lasting and respects the sovereign
rights of the Argentine Republic.

.fi-r.w

other members of the Council for having invited me to
make a statement. I congratulate
you, Sir, on the
calm and wisdom with which you have carried out
the duties of the presidency of the Council in the present difficult circumstances.

158. There is GIWX
fc>r concern in those facts
because of the disproportionate
use of force by a firstrank world Power against n developing republic whose
military capacity is limited.
There is cause for concern in that nn old colonial Power. with the co-oper-

(Bolivia) fint~Irp,.Pt~rtio,l
I thank you and the

Spr~tu’.vh): Mr. President,

I3

163. The Argentine Republic is u cultured and
civilized country of which all Latin Americans are
proud, It is the land of thinkers and statesmen. of
artists and experts, of professionals,
workmen and
farmers, It is the land of Alberdi and Sarmiento, of
Ricardo Rojas and Jorge Luis Borges, of Bernard0
Houssay and Rail1 Prebish. It is a generous country
which since its foundation has opened its arms like a
mother to take to its breast Frenchmen,
Belgians.
Dutchmen, Scandinavians,
who had fled from the
conflicts and problems of the old world in search of
a new land. It welcomed Spaniards and Italians who,
stricken by poverty at home, emigrated to America,
and the English themselves, who became prosperous
farmers and ranchers. Argentina offered them all
refuge, a new life. an Argentine name and all the
prospects of a future in America. It is against that land
that Europe has now decreed its economic sanctions.
What a world we are living in!

ation of other Powers, could sail from near the Arctic
Circle to Tierra de1 Fuego, evoking the punitive
expeditions of the colonial era. There is cause for
concern in that the British aggression, perpetrated with
the solidarity of Europe-which
imposed economic
sanctions against the Argentine Republic-is
directed
against a nation intimately linked with the history,
the destiny, the law and the soil of the American continent. There is cause for concern, too, in that the
country engaging in this extravagant use of military
power to defend a colonial enclave is a permanent
member of the Security Council, charged by the Charter of the United Nations with responsibility
for
maintaining
or restoring international
peace and
security.
159. There can be no doubt that the course of
events, their inter-continental
characteristics,
the
potential collapse of major regional agreements and
the lack of any progress towards peace and a permanent solution to the problem create, for the members
of the Council, and especially for the permanent
members, the duty to act right now and effectively,
not just to adopt resolutions in favour of or against
anyone, but to direct the world community and the
parties to the conflict towards that lofty duty: the
preservation of world peace.

164. The Bolivian
Government
appeals, in this
lofty setting, for peace; it appeals to the civilized
conscience of the European peoples-including
those
of the United Kingdom-who
in the past contributed
positively to the formation of the cultural make-up
of a young America and who today, because of the
unacceptable stubborn determination
to maintain a
colonial enclave, are on the point of causing a grave
and lasting breach in relations between Europe and
America.

160. The Secretary-General
informed
us yesterday [236&h nzcrtin,~] of his initiatives and efforts
to find a negotiated, balanced solution. We who have
heard the representative of Argentina and who are
mindful of the course of events are sure that any
peace effort will be doomed to failure as long as the
United Kingdom persists in its equivocal stand.

165. The time has come to end this senseless
conflict, in which Great Britain’s imperial hankerings
threaten to separate permanently
a Europe and an
America which up to now have lived in peace, cooperation and mutual benefit.

161. Despite the efforts of the Secretary-General,
his professional skill and his impeccable impartiality,
the situation has become worse. The prospects for a
peaceful settlement seem to be receding. In the last
few hours rivers of blood have been shed by both
sides. The news of the escalation of the conflict
should move the world and mobilize all peoples in a
supreme effort for peace, On the one hand there is
Argentina, with its right to full sovereignty over the
islands, and alongside it the whole Latin American
continent, outraged by this extra-continental
aggression striking at its beaches. On the other hand stands
the United Kingdom, with the European Community,
acting like a traditional colonial regional organism
against our America, which we hope can still be called
the continent of hope.

166. Why, after striking its flag in India and in so
many former colonies in Africa, is the London Government persisting in seeking sovereignty over some
Argentine islands at the far ends of the earth?
167. We listened with amazement also to the fallacious argument that Argentine forces must be withdrawn and that it is not possible to recognize Argentine
sovereignty over the Malvinas “because aggression
cannot be rewarded”. We agree: no aggression must
be rewarded, but let us recall that the first act of
aggression was committed by Great Britain against
Argentina in January 1833, and that is the real aggression, the effects of which must now be corrected a
century and a half later. It is the Argentine people
that at this bitter moment in history is exercising true
“self-defence”,

162. We listened
with amazement
to certain
British sources, in a new attack on America’s respectability, referring to the concept of “Argentine machismo’ ’ . We regret to have to observe that the constant
escalation of preparations and warlike actions by
Great Britain smack far more of “machismo”,
since,
in order to defend an internal political position, it is
striking international attitudes which do no credit to
its history.

168. The PRESIDENT
(intc/prctc/tion
nr.sc): The next speaker is the Minister
Affairs of Panama, Mr. Jorge Illueca.

,fbom

c’hi-

for Foreign

169. Mr.
ILLUECA
(Panama)
(inlrr.prrftrfir,n
from Spc/ni.vh): I should first like to greet you most
cordially, Mr. President. We are glad that a stntesI4

nltln of Your stature, who represents one of the major
Powers of the world, is guiding these debates, to the
s~~~i~f~~~tiOll
Of all and in a manner consistent wjth the
idCd!i of the United Nations.

have been strengthened with the passage of time by
the Asian, African and Arab nations and by some
European nations which are in harmony wjth the
interests of the third world, Those anti-colonialist
resolutions proclaim in a clear-cut way, without
ambiguity. that peoples that are subject to colonial
0PPreSSiOn
may Use all means available to them in
order to put an end to that colonial situation.

170, 1 should like also to greet your predecessor
Mr+ Kumanda wit Kamanda, of Zaire, who preside;
over the deliberations of the Council last month,
171. PWlma is particularly pleased at the presence
of two Latin American Foreign Ministers, representing
two countries with a great Latin American history
which we respect, admire and esteem, I am referring
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina,
Mr. Nicnnor Costa M@ndez. and the Minister for
Foreign
Affairs of Venezuela,
Mr. Jose Albert0
Zambrano. They represent two nations whose peoPIGS shed their own blood in the days of the struggle
for independence in order to liberate other peoples.

177. It was for that reason that my country objected
to resolution 502 ( 1982), adopted by the Council on
3 April. On that occasion, we made a very clear
statement that the intransigent anti-historical attitude
of the United Kingdom was going to cause great problems, tribulations, conflicts and painful situations fol
the countries represented in the Council, the Western
Powers and mankind at large, including the Socialist
an’s Eastern Powers, because this is not a problem
that is confined to Latin America and Argentina but
rather one which is bringing the world to the brink
of a conflagration.
It is time to appeal for reflection,
prudence and calm so that there will be no more of
these punitive expeditions in which two thirds of a
British naval fleet-by
now I should say it is four
fifths of its fleet-is dispatched, to attempt to punish.
humiliate and confront Argentina, disregarding the fact
that there is a Latin American continent that has historical and cultural links and that an affront or threat
to Argentina is an affront and threat to the dignity.
image, rights and aspirations of all Latin American
peoples.

172. Behind them is the image of Simtin Bolivar and
of JOSE de San Martin and the ideal of the unification
of Lutin America as reflected in the Panama Congress
of 1826. an endeavour not yet completed but about
to be concluded. I refer to this because we truly do
have a colonial question before us, as we stated at the
Council’s meeting of 3 April [2.?SOth mWin,g].
173. At that meeting I expressed my own country’s
concern at the threat represented by the colonial
presence of an extra-continental
Power in Latin American territory. On 3 April there had been no breach
of the peace, there had been no outbreak of hostilities.
When the Government of Argentina carried out the
occupation of the archipelago which rightfully belongs
to it, it did so with great respect for peace and for
individual safety which reflected great care for human
life, and it caused no personal harm to any British
soldier or to any civilian.

178. An attempt has been made to conceal and cloud
the colonial problem, It is regrettable that countries
that call themselves civilized view Latin American
peoples merely in terms of their Governments, of
particular rkgimes, regardless of their nature. There
are peoples and nations with a history and a social
structure that have permanent values. values that
cannot be obfuscated, that are not negotiable. are not
on the market, cannot be bargained away. Those
are the values of our peoples and perhaps that is why
the Anglo-Saxons do not understand Latin Americans. Those values of our peoples cannot be subjected or violated, because that would cause blood
and tears for mankind. There are many such cases in
the history of mankind. It will be seen that Latin
America, together with Argentina, is right in this case
and that the Security Council. and particularly the
countries represented here, must look at the roots of
this problem, which are purely and Simply COhlid.

174. It was claimed that that action by Argentina
violated the legal order, but the opinion of Panama and
the opinion of the General Assembly in many resolutions is that the State that was committing a breach of
the peace was the State which does not belong to that
continent, which did not comply with the United Nations resolutions on decolonization and which was disregarding Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
We have proclaimed here an anti-colonial law
17s.
which has not been codified but which appears in
many resolutions and which the colonial and neocolonialist
Powers naturally do not want to see codified. Therefore, peoples that want to maintain their
territorial
integrity, freedom and independence must
lay claim to their anti-colonial rights as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and in nufm?rous resolutions.

179. Resolution 502 (1982), in spite of our opposition, contained three elements. One was a cessation
of hostilities which at that time did not exist, and that
is why we had stated that the reSdUtiOn Ws ill0dc:~l.
Those hostilities have now occurred with only one
party to blame, one aggressor, with only one Government acting in an irrational and disrespectful way *
disrespectful
of the United Nations system and the
system of contemporary civilization. It is lamentable
to see in the newspapers that the leaders of the UnIted

176. Those resolutions emerged as Latin American
initiatives at the time when Latin America constituted
the strongest regional group of the United Nations and
15

Kingdom are saying that “civilized peoples should be
grateful” for its action against Argentina. This is a
reflection of colonial thinking-to
speak in this day
and age of civilized peoples implies that there are
uncivilized peoples. Who is civilized and who is not?
Is the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom civilized
when she tells the Chairman of the BBC in London that
British patriotism has to be defended and has to be
told that the media exist not to defend patriotism but
to provide the facts and that an Argentine widow
deserves as much pity as a British widow?

Council, so this is an affront to the Council. We cannot
be indifferent to this. Is there order, or is there not?
Does the Charter exist or not? Must it be respected
or not?
184. But that is not the only thing. That maritime
exclusion zone runs counter to the zone of geographical security enshrined in article 4 of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance. So it can
clearly be seen that this is not a crisis that we are
inventing: it is a crisis that was designed by the United
Kingdom,
which is disregarding
the entire interAmerican system. 1 am mentioning this here because
the situation must be considered in depth and a solution must be found before more regrettable extremes
are reached, because we are all aware of the loss of
life, the damage to property and the very profound
spiritual injury done to all the Latin American peoples,

180. We are considering here an infamous loss of
life which has no reason, no possible explanation, in
a civilized world-to
use her own words- a world
which has reached this stage of development.
181. That same resolution talked about negotiations. It was not a matter of cessation of hostilities,
because unlawful action was taken by the nation that
proposed this. We have to go back to General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX), which called on Argentina and the United Kingdom to “proceed . . . with
the negotiations”,
To discuss what? The decolonization of the Malvinas. Why with Argentina? Because
Argentina’s claim was proper in our opinion, and the
United Kingdom’s was not. And the Assembly stated
that account should be taken of the interests of the
inhabitants, not the rights of the inhabitants. There
is no right to self-determination in this case, and you
should not be surprised to hear me say that there is
no right to self-determination in this case, because the
right to self-determination
is for the oppressed, not
for the oppressors. The 1,800 inhabitants of those
islands are all dependants of a British colonial company with headquarters in London, which has some
700,000 sheep that are grazing in the Malvinas, and it
would really be making a mockery of the right to selfdetermination
if we were to say that the future of the
islands must be decided by the employees of a colonial
company who are of the same nationality as the
oppressor nation.

185. But the violations of resolution 502 (1982) do
not stop there. The Venezuelan Foreign Minister.
in an outstanding
and most lucid way. described
those violations. One of the most disdainful acts has
been committed because a major maritime Power, the
United Kingdom-which
should honour the propel
rules, even if they are arbitrary-is
taking action
which the President of the Republic of Panama,
Mr. Aristides Royo, has quite rightly described as a
deceitful action. Why deceitful? Because the cruise1
Gotc~rtrl Brlgrn~~o. which was torpedoed and sunk by
one of the nuclear submarines belonging to the United
Kingdom, was outside that maritime exclusion zone.
186. If we follow the logic of that civilized people
-to use its own words-well
then, in a civilized way
England decided that, so as not to violate its own zone.
the zone should be extended to within I2 miles of
Argentine continental territory. Does that exonerate
England. or does it mean that England wanted freedom
to act, to take justice into its own hands by might.
to gain time so that the troops arriving in a luxury
liner would manage to reach the Malvinas archipelago
and Argentine territory‘?

182. This is the situation. Thus, it was not a simple
question, in spite of the fact that that resolution was
prepared by those who later were going to violate it.
But in any event we do have those two elements
which must be considered.

187. The zone of war is being extended, and it is
being extended without any declaration of war, in the
knowledge that Argentina has a territorial
sea of
200 miles. We, the developing countries, have greatly
suffered from the actions of maritime Powers. Innocent passage is requested of us. At the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea we had
great difficulties because of that obsession to keep the
seas open. How many of those maritime
Powers
-above all, the European Powers-have
protested ru’
condemned this irrational, unreasonable act on the
part of the United Kingdom’? I know of only one-the
Soviet Union. It must be said that the Soviet Union
has stated that it cannot in any way accept the type of
decision taken by the United Kingdom. But if there
is any other such Power, I think it would be very
helpful if it were to state here in the Council that it
does not accept that type of decision taken unilater-

183. The United Kingdom has set itself up as the
executor of that resolution, but in order to violate it,
and what are those violations? On 3 April we stated
here that the United Kingdom, with its obduracy in
this matter, was going to provoke a crisis in the interAmerican system. We stated this before the crisis
ever took place, but now the crisis has occurred, and
why has it occurred? The United Kingdom has decreed
a maritime exclusion zone extending 200 miles from the
Malvinas archipelago. That could only be done by the
Security Council. We need only read Articles 39. 41
and 42 of the Charter of the United Nations to see
that such a thing can only be done by the Security
16

itlly by the United Kingdom, which feels itself very
powerful, and we are going to see why.
188. The Venezuelan Foreign Minister, Mr, Zambrano Velasco. has already referred to the nuclear
or nuclear-powered
submarines which are being
used for military purposes; in our view, that is in
violation of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
M’eapons in Latin America (Treaty of TlateloEco):
Prohibited
explosives have also been used, such as
certain types of bombs. that really constitute a crime
against humanity.
189.

We have seen photographs.

It has been said

would be extremely pleased if the United Kingdom,
even if by force. were to maintain control over the
Malvinas archipelago, given the fact that it is in the
South Atlantic and includes South Georgia and the
South Sandwich islands, which are near Antarctica.
But is it possible to consider whether Argentine sovereignty affects the interests of any other country?
Argentina has a legitimate right to sovereignty ovet
those islands and to exercise its full authority there,
Of course, in the framework of world relations it is fol
Argentina to assume its responsibilities,
but this is a
matter that falls under Argentine sovereignty.
193. It cannot be claimed that we have here a conflict between countries that belong to strategic or military alliances. But, unfortunately,
we have found
that in this problem of the Malvinas we now have
problems of conflict of the NATO and Rio Treaty
alliances. The Rio Treaty has proved ineffective and
Latin America lacks a system of collective security.
A distinguished United States admiral declared, in
statements that were published in the press, that the
United States was not obliged to help the United
Kingdom because the NATO Treaty applied north of
the equator and did not include the Malvinas, but
that Argentina can invoke the Rio Treaty.

thmt it is not true, but if it is not true, I think it would

be good to have repeated here in the Council that
thlat type of device is not being used and will not be
used, that nuclear weapons are not being used and
will not be used. But we have not seen any great haste
tcr make that kind of pledge.
190. The chain of violations of resolution 502 ( 1982)
by the United Kingdom has created a crisis in the
United Nations system of security, a crisis which
worsened when other members of the European Commlunity, also in violation of the clear provisions of the
Charter that it is for the Security Council alone to
decide on taking such action, decided to impose
sanctions against Argentina.

194. We should not like to see this matter handled
from a strategic standpoint. We believe that we must
go back to its essential roots, that is, its colonial
nature, I say that we do not want it handled that way
because clearly, in view of the fact that the United
Kingdom is concentrating all its naval forces in the
South Atlantic to commit this aggression against
Argentina. if another NATO country replaces its tanks
and planes to render service in,NATO,
that is just an
exchange of colours or positions. In other words.
you keep your English-type planes here and we keep
English planes with a flag that could be that of the
United States, France or any other country, and then,
obviously, we would have a State member of the Rio
Treaty, with commitments in NATO. affecting another
State member of the Rio Treaty in Latin American
territory.

19 1. That crisis has now been reflected in the interAmerican
security system. We must look at this
calmly and give it profound thought. In 1947 the
American States signed the Inter-American
Treaty of
Reciprocal
Assistance-the
Rio Treaty. That treaty
stipulates that an attack. particularly one by an extraccjntinental Power, against a signatory State is to be
considered an attack against all the other States parties
to the Treaty. Pursuant to the Treaty, during the first
week of this month a meeting was held in Washington
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the countries
parties to the Rio Treaty, An historic event occurred.
The countries gathered there recognized Argentine
sovereignty
over the Malvinas. They decided t’o
make collective representation to the Security Council and to the parties involved. They also requested
a cessation of hostilities. Seventeen countries voted
in favour of that decision and only four abstained.
But the Treaty proved ineffective in this connection,
although it envisages sanctions against the aggressor,
measures to support the country against which a
violation is directed and measures for the collective
security of the Rio Treaty countries.

1%. There is growing resentment in Latin America
against the United Kingdom and against all the nations that are lending themselves to the United Kingdom’s aggression against Argentina, and this must be
put on record, Hence we consider that the root of the
problem is colonial, that the United Kingdom is against
the legal order of the United Nations, that in attempting
to maintain its anachronistic colonial presence it is
against the contemporary spirit, against the process
of
change which must take place in the Malvinas. and
in Gibraltar also, where the United Kingdom presence
is as anachronistic and undesirable as it is in the Malvinas. Indeed, it is offensive to all of US with an
Ibero-American conscience, and this is something that
must bc considered by the Council and by the other
Members of the United Nations. above all. the pc~plc
of the United Kingdom. who must rcalizc that at the

1!32. Why has it not been possible to apply the
Treaty? A strategic problem arises. The question of
the Malvinas invites serious reflection because, in
addition to its being a colonial question-which
is the
r<)ot of the problem-other
considerations are involved
which are not ideological but involve strategic interests. The major Powers are interested in the South
Atlantic sea routes. The NATO countries, of course,
I7

close of the twentieth century these colonial enclaves
have no jllstification;
they are inadmissible, reprehensible and repudiated by the world conscience.

Galtieri, who also expressed the desire that the Secretary-General continue his efforts.
201. As I understand it. the Council met this past
Wednesday in an informal meeting and, as also reported in the press, on the basis of that background
information decided to allow the Secretary-General
an additional few days in which to pursue his peacemaking efforts, efforts which. I repeat, we all commend and fully support, Indeed, we only wish he could
be given a mandate to complete those efforts successfully, with, of course, the co-operation
of the parties
concerned. That was on Wednesday of this week.

196. The Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries
has declared its support for the Argentine claim.
Although the Group of 77 is a political group, economic sanctions caused it to be concerned about these
issues. Hence its representatives in various capitals
have declared their support for Argentina and their
opposition
to sanctions. We therefore believe that
the Council should find a way of reaching some type
of decision or agreement that would effectively bring
about a cessation of hostilities, a separation of forces
and should seek the withdrawal of that colonial presence, thereby opening the way for negotiations.

199. The intensive negotiations earlier this week
here at United Nations Headquarters, both in the
offices of the Secretary-General and at his residence,
gave us grounds for hope. One of the participants in
them was Mr. Enrique Ros, whom we all know and
whose human and professional qualities need no
additional mention by me. Also present was the distinguished representative of the United Kingdom. Sit
Anthony Parsons, who also enjoys our respect because
we know he possesses excellent qualities. At the same
time, we are aware that he is subject to instructions
which at times, it is said, are ironclad, even though
we wish they were more human.

202. The Council, as everyone knows, had agreed
to give the Secretary-General
a few days more to
continue his efforts. However.
the rebuff to the
Council came not from Argentina but from the othet
side of the Atlantic, because on the following day to
Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom
appeared
before the House of Commons to say that negotiations were leading nowhere and had broken down.
What caused that? The United Kingdom
had made
some proposals and issued an ultimatum
to Argentina.
That also was published. And if the version that I am
stating here is inaccurate, may I be corrected. It was
indicated that if Argentina failed to accept those proposals as put forward, the United Kingdom,
which had
been involved in a process of prolonging those talks in
order to prevent specific agreement,
was going, as
indeed it subsequently did, to begin an escalation. an
escalation which is taking place right now. That. of
course, leaves the Council in the position of being
slighted. I believe that, by its intransigence,
the
United Kingdom is snubbing the Council and all its
members. As I stressed in the Council on 3 April
[ihid.] after the adoption of resolution
SO2 ( 1982). a
punitive expedition had been mounted, and the resolution should in no way be understood as authorizing
the United Kingdom to use force. I said that, because
a British expeditionary force was advancing towards
the South Atlantic, a force of overwhelming
military
capability. No one here objected to the interpretation
made by Panama that resolution 302 (1982) in no way
authorized the use of force by the United Kingdom.
Yet it has resorted to force and is now engaged in an
escalation of the use of force, to the detriment of the
Argentine nation and of the peoples of Latin America.

200. Now, just when the Secretary-General’s efforts
seemed headed for success and the Council had been
convened, the Council began to find itself in what
I believe to be a very difficult position, When the
rumour WCS circulated that the negotiations, as reported throughout the world press, had broken down,
the Secretary-General
communicated personally with
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mrs. Thatcher. According to press reports, Mrs. Thatcher
had made positive signs and asked the Secretary-Genera1 to continue his efforts. Similarly, the Secrct;lryGeneral contacted the President of Argentina, Genera]

203. It has been stated in England that civilized
peoples should be grateful to England for this opprcssive. aggressive, warlike. unlawful
action against
Argentina. What we must say is that Latin Amcricnn
people are grateful to Argentina; that we are grntcful
to it for its sacrifices: that the Argentine people have
behaved nobly. as they did in the days of emuncipation to liberate other peoples, as Vcnczucln did with
other pooplcs in all the latitudes of America. This is
now moving the Latin American conscicncc towards
the reaffirmation
of its own ctr]tura]. politic:11 itnd
economic vnlucs.

197. Indeed, as was stated by the Inter-American
Juridical Committee, what we have to negotiate is the
withdrawal of the United Kingdom. There is nothing
else to be negotiated. And it must be negotiated so
that, in the most orderly. peaceful way possible, we
can restore the legal order of the United Nations, which
is completely anti-colonial.
198. The efforts of the Secretary-General
are to
be commended.
Those efforts deserve the support
expressed by the Head of State of Panama, as well as
the support of all members of the Council. Thus far,
however. those efforts have been unsuccessful because
of the intransigence of the United Kingdom. The
way in which this matter has been handled by the
United Kingdom leaves a very bitter taste indeed
because. as events have unfolded, 1 think the very
position of the Council has been affected,

18

LIBRARY
’

2104. I wish to conclude by stating that the Council
nlust take clear and categorical action for the cessation of hostilities. But, at the same time, I should like
to tell the men and women of Argentina, the mothers
and sisters who have lost brothers, sons or fathers
that all this sacrifice will not be in vain; that this bloodslhed, grief and tragedy will lead to a new Latin America, a united, worthy, active Latin America with a
greater awareness of the role it must play so that peace
and justice may prevail in the world.

international
peace and security and justice are not
endangered. To resort to force in order to claim what
is disputed or to seize what is considered sovereign,
or to impose on a community a rCgime which it considers foreign has serious consequences for the rule
of international
law and for the conduct of orderly
relations between States. Abrogation of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes can lead
only to chaos, the law of the jungle and the dimming
of values we hold dear in civilization.

2105. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpr~ttrtion ,fiwm ChiI~~‘.so): The next speaker is the representative
of
Canada. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement,

211. As we forecast in April and as events show so
clearly, tragedy and suffering are the inevitable results
when a nation fails to abide by the principles set out in
the Charter and employs force to extend unilaterally
its national claims. And we cannot forget that Argentina initiated the hostilities in occupying the islands
unilaterally.

2106. Mr.

PELLETIER
(Canada): I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. It is a difficult
and challenging assignment which has been thrust
upon you.

212. We had earnestly hoped that Argentina would
abide by the provisions of resolution 502 (1982), which
the Secretary-General
has stated provided the basis
for the search for a peaceful resolution of the dispute
in question. Paragraph 2 of that resolution demanded
an immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces from
the islands. This has not taken place. Canada has
thus been compelled to impose certain economic
sanctions against that country. We did this with great
regret, because Canada greatly values its friendly
relations with Argentina, More important, however.
we believe that respect for the rule of law throughout
the world, as embodied in the Charter, is fundamental
in today’s society and must take precedence.

It is with the deepest regret that my delegation has felt obliged to request the permission of the
Council members to address them once again on the
question of the Falkland Islands. My regret is profound because my speaking today is a consequence of
failure, the failure of one party to the dispute to adhere
to the provisions of a decision taken by the Council
on 3 April. It is also a consequence of the sad lack
of success of the courageous and persistent efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General to seek grounds
on which to implement Council resolution 502 (1982)
and to establish a framework for direct negotiations
bjetween Argentina and the United Kingdom to resolve
their differences in this dispute.
207.

213. The tragic consequences of the past several
days have been the inevitable result. This terrible
reality has now begun to register, and public opinion
in all our countries is demanding an end to violence
and bloodshed and the needless loss of life and destruction of property, It must now be more clear than ever
before that a negotiated solution to the problem is the
only civilized course of action. Council resolution 502
(1982), calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
coupled with an immediate withdrawal from the islands
of all Argentine forces, provides the basis for seeking
a diplomatic settlement.

208.

My delegation has listened to the debate with
attentiveness, There have been several points
n-bade which, in my view, tend to depart from the
central issues of principle of which the Council is
seized. I should like, therefore, to address the key
plaints on which, in the view of my delegation, the
Council should focus its attention before any decision
is’ taken on the question at hand.
glreat

209.
When I participated on 2 April last in the Council debate on the Falkland question [23&r/z ~nretirz,~],
I communicated
the deep sense of shock of the Canadian Government and people that one of the States
Members of the United Nations, a country with which
Canada has traditionally
enjoyed friendly relations,
slhould resort to the use of armed force in order to
resolve a dispute, not only in fundamental violation of
the Charter of the United Nations but also at a time
when bilateral negotiations were being conducted in a
clivilized spirit with another Member of the United
hlations.

214. Canada has not made any judgement on the
substance of this question, which is the conflicting
claims to the sovereignty of the islands. Canada has
always maintained that this a matter to be settled by
negotiation between the parties directly concerned,
due regard being paid to the wishes of the islanders
themselves. How tragic it is that great suffering must
be endured, families separated, blood spilled and lives
lost because of a dispute whose settlement should and
could still be reached by peaceful means.
215. My Government has been greatly heartened
by the courageous efforts over the past days of the
Secretary-General,
who, taking resolution 502 (1982)
as the basis of his work, attempted persistently to

2 10. Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter is quite
explicit
concerning the requirement for Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means so that
I9

llllllll

nomic and political relations with our Latin neighbours. We not only care about this hemisphere, we
are part of this hemisphere, and we share many of the
aspirations. goals and dreams of all nations of the
Americas. Our own culture and society are deeply
influenced by a growing Hispanic population. We can
never turn our backs on or be insensitive to hemispheric goals and aspirations that we ourselves hnve
promoted and defended.

narrow further the differences separating the two
sides. We applaud his initiative. We admire his skill
and that of his staff, and we sorrow at his set-back.
We have told him that as a concerned member of the
world community as well as of the hemisphere, one
that has ties of history and geography with both parties to the dispute, the Government of Canada stands
ready to facilitate negotiations or to assist in the
implementation
of any agreed settlement if the parties
agree there is a useful role for Canada to play. The
Canadian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has
reiterated to the Foreign Ministers of Argentina and
the United Kingdom Canada’s willingness to cooperate in achieving a lasting, peaceful settlement.

221. That is why the United States tried so hard
to avoid the conflict on the Falklands,
why we are
hoping so intensely to reduce and isolate it and why
we are eager and ready to back any realistic diplomatic
initiative that will put a just end to it. And we especially mean to stay in close touch with our Latin neighbours while efforts are made to solve this tragic conflict in order to restore peace with honour so that once
again we can concentrate our efforts on the resolution of our problems in the hemisphere. The quicker
we put this tragic conflict behind us, the quicker we
can begin building our future. And there. as always.
Latin America will find how deeply the United States
is committed to the cause of peace and prosperity in
our hemisphere.

2 16. The people of Canada have watched the
escalation of violence with growing concern, and they
will applaud and support any and all efforts that lead
to a peuccful settlement. But that must be based on
justice and the rule of law. Settlement must be
achieved before further lives are lost and before the
conflict becomes more widespread. Let no time be
wasted or efforts spared in returning to the precepts
of resolution 502 (1982).
217. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United
States of
America): I should like to begin by expressing to you.
Mr. President, the appreciation of my Government
for your judicious and skilful leadership of the affairs
of the Council in this deeply truubled time, as we seek
a solution to the tragic conflict under way in the South
Atlantic.

t

222. As the fighting intensifies and the cost in lives
mounts in the South Atlantic, I think we all share a
sense of anguish that it has not yet been possible to
prevent this tragic conflict.
223. We have all come to appreciate how deep the
roots of that conflict are. Britain, in peaceful possession of the Falkland Islands for IS0 years. has been
passionately devoted to the proposition
that the
rights of the inhabitants should be respected in imy
future disposition of the islands. Na one can sny
that that attitude. coming from a country that has
granted independence to more than 40 peoples in a
generation and a half, is a simple reflex to retain passession.

218. We desire also to express in this public arena
our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his tireless
and determined efforts to find a peaceful resolution
to the conflict between the United Kingdom and
Argentina.
The Secretary-General
knows, as we
should like the world as well to know, that he enjoyed
the active support and co-operation of the United
States in his search for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict.

224. Yet we know too how deep is the Argentine
commitment
to recover islands they believe were
taken from them by illegal force. This is not some
sudden passion, but a long-sustained national concern
that also stretches back 150 years and is heightened
by the sense of frustration at what Argentina feels
were nearly 20 years of fruitless negotiation.

219. This conflict poses a particularly acute problem for persons and nations that love peace and also
for this international body, whose very raison d’ctre
is to promote and ensure the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
220. The United States stands behind the principle
that the use of force to settle disputes should not be
aIlowed anywhere, and especially in this hemisphere
where a significant number of territorial disputes
remain to be solved diplomatically.
For the United
States, the Falkland crisis has been and still is a particularly agonizing, tragic event. As the whole world
knows, we have a long-standing alliance and, beyond
that, the closest relations of friendship with the United
Kingdom, the country from which our political institutions. law and language derive. But we have not
forgotten for a moment our close geographical, ecoI
i

225. From the start it has been widely rccognizcd
that the conflict engages basic principles without
which a peaceful international
order cannot st:md.
Unless the principle is respected that force must not
be used to settle disputes. the entire intcrni\tionili
community will be exposed to chaos and suffering.
And unless the right of self-dcfcncc is granted, only
those countries that use force first will huvc the protcction of law.
226. The Council wi\s profoundly
right to rcassc‘rt
those principles in resolution SO2 ( 1082). which fr)rm\
20

.(BRARY ’
good
offices
to do.

HIS,

of

course,

it

w;is

its

full

privilege

llllllll

234. The tragic conflict before us also hns special
Poignancy for the United Nations, It is precisely
this kind of problem the Organization was created to
resolve. Article I of the Charter of the United N;ltions commits us “to bring about by peaceful
me;lns.
and in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a
breach of the peace”. It commits us to **develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the Principle of equal rights and self-determination of
Peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to
strengthen universal peace”. It commits us to
“achieve international co-operation in solving international problems” and to “be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of these
common ends”.

22’7. For the United States, the conflict continues to
have il SPeci~ll poignancy. We do not take, and have
never taken. any position on the underlying claims.
13rit:lin is iI country to which we are bound by unique
ties of friendship, values and alliance. And Argentiil:I is also iIn old friend. a country of immigrants and
QZttlcrS like 0111‘ own. :I country
with
which
we share
the enormous human and national potential of the New
LV/orld experience.
2%. That ;I conflict of such dimensions should take
pl~e and that it should occur here in the western
hcmisphcrc. whose countries have long shared a partic\llar commitment
to each other, to their mutual
welfare :lnd to pence. causes
us the deepest concern.
This conflict, however urgent, cannot be permitted
1~) obscure the common engagement of all American
States to the rule of law and to the well-being of this
hcmisphcrc.

235. The United Nations record in dealing with this
conflict is, we believe, commendable. The Council
responded rapidly to the Argentine seizure of the
islands. The fact that both parties accepted resolution 502 (1982) proves that it was a constructive
response.

229. It was natural that the United States should
make :I particular effort to help Argentina and Britain
find ;I solution. That effort began before 2 April, when
we offered to the two sides our good offices to help
find a solution to the South Georgia incident.

236. The Secretary-General’s
determined
and
imaginative efforts were, of course, fervently welcomed by all of us. Again the elements of settlement
seemed to be present, or nearly present. Again peace
eluded us. I believe the institutions of the United
Nations have functioned in this crisis in the mannel
foreseen by its founders and its Charter. We can be
proud of it, proud especially of the Secretary-General.

:!30, After 2 April, both President Galtieri and Prime
Minister
Thatcher asked the United States to see
whether it could be of assistance. At President
lieugan’s direction, Secretary of State Haig undertook two rounds of intense discussions in both capitals. Finally, on 27 April, as prospects for more
intense hostilities arose, we put forward a proposal.
It represented our best estimate of what the two parties could reasonably bc expected to accept. It was
fbundcd scluarcly on resolution 502 ( 1982) by providing
fbl- a cessation of hostilities, withdrawal of forces and
n political settlement of the dispute.

237. We have already heard his account of his search
for a formula that could resolve the conflict. I think
all of us have been deeply impressed by the skill and
sensitivity, by the judgement and fairness. that the
Secretary-General brought to this task. That his effort
has not so far succeeded does not mean thnt it has
not realized important gains, notably in the establishment of a mutually acceptable concept of negotiations. The United States will whole-hcartedly
support
any
initiative that can help Argentina and
Britain make peace with honour.

23 I . The British Government indicated that it would
:;criousIy consider our proposal, although it presented
(:cI*t;lin t-c;11difficulties for it. However, the Proposal
wns not acceptable to Argentina.

238. But, despite all our efforts. the problem
solved. Young men die in icy waters,
On
beaches.

:!32. Ilnmcdiately
afterward, President Belalinde of
I?eI-u, after consultation with Secretary Haig in ordel
t:o be brought ~1, to date on his initiatives. undertook
the initiative to put forward a much simplified Peace
plan. also drawing on the fundamental elements of
resolution 502 (1982).

is

not

fnX%I

239. The dispute that appeared to many to bc
simple
has proved extraordinarily difficult to resolve.
But we must not abandon the effort. Resolution 502
(l982), with its concept
of linked and SimUltancous
cessation of hostilities. withdrawal of forces. and
negotiations.
must remain the framework of the search
for peace. The problem
is too impo!tant-for
the
rule of law, for the future of the Americas. for many
of us friends of Britain and Argentina-not
to make

:!33. On 5 ~~~~~ a draft text was forwarded by Peru
1.0 Buenos Aires; we forwarded the same text to Len(jon. Britain made it clear that it could SeriouslY con!;ider the pl~opos~~l. Argentina chose not to conside
it, asking instead that the Secretary-General use his
21

an all-out effort to settle this tragic conflict, so costly
in every way.

the full extent of its territory
recognized.

240.

248. We believe that this matter should bi dealt
with through negotiations so that the vast majority
of the States that make up this international kommunity can maintain their faith and belief that international justice lives and prevails, even when what is at
stake are the interests of great Powers which seek to
impose their will by means of their military niight.

The PRESlDENT
(irzfop,‘rttrlion
.f?om ChiThe next speaker is the representative of
Guatemala. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

17~se):

241,

Mr. DELPRBE
CRESPO (Guatemala) fintc’rfrom Sprrnish): The delegation of the Republic of Guatemala wishes to thank the Coundil
for inviting it to participate in the discussion on the
situation in the Malvinas Islands and the conflict which
has arisen between the United Kingdom and the
Argentine Republic.

prcrcrtion

has been internationally

249. If this does not come about, Latin America
will continue to believe that this action against Argentina is a serious threat also to it and shakes confidence
in the rest of the world among those who might suffer
similar treatment if an attempt were made to subject
them to similar circumstances.

242. As this is the first time that I have spoken in
the Council this month, I should like to take this
opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President.
Your personal virtues, talent, skill and prudence are
guarantees that the Council’s deliberations will be
conducted in such a way as to ensure their success.

250, The Government of Guatemala, thrc?ugh me,
expresses its confidence in this important body and its
conviction that, in the face of the situation created by
the breaking off of negotiations, it will fulfil its lofty
mission effectively and efficiently,
by finding 01
encouraging the parties to find a peaceful and just
solution to this conflict that is causing us so much
concern.

243. Guatemala regrets the deadlock in the negotiations between the Argentine Republic and the United
Kingdom on the Malvinas conflict, because we have
always believed, as a matter of principle, in the peaceful settlement of international disputes, which is the
very corner-stone of relations among the States that
make up the international
community.
We have
always considered it an overriding duty to abide by the
norms governing the United Nations,

25 I,

The PRESIDENT
fhtrrpr.c’tatiol7 fio/?z ChiIn view of the lateness of the hour, I intend to
adjourn the meeting now. The remaining speakers
on today’s list will be heard when the Council continues its consideration of the item on the agenda.
Some other speakers have also asked to make statements at tomorrow’s meeting. I shall now call on
those representatives who wish to speak in right of
reply.

nrsrd):

244. Guatemala appeals to both parties to return
to the negotiating table in good faith to find a peaceful solution to the conflict which is having such a
decisive effect on peace in this continent, and possibly
throughout the world.

252. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
This afternoon’s debate has contained few surprises
to my delegation. Obviously we expected Latin American speakers. for reasons of regional solidarity+ to
support the position of Argentina. Obviously we
expected certain delegations to express their views,
however unwelcome to us in substance, with sobriety
and moderation, Obviously we expected other delegations to give vent to atrociously offensive. confused and ill-directed rodomontades against my country, even including objectionable personal observations
about the leadership of my Government. The For&n
Minister of Panama even went so far as to imply that
there might have been some difference between mY
own judgements and recommendations
and the instructions I received from my Government. Nothing
-nothing.
Mr. President-could
be further from the
truth, I repeat, nothing, nothing could be further from
the truth.

245. We also appeal to the parties to support with
a constructive attitude the admirable and tireless work
of the Secretary-General in the mediation efforts he has
undertaken. In them he has demonstrated his faith
in the United Nations, its purposes and principles, its
procedures and the paramount importance which the
maintenance of peace and security should be accorded
by the nations which, as we know, have sought to act
in this affair that is causing such distress to all the
countries of the world.
246. The Government
of Guatemala
wishes to
reaffirm its solidarity with its sister, the Argentine
Republic, as it has done before, and with the noble
purpose of its Government to safeguard the territorial
integrity of the Argentine nation.
247. It is inconceivable that the colonialist system,
which is fortunately in its death throes throughout the
world, including our continent, should have sprung
to life, allowing a colonialist empire to impose its
interests upon our America to the detriment of a Latin
American country, whose right to sovereignty over

253. We also expected to hear the heavy tread of
the dinosaur, stirring the dust of long-extinct political
slogans. Again, we have not been disappointed. 1 am
referring, of course. to the bizarre animadversions
we have heard about colonialism
and imperialism.
22

BRARY ’

Nc1 StiltC Mcmhcr of the United Nations could have
rlOne mre
t0 promote self-determination
and the
hhts
rind iIlkl%itS of peoples than the United Kingdllm*
Between 40 and 50 Members of the Organizttion
can testify to that.

(1982) to use force. No such authorization is necessary under the Charter. Article 51 provides that:
“Nothing
in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of . . , self-defence . , .“. The
United Kingdom has been exercising this right in
the face of Argentina’s first use of force to invade the
Falkland Islands and subsequent use offorce to occupy
them and to attempt to subjugate the people of the
Falkland Islands.

There are still a few very small dependent
territories
of the United Kingdom which have, like
the Falklands.
decided of their own free, democratic
choice not to seek full sovereign independence because
of the size of their populations and the limitations of
theil. resources. This is their free choice, not a consecluence of such preposterous nonsense as colonial
oppressiiin.
254.

260. Mr. Ros also argued that there is an obligation to suspend self-defence once the Security Council, under Article 51 of the Charter, “has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security”. He went on to say that: “The determination of whether such measures have been effective must be reached objectively and cannot be left to
the arbitrary judgement of the . . , United Kingdom” [ikid., pmo. 551.

255.
None of the Latin American speakers today
hils uttered cries of rage because, for example, there
:lre still islands in the Caribbean which fall into this
cutcgory.
It seems that their objurgations apply only
to n territory which happens to be claimed by Argentinn. I have listened carefully for any, any serious,
mention
of the people of the Falkland Islands. I have
heard none. The Falklands are not uninhabited rocks.
They contain a people, small in number put peaceful,
harmless
and homogeneous. They have chosen to
rcrnain
British of their free, democratic choice, That
is the right which we are protecting, and which we shall
continue
to protect.

261. The United Kingdom accepts that the determination must be an objective one. It must be reached
in the light of all the relevant circumstances.
262.

What are the facts?

263. By resolution 502 ( 1982) the Council demanded
the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces from
the Falkland Islands. Argentina did not withdraw any
of its forces: it did quite the opposite. Argentina
increased considerably the number of its forces in the
days following the adoption of the resolution,

256.
I now turn to the question of self-defence.
I think I dealt adequately in my statement yesterday
[2.16Ur/z rnc~li,zg] with other issues which have been
rnised today, such as the question of who was responsible fc>r breaking off the latest negotiations, who has
shown flexibility and who has been rigid. I will only
stirte again that it was not my Government which
brought the last round of negotiations to an unsuccessful conclusion and that my Government has throughout shown the maximum flexibility consonant with the
firm maintenance
of principles which we will not
itbandon.

264. The resolution determined that there was a
breach of the peace as a result of the Argentine invasion. This is made clear by a reading of the preamble.
The results of that invasion were Argentine occupation, Accordingly, the breach of the peace still subsisted despite the adoption of the resolution. How.
then, can it seriously be maintained that resolution
502 (1982) amounted to a measure “necessary to
maintain international peace and security”?

First, we are dealing with a simple case of cause
257.
and effect. The cause of the present crisis is the
invasion
of the Falklands by Argentina and Argentina’s refusal to obey the mandatory demand of the
Security
Council to withdraw unconditionally.
The
effect is the hostilities which are causing such concern to the international
community.
Remove the
cause, Argentine illegal occupation of the Falklands,
and the effect, the hostilities, will disappear.

265. In my letter to the President of the Council
dated 30 April, I pointed out that the reference in
Article 51 of the Charter to measures necessary to
maintain international peace could
“only be taken to refer to measures which are
actually effective to bring about the stated ohjective. Clearly, the Security Council’s decision in
its resolution 502 (IY82) has not proved effective.
The United Kingdom’s inherent right of self-defence
is thus unimpaired.” [See S/15016.]

1 should Iike to say a few words about Arti258.
cle 5 1 of the Charter of the United Nations, and 1 shall
addl-ess my remarks in response to the statement made
ta the Council yesterday by Mr. Ros, the *Undersecretary
for Foreign Affairs of the Argentme Republic
[i/pid.]. He advanced his argum.ents in Plain
language, unadorned by abuse or rhetorrc. and 1 shall
tllerefore
address my remarks to him.

266. The Council

has not, of course, adopted any
measures under Articles 39, 41 and 42 of the Charter.
The argument of Under-Secretary Ros that the exercise of self-defence is not available ~CC~USC the Council adopted resolution 502 (1982) would lead to absurd
results. A State which has committed an act of aggrrssion is t&l by the Council to stop its aggreSSic)n
and

It has never been the contention Of the United
259.
Kingdom
that we were authorized by resolution So2
23

1111111
_-.----

272. Finally,
Under-Secretary
Ros argued that
the United Kingdom
had violated resolution SO2
(1982) by dispatching the Royal Navy. He argued
that this was contrary to paragraph 1 of resolution SO2
( 1982) which demanded a cessation of hostilities, The
resolution has to be read as a whole. Its preamble
makes clear that there had been an invasion of the
Falklands on 2 April by armed forces of Argentina
which had caused a breach of the peace. It was to
these hostilities by Argentina that paragraph 1 was
directed. The Falkland Islands had been at peace
before 2 April and had never threatened Argentina,
We maintained only the smallest of garrisons there.
Had Argentina complied with paragraph I by ceasing
its hostilities against the people of the Falkland Islands
on 3 April and had Argentina complied with the
demand for the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces, there would have been no need for the
Royal Navy to exercise the United Kingdom’s right
of self-defence when it arrived off the Falkland
Islands. The way would have been open for the continuation of diplomatic negotiations which had been
held as recently as 27 February. Instead, Argentina
used force to occupy the islands and has used force
against the people of the islands day by day since
3 April. This was contrary to resolution SO2 (lY82),
In these circumstances, the United Kingdom retains
in full its inherent right of self-defence.

to withdraw. That State does not heed the demand.
The victim. according to Mr. Ros, would then be
obliged to fold his arms and allow the aggressor to
continue his aggression and to digest its fruits.
267. A moment’s
thought would lead any fairminded observer to conclude that the Charter could not
have been intended to produce that result and that the
Council could not have produced that result by resolution 502 ( 1982).
268. The Under-Secretary
also argued that selfdefence could be exercised “only as an immediate reaction to protect essential interests” [236&h mctirz,g,
po~tr. 581. The essential interests of the United Kingdom include the protection of British territory and
British nationals. The Falkland Islands are British
territory on the basis of history from the eighteenth,
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. We have occupied
and administered the islands in all three centuries and
continuously since 1833. The people of the Falkland
Islands are British subjects who have chosen to maintain their present way of life and political institutions
in free and fair elections.
269. Can there be any doubt in the mind of anyone
that the United Kingdom is entitled to protect its territory and its people?

273. Finally, I believe that the Foreign Minister of
Panama suggested that wc might be introducing
nuclear weapons into the area. I only have this to
say: it is absolutely inconceivable that Britain would
use nuclear weapons in the dispute with Argentina
over the Falklands.

270. A further argument of Mr. Ros was that
“the United Kingdom could not allege any imminent
and grave danger” [ihid., po/‘rr. 501. The Argentine
invasion of 2 April not only posed an imminent and
grave danger but it was determined by the Council to
have caused an actual breach of the peace. It flies in
the face of reason that there was no imminent and
grave danger. There was an actual and grave dangel
to the people of the Falkland Islands: that they would
continue for ever to be governed by an alien rkgime
which they most decidedly and unanimously did not
want.

274. Mr. ROS (Argentina)
(intrl.~,.[‘ttrtic,rl
.fiWl
Sl~trni,sh,J: 11:was not the intention of my delegation to
prolong this debate in any kind of personalized wily,
but the representative of the United Kingdom has
opted for this system; obviously we have to act as if
we were embarking upon a bilateral dialogue.

271. It was also argued that the United Kingdom
was not entitled to exercise self-defence because the
Falkland Islands are 14,000 km from Great Britain and
that the islands are a colonial dependency. My answer
is that the Falkland Islands are British territory and
that. in accordance with Article 73 of the Charter, we
have accepted the obligation to promote, “within
the system of international peace and security established by the present Charter, the well-being of the
inhabitants”-in
this case, of the Falkland Islands.
This means that the United Kingdom is perfectly
entitled to resist the illegal use of force by Argentina,
contrary to the fundamental principles of the Charter,
peaceful settlement and non-use of force, by exercising the inherent right of self-defence. Distance
is irrelevant. Dependant status is irrelevant because
Article 73 extends to the people of dependencies the
full protection of the Charter regarding the maintenance of international peace and security.

275. The fact is that hc has made known his points
of view, and while he was speaking I was reading
resolution SO2 (IY82). but I could not see in that [‘es+
lution any authorization for the United Kingdom to
send its fleet and to begin hostilities. So no matte1
how much we debate, in no way does this resolution
authorize the United Kingdom to become the world’s
policeman and to use force in the way it is doing.
276. The reprcscntative
of the United Kin&m
tells us that we are not complying with resolution 502
(IY82). I should like to recall that the Government
of Argentina immediately
manifested its intention to
comply with the resolution as a whole, because the
resolution cannot be applied one paragraph today 01
another when it suits the United Kingdom. Obviously
it is an integral resolution and it must bc wholly
complied with.
24

277. The Argentine
Government
indicated
its
acceptance in three communications
to the Council.
However, it was the United Kingdom which violated
the resolution by not ceasing hostilities and by initiating
its aggression in spite of that decision which had already
been communicated to the Council.
278.

Since intransigence

was mentioned,

I should

also like to point out that my country’s desire to find

a peaceful solution to this conflict has been amply
Proved by the very great patience with which we have
tried to continue to find a negotiated solution to this
dispute which was not begun by the Argentine Republic but precisely by this British fleet which, in a
full upsurge of British imperialism, came to our coasts,
expelled our authorities, imprisoned our inhabitants
and expelled them to Montevideo. This was the act of
force which gave rise to this problem. It is not a
problem of today, it is a problem which goes back a
long way. My country never signed a treaty, never
accepted any declaration. On the contrary, it constantly protested against this usurpation of its territory,
of a piece of our territory on which a colonial rCgime
was imposed, and today it is claimed that we should
accept it as if it were a fact which all Argentine generations have constantly rejected.
279.
A little logic should be applied to this problem
when an attempt is made by a stroke of the pen to
ignore a truth shared by all the peoples of Latin America-it
is part of our territory and colonial imperialism
came to impose a colonial system on it. In passing,
I should like to r’ecall that we are talking about a colonial settlement with a handful of people, about 800families, and this is presented to us as if this were a people,
a nation, with all the attributes of a State practically
on the brink of independence.

to stay in this territory where the United Kingdom has
no business to be at the end of the twentieth century.
It is an anachronistic relic of outmoded imperialism.
283. Instead of looking at things in their true light,
we keep on looking at peripheral details. Today
there is one crisis, tomorrow another, but we nevet
come to the substance, to the crux of the matter. The
crux of the matter is that the United Kingdom and the
Argentine Republic have to find an intelligent answer
to this problem, and if the Secretary-General’s
good
offices could help us to find such a solution, we would
be extremely grateful. This very day, the Argentine
Foreign Minister has been to see the Secretary-General to ratify our wish to continue negotiating within
the framework of his good offices, within the framework of the Charter and within the framework of the
resolutions of the United Nations-resolutions
which
were approved by the General Assembly and which are
the voice of this house-calling
for a negotiated solution in terms which are indicated.
284. Three resolutions of the General Assembly
have been adopted and the three resolutions have
borne no fruit, although there was a call to accelerate
the negotiations. There was recognition of the efforts
of Argentina over the last 10 years to assist the development of these islands, to facilitate communications
and demonstrate our goodwill.
285. Why did these negotiations not prosper? Because of a combination of monopolistic interests, plus
typically colonial legislation which made it possible
to maintain in the islands a kind of artificial cocoon,
suspended in time and space, preserving a kind of
Victorian policy which suited some, but was rejected
by the whole continent, particuiarly by our nation.

280.
This exaggeration of the principles concerned
is a ,way of obscuring the truth, and this is what we
want to say.

286. I do not want to add much more, because
sometimes words only complicate problems more, but
I should like to say now that this is not really a reply
but an appeal to the intelligence of those of us who
are responsible for this matter, and also a request for
participation
on the part of the Council not only in
trying to find a solution to the dispute in which we
find ourselves, but also in acting as a kind of interpreter of the will of the General Assembly in the search
for an ultimate solution of this dispute. It is our hope
that the Council will encourage the Secretary-General
and give him a clear-cut mandate to resume negotiations so that we can truly work in an atmosphere of
peace in the search for an intelligent and honourable
solution.

28 1. I should also like to recall that the wish of my
country has been made clear: within the framework of
the negotiations a solution was suggested which permitted
an honourable outcome and opened the way
towards a final solution of this long-standing controversy. However, we did not find in the exercise the
same goodwill on the part of the United Kingdom.
On the contrary, we found a constant stretching of
legal terminology
to cover all the possibilities of a
reply which could really provide an intelligent
and
reasonable solution, a solution which would take care
most generously of the concerns of the islanders by
means of a statute that would be part of this same
agreement
and would be presented to the United
Nations.
What better guarantee than a statute that
generously takes care of their interests and enjoys the
protection
of this international body?

The meeting rose (It 7.45 pm.

NOTES

282.
However, all these references were ignored,
because, we must conclude, the defence of this principle of self-determination is just a pretext to continue

1 A/34/542, annex, Political Declaration, para. 168.
J A/ 102 I7 and Cow. I, annex, Political Declaration, para. 87.
’ United Nations, Tw~ty Soirs, vol. 634, No, 9068, p. 326.

25

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde eniier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous ~3: Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genkve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero~g dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

88-60989-October

l&9-2,050
