52

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

2767 (XXVI). United Nations Institute for Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its past resolutions relating to the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, particularly resolution 2640 (XXV) of 19 Nove1?-ber 197~,
and the resolutions of the Econornic and Social Council
on the sarne subject,
l. Takes note of the report of the Execut~v~ Director of the United Nations Institute for Trammg and
Research· 1
2. No;es with satisfaction the incr~asing effec~i~~~ess
of the Institute in the discharge of 1ts respons1b1htles;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
1988th plenary meeting,
18 November 1971.
2768 (XXVI). Identification of the least developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 2_4 O~tober
1970, in which it provided a separate sectron m the
International Developrnent Strategy for the_ Second
United Nations Developrnent Decade on special measures in favour of the least developed among the developing countries to enhance their capacity to benefit
fully and equitably from the policy measures of the
Decade,
Further recalling its resolution 2724 (XXV) of 15
December 1970 in which it affirmed the urgency of
identifying the ieast developed among t~e developing
countries in order to enable those countnes to benefit
as early as possible from the special measures in their
favour adopted in the various forurns,
Considering that the criteria used so far for the identification of the hard core least developed among the
developing countries need to be reviewed and refined,
Further considering that there is a lack of necessary
comparative data in most developing countries,
Mindful of the varying stages of economic development arnong the developing countries as a whole,
1. Commends the report of the Committee for Developrnent Planning on its seventh session~ and that of
the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on specml measu~es
in favour of the least developed among the developmg
countries3 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
2. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1628 (LI) of 30 July 1971;
3. Takes note also of Trade and Developrnent Board
resolution 82 (XI) of 18 Septernber 1971 ;4
4. Approves the list of hard core least developed
countries contained in paragraph 66 of the report of
the Cornrnittee for Development Planning on its seventh
session;
1 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/8414).
2 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyfirst Session, Supplement No. 7 (El 4990), chap. JI.
3 TD/B/349.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8415/Rev.1), part three,
annex I.

5. Requests the Econornic and Social Cour~cil to
instruct the Cornrnittee for Development Plannmg to
continue in close collaboration with the United Nations Co~ference on Trade and Developrnent, the review
of criteria now being used, as well as any other _criteria
which may in due course be deerned appropnate _for
the identification of the least developed countnes,
keeping in view the possibility of modifications in the
list of those countries as early as possible;
6. Commends the request of the Trade and Development Board in resolution 82 (XI) that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Developrnent work out a detailed and comprehensive action-oriented prograrnme, within the cornpetence
of the Conference, for the irnplernentation of the relevant provisions of the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Devel~prnent
Decade in favour of the least developed countnes;
7. Requests other organs and programmes of the
United Nations, including the United Nations Developrnent Prograrnrne and the United N ations Industrial
Developrnent Organization, to initiate, as appropriate,
similar action-oriented prograrnmes, within their respective fields of competence, in favour of the least
developed countries;
8. Further requests the international organizations
within the United Nations system to take fully into
account the special needs of the least developed arnong
the developing countries when formulating their prograrnrnes of activities or selecting the projects they
finance;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on the irnplernentation of paragraphs 6, 7 and 8
above in the reports to be submitted by hirn under
paragraph 83 of General Assernbly resolution 2626
(XXV).
1988th plenary meeting,
18 November 1971.

2800 (XXVI). Dissemination of information and
mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the
implementation of the lnternational Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling Econornic and Social Council resolution
1357 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on the rnobilization of
public opinion in developed and developing countries
regarding the Second United Nations Developrnent
Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 2567 (XXIV) of 13 Decernber 1969 on the rnobilization of public opinion and
taking note of the administrative arrangernents for the
Centre for Econornic and Social Inforrnation which
the Secretary-General has made in pursuance of that
resolution,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Developrnent Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, contained in resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970, on the mobilization of
public opinion, which is an essential cornponent of
the Strategy,
