A /76/PV.31

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

31st plenary meeting

Thursday, 11 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Salovaara
(Finland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 77 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/293)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/76/291 and
A/76/292)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.7)
Mr. Ndoye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to warmly thank Mr. Piotr
Hofmański, President of the International Criminal
Court, for his leadership of the Court and his thorough
presentation of the report (see A/76/PV.29) of the Court
covering the period from 1 August 2020 to 31 July
2021 (see A/76/293). My delegation would also like to
express its warm congratulations and best wishes once
again to President Hofmański and Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, and
their colleagues for their unwavering commitment and
professionalism in the exercise of their noble mission,
which consists, among other things, of enabling the
victims of the most serious crimes to obtain the right
to justice.
Senegal takes note with great satisfaction of
the report of the Secretary-General (A/76/292) on
information relevant to the implementation of article
3 of the Relationship Agreement between the United

Nations and the International Criminal Court, submitted
pursuant to paragraph 12 of resolution 75/3, which
attests to the excellent cooperative relations between
the two institutions.
The consideration of the report of the Court for the
period under review demonstrates its importance and
place in the fight against impunity for perpetrators
of the world’s most serious crimes. The activities of
the Court described therein attest to its outstanding
contribution to bringing justice to thousands of victims
around the world, thereby giving affected people the
sense that humankind as a whole has heard their call.
On reading the Court’s report, we also note that,
despite the practical difficulties caused by the health
crisis caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
Court made significant progress in its activities during
the period under review. My delegation also welcomes
the achievements of the Trust Fund for Victims, which
continues to provide support and relief to thousands of
victims in accordance with its mandate and to advance
the implementation of the reparation orders issued.
As the first country to have ratified the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court on 2 February 1999,
Senegal has always cooperated fully with the judicial
institution by playing its part in the emergence and
promotion of international criminal justice.
It should be remembered that there can be no
effective justice without the full protection of witnesses
called to testify before the Court. It is essential that the
International Criminal Court take all the appropriate
measures to protect the safety and the physical and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-33228 (E)

*2133228*

A/76/PV.31

11/11/2021

psychological well-being of witnesses, as well as to
protect their dignity and ensure respect for their privacy.

investigation and case build-up for possible filing of
criminal charges.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the achievement of the Court’s aspirations
largely depends on the strong and constant support
of the entire international community. It is therefore
important for all States parties to the Rome Statute to
make it a priority to preserve the independence of the
International Criminal Court so that it can properly
execute its mandate. In that regard, we must show
commitment and determination by combining our
efforts to strengthen and renew cooperation through
frank and constructive dialogue among States parties.

The Rome Statute requires the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor to respect and defer to the primary
criminal jurisdiction of a State party concerned while
proceedings are ongoing in that State. The precipitate
move by the Prosecutor, as reflected in the report, is a
blatant violation of the principle of complementarity,
which is a bedrock principle of the Rome Statute.

We must also continue to work tirelessly for the
universal ratification of the Rome Statute and the
integration of its standards into the domestic law of
States so that all victims around the world, wherever
they reside, have an equal and fair opportunity to
obtain justice.
Finally, we must maintain our commitment to
strengthen complementarity by supporting national
justice systems so that they are able to try the most
serious crimes that offend our collective conscience in
order that peace and stability may reign in all regions
of the world.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): The Philippines
disassociates itself from the draft resolution contained
in document A/76/L.7, which welcomes the report of
the International Criminal Court for the period 2020
to 2021 (see A/76/293). The report contains references
to the Philippines under the updates on judicial and
prosecutorial activities in relation to crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court allegedly committed on the
territory of the Philippines in the context of the war
on drugs campaign. The Philippines expresses once
again that it finds deeply regrettable the actions by the
then outgoing Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to seek judicial authorization to proceed with an
investigation of the situation in the Philippines.
The Philippines underscores that an inter-agency
review panel headed by the Secretary of Justice of the
Philippines was established precisely to reinvestigate
cases involving fatalities in the campaign against
illegal drugs and is steadily proceeding with its
work. Just last month, the Secretary of Justice of the
Philippines referred to the Philippine National Bureau
of Investigation cases that need to undergo further
2/10

The Philippine Government in fact recently signed
with the United Nations a joint programme on human
rights, the first-ever United Nations joint programme
on human rights in the Philippines, which puts together
the capacities and resources of the United Nations in
support of a wide range of national institutions. That
affirms the adherence of the Philippines to human
rights norms and its long track record of constructive
engagement with international and regional partners in
human rights promotion and protection.
As in all democracies, the wheels of justice
sometimes turn slowly, but they do turn. The rule of law
cannot, and should not, be compromised for immediate
retribution. Notwithstanding our withdrawal from the
Rome Statute, which was due to a principled stand
against those who seek to politicize human rights, the
Philippines affirms its commitment to fight against
impunity for atrocity crimes. We have extensive national
legislation punishing such crimes. The International
Criminal Court may exercise jurisdiction only where
national legal systems fail or are unable to do so. The
International Criminal Court was never conceived or
created as a substitute for national courts.
Finally, the International Criminal Court is a
court of last resort. The States parties to the Rome
Statute envisioned a court with complementary, and
not primary, jurisdiction for the prosecution of the
persons most responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern.
Mr. Roughton (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
President Hofmański for the report (see A/76/293) of
the International Criminal Court and welcomes this
opportunity to discuss the International Criminal
Court’s contribution to the international rule of law and
its relationship with the United Nations.
We commend the progress made by the Court in 2020
and 2021, notwithstanding the continuing challenges
presented by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
21-33228

11/11/2021

including through the use of such arrangements as
hybrid in-person and virtual proceedings. We note
with appreciation the Court’s engagement with State
parties to the Rome Statute, the United Nations,
intergovernmental and regional organizations and
civil society in order to enhance cooperation with, and
support for, the Court.
New Zealand supports the International Criminal
Court as a central pillar of the international rules-based
order and international criminal justice. In delivering
on its mandate to hold to account those individuals
responsible for the most serious international crimes,
the Court plays a crucial role within a broader system of
domestic and international accountability mechanisms.
We note that the cooperation and assistance provided
by the United Nations provides invaluable assistance to
the Court in being able to fulfil its mandate effectively.
We welcome the efforts made by the Court, the
review mechanism and States parties in moving
towards the implementation of the recommendations
of the independent expert review in its September
2020 report, which provided important insights that
were underpinned by a thorough examination of the
Court system, including consultations with its staff
and officials as well as States parties. We encourage
all States parties to ensure their ongoing support for
the Court through the implementation of appropriate
recommendations.
New Zealand’s view remains that States parties
should focus on supporting the Court to consolidate
its work in the exercise of its mandate and to focus on
the investigation and prosecution of the most serious
international crimes, consistent with the principle
of complementarity.
New Zealand supports the Court’s role as an
independent judicial institution. That independence
must be respected and protected to enable it to perform
its functions. Earlier this year, we welcomed that the
United States had withdrawn the visa restrictions and
economic sanctions that had previously been imposed
on the Court. New Zealand is also firmly of the belief
that the mandate and credibility of the Court are
intrinsically tied to its independence and impartiality.
We are grateful to the leadership of the United
Nations in continuing to support and cooperate with
the Court, in particular to the Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs as the
interface between the Court and the United Nations

A/76/PV.31

system. In addition, we welcome the support provided
to the Court by the wider United Nations system,
including in regional offices, by providing essential
operational support to the Court’s activities, with the
agreement and cooperation of host States.
New Zealand is committed to the Rome Statute
and its underpinning principles of complementarity,
cooperation and universality. We reiterate that the
primary responsibility to take robust and appropriate
measures when faced with the commission of
international crimes lies with States. The Court is an
independent court of last resort to try such crimes.
Domestic courts and judicial processes that secure
accountability for the perpetrators of international
crimes are crucial to implementing the principle of
complementarity. We encourage States parties that have
not done so to consider incorporating Rome Statute
crimes and principles into their domestic law.
Above all, New Zealand is committed to the Court
and will work with others to ensure that the Court
continues to be, and is seen to be, an effective and
sustainable judicial institution.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the International Criminal
Court for the comprehensive presentation of the Court’s
activities (see A/76/PV.29).
Ukraine welcomes the report of the International
Criminal Court for the period 2020 to 2021 (see
A/76/293). The decision of the Court’s Prosecutor on
11 December 2020 concerning the completion of its
preliminary examination of the situation in Ukraine,
concluding that there was a reasonable basis to believe
that war crimes and crimes against humanity had been
committed and that the statutory criteria for opening an
investigation had been met, is well received in Ukraine.
It is important that, in this extraordinary time, the
Court continue to receive cooperation from the United
Nations on a wide range of issues. However, let me
underline the direct linkage between the cooperation,
assistance and support of States parties to the Rome
Statute and the effectiveness of all Court activities, from
ongoing investigations to judicial activities. Providing
such cooperation is an additional contribution to the
prevention of, and the fight against, impunity for the
most serious crimes.
As one of the first States to support the idea of
establishing a permanent treaty-based international

21-332283/10

A/76/PV.31

tribunal, Ukraine actively participated in the
Preparatory Committee on the Establishment of an
International Criminal Court and signed the Rome
Statute in 2000. Subsequently, my country was among
the first non-State parties to ratify the Agreement
on Privileges and Immunities of the International
Criminal Court.
Strongly believing in this court of last resort,
on 17 April 2014 the Government of Ukraine lodged
a declaration under article 12 of the Rome Statute
accepting the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court over crimes committed on its territory from
21 November 2013 to 22 February 2014.
On 8 September 2015, the Government of Ukraine
lodged a second declaration under the same article of
the Statute, accepting the exercise of jurisdiction by
the International Criminal Court in relation to crimes
committed on its territory starting from 20 February
2014 — since the beginning of the Russian military
aggression against Ukraine.
Let me once again reiterate that those declarations
were made for an indefinite duration. Therefore, the
International Criminal Court will be able to exercise
its jurisdiction over such crimes regardless of the
nationality of persons who have committed them, even
if they were citizens of third-party States.
Ukraine welcomes the fact that, during the
reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor continued
to focus its analysis on crimes in Crimea and eastern
Ukraine with a view to defining potential cases for
investigation. The Prosecutor’s report clearly states that
there are sufficient grounds to believe that the crimes
committed in both Crimea and Donbas fall within the
Court’s jurisdiction. Those crimes are nothing but
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including a
significant number of crimes against civilians.
As the Office of the Prosecutor recognized that
the situation in Ukraine meets the criteria of the Rome
Statute to open an investigation, we are looking forward
to the next step — that of seeking judicial authorization
to open such an investigation.
In its turn, Ukrainian law enforcement agencies, in
cooperation with civil society organizations and human
rights defenders, continued to document and provide the
Court with additional information, facts and evidence
related to both the nature of the existing armed conflict
in Ukraine as an international armed conflict caused
4/10

11/11/2021

by a foreign armed aggression and the numerous war
crimes committed by the aggressor State’s armed
forces, occupation authorities, personnel and proxies in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
Although the pandemic and limited resources
may affect the work of the Court, we strongly believe
in its prominent role in ensuring justice and fighting
against impunity, including in the case of the RussianUkrainian armed conflict.
The demand of the people of Ukraine for justice,
prosecution and holding to account of all perpetrators
of grave crimes committed in the territory of Ukraine,
including in the temporarily occupied Crimea, remains
unwavering, as does the support of the Ukrainian
Government for the work of the International
Criminal Court.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I would like to congratulate
Judge Hofmański, President of the International
Criminal Court, on the presentation (see A/76/PV.29)
of the well-rounded report of the International Criminal
Court (see A/76/293). Although Sri Lanka is not
party to the Rome Statute, it keenly follows the rich
jurisprudence associated with the Court and wishes to
make a few observations with a view to provoking some
thought with regard to its jurisdiction.
It is observed that the Statute refers to peace to some
degree, by recognizing that grave crimes that deeply
shock the conscience of humankind threaten the peace,
security and well-being of the world, and it affirms that
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished. That
was the primary reason for which the International
Criminal Court was established, thereby stressing
its primary judicial function of ending impunity and
contributing to the prevention of such crimes.
Nonetheless, it must be appreciated that the Court’s
Statute was not drafted with a specific country situation
in mind, as was the case with the ad hoc tribunals.
It is observed that the Statute is concerned with the
prosecution of crimes against humanity in peacetime,
irrespective of the fact that the criminal act is not
necessarily connected with an armed conflict.
It is therefore seen that the goals mentioned to
be achieved by the International Criminal Court, in
keeping with the resolutions and statutes establishing
international criminal courts and tribunals, as well
as by the domestic prosecution of international
21-33228

11/11/2021

crimes — especially within the framework of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court — raises the
following question: what were the precise parameters of
the mandates of those international judicial tribunals?
Upon examination, the mandates of the tribunals
appear to be twofold: on the one hand, dealing with
impunity for serious criminal conduct affecting the
international community and, on the other hand,
dealing with the maintenance of peace and security.
A matter that the International Criminal Court can,
in my view, give its mind to is to whether there is a
seamless cause and effect between respect for the
rule of law and international peace and security, so
that the implementation of a mandate to prosecute
alleged criminality will in and of itself contribute to
international peace and security.
To put it differently, is the capacity of the
International Criminal Court — as the academics
ask — to bring about security and stability strictly
limited to the impact of its primary judicial function,
or does it include other tasks that the tribunals have
been entrusted with for achieving that objective? Those
are matters for the consideration of the Court.
Although there is little doubt that the Court can
contribute to peace and security in international
relations and the prevention of the recurrence of such
crimes, it remains to be answered to what extent
the Court can go in making such contributions. It is
observed that the Court and the tribunals are mandated
to bring peace where there is conflict, provide
reparation and re-establish the rule of law. All those
objectives no doubt contribute to the establishment of
peace and security, but do these goals fall within the
competence of an international tribunal as far as they
entail additional activities beyond the strict exercise of
its judicial functions?
There appears to be no clear answer to those issues.
We have heard statements made, even by the members
of the international judiciary, that administering justice
is the only task of an international criminal court, while
reconciliation is a matter for national communities
and institutions. Some academics are of the view that
such a position appears to be too radical, in tracing a
mutually exclusive separation of its jurisdiction. They
say that leads to the neglect of the fact that a tribunal,
notwithstanding its independence and impartiality, is
not an abstract entity but operates within the social
environment under the laws of which it was established.

A/76/PV.31

In that scenario, we would do well to remember
that criminal justice cannot be shifted entirely from the
domestic to the international level and that the primary
responsibility for prosecution rests with the States and
their judiciaries.
The view has been expressed that international
courts are a temporary and objectively limited
replacement for domestic jurisdictions, which ultimately
bear the primary responsibility for re-establishing the
rule of law and restoring security and stability in the
national society. They, too, must contribute to reaching
those goals. How far that contribution can then go is
a matter for each court to assess and may depend on
the concrete situation in which the court is operating.
However, that dual accountability of an international
court should not, in my view, be glossed over.
We see that international criminal courts pursue
a host of ambitious goals through their proceedings to
establish the truth about alleged crimes, end impunity
for international crimes and model respect for human
rights in their proceedings. Yet, while those hallowed
principles are highlighted in the Court’s founding
documents and in case law, in practice a less hallowed
goal — namely, resolving cases efficiently — will soon
become the central feature of the administration of
international criminal justice.
That is probably through no fault of the Court;
however, because donors and the Court administrators
take stock of the substantial costs of international trials,
they begin to place demands on judges, prosecutors and
defence attorneys to do more with fewer resources.
Efficiency is no doubt an important goal for
international criminal courts for a multitude of reasons.
It enables defendants’ rights to a speedy trial, promotes
victims’ interests and closure, conserves limited
resources and helps provide justice in as many cases as
possible. Yet, as the brief history of modern international
criminal procedure has shown that we cannot sacrifice
justice on the altar of expediency, as that can lead to the
erosion of the protection of individual rights and the
search for the truth.
We have seen that framed in some of the criminal
tribunals of yesterday. Where the tribunal is under
pressure from donors, managerial reforms have been
introduced that resulted in impacts on the presentation
of defences. We have observed that scholars, and
even some judges, found that procedural reforms give
undue precedence to judicial economy over fairness.

21-332285/10

A/76/PV.31

We observed that, in recent times, judges of the
International Criminal Court have begun introducing
reforms that aim to improve the efficiency of the
Court, which no doubt is a good thing in principle and
mitigates undue delay.
But a thought that worries defence counsels remains
an unanswered question: does judicial managerialism
also circumscribe defence activities? We must guard
ourselves to ensure that judicial managerialism does
not lead to restrictions of defence investigations. It
is heartening to note that defence attorneys do not
perceive judicial managerialism as an impediment to
adequate representation at the International Criminal
Court. We have heard them say that, while respondents
complain about insufficient financial and institutional
support for defence work, that responsibility should be
placed on the Registry and States parties, and certainly
not on our judges. The view was also expressed that
defence attorneys thought judges should give greater
weight to defendants’ rights, inasmuch as they would
wish to protect the rights and interests of victims.
It is clear that the International Criminal Court
aims to promote not only justice but also peace.
Notwithstanding what the critics have to say, the
International Criminal Court has contributed
significantly to the promotion of international justice
and peace and has made a major impact on the
prevention of crime, since its prosecutions represent a
clear threat to highly placed individuals who commit
serious crimes. Despite all that, it is a Court with an
ethical aim — the prosecution of criminals — and it is
gaining in legitimacy. It could attract States that want
to show their support for the defence of human rights.
It has been said that the International Criminal
Court must nonetheless guard itself from State leaders
who ask it to act against respondents in order to reinforce
their own regime and authority, thereby seeking to turn
the Court into their political instrument. Any such
overtures must be discouraged at the highest level.
To do otherwise would contribute to the creation of
an unjust, illegal system, as such political actors want
the Court to focus on one side of the conflict. I would
say that the Assembly is confident that the Court will
respond to such overtures appropriately.
Sri Lanka thanks the President for giving it the
opportunity to make the observations I have provided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
6/10

11/11/2021

Mr. Bamya (Palestine): International law is often
elaborated in the aftermath of great tragedies and
horrors. Often unable to prevent their occurrence, it
aims to prevent their recurrence. In the post-Second
World War era, humankind developed unprecedented
and far-reaching instruments, adopting in the span
of five years the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, in one of the greatest leaps in
the history of the advancement of international law
and humankind.
We call the order that emerged at the end of that
devastating war the rules-based multilateral order,
or the international law-based order. We therefore
acknowledged that international law is the defining
line between order and chaos, between humanism and
barbarism, between survival and extinction. Upholding
international law is therefore the raison d’être of the
United Nations. But if we speak of rules, we need to abide
by them. Either their provisions need to be observed or
those breaching them need to be held accountable.
Would you say that the rule of law is upheld
in a country that has the best constitution, the best
legislation, but in which the people who are breaching
those instruments would not be held accountable
by a court? It would be a difficult claim to make. A
permanent court to prosecute crimes that strike at the
very essence of our humanity is not only indispensable
for victims who have no other avenue for justice and
redress, but is also a milestone in the progress of human
civilization. The International Criminal Court was not
created to fill a gap but an abyss, a black hole that would
devour all the light that generations have carried to us,
enduring great sacrifices in the process.
As we declared from day one, we joined the Court
seeking justice, not vengeance. We joined this court of
last resort to prevent the recurrence of crimes against
our people, because we believed the words and ideals
enshrined in the Rome Statute and because we believed
we were not less human or less deserving to enjoy the
protection of international law.
It is puzzling to see those who might finally face
prosecution one day, after 75 years of total impunity, be
outraged before a court that offers the highest standards
of fair trial, while they feel entitled to prosecute an
entire nation before their military courts, which fail any
standard of impartiality, in which the occupying Power
is party and judge and in which one is condemned in
21-33228

11/11/2021

advance, a system that considers our representatives,
our intellectuals, our human rights defenders, our
children and our non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) as terrorists and legitimate targets.
Only a few days ago, six of our very prominent
NGOs were designated as terrorist organizations by
Israel. I am sure that it is a complete coincidence that
they are among the most prominent NGOs cooperating
with the Court, and that a few days ago were discovered
to have been hacked by Pegasus spyware. It is puzzling
to see perpetrators of crimes argue quite seriously that
prosecuting war crimes undermines the chances of
peace, while pretending that the commission of war
crimes is compatible with the search for peace.
It is a responsibility to stand at this podium.
It is a responsibility to speak in this Hall, which
has witnessed so much of human history unfold,
including the struggle for liberation of so many here,
notably against colonialism and apartheid. The Israeli
representative stood behind this very podium only a few
days ago (see A/76/PV.24), tore up the report (A/76/53
and A/76/53/Add.1) of the Human Rights Council and
said here that the report belongs “in the dustbin of
anti-Semitism”.
That was not an isolated incident. Last February,
the Israeli Prime Minister, after the opening of the
International Criminal Court investigation, said that
“When the International Criminal Court
investigates Israel for fake war crimes — this is
pure anti-Semitism”,
adding that
“we will fight this perversion of justice with
all our might”.
In 2016, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), the Israeli representative said
that the resolution was “a victory for terror”, calling it
an “evil decree” — yes, a Security Council resolution
was a called an evil decree — and compared it to the
decrees of the times of the Maccabees.
Therefore, Palestinians are terrorists? Those
supporting their rights and just and lasting peace in
accordance with international law are anti-Semites?
The General Assembly and its members are
anti-Semites? The Security Council and its members
are anti-Semites? The Human Rights Council and its
members are anti-Semites? The International Court

A/76/PV.31

of Justice and the International Criminal Court are
anti-Semites because they do not accept the illegal
policies of the occupying Power?
Anti-Semitism is a serious matter. It led to one
of the worst horrors humankind has ever witnessed,
the Holocaust. It cannot be used and abused to shield
the Israeli occupation from condemnation, or the
perpetrators of crimes from being held accountable
before the International Criminal Court.
Many Jews have been an integral part, or even
been at the forefront of, the fight against colonialism
and apartheid, for civil rights and, yes, for Palestinian
rights, for the promotion and defence of international
law, informed by their own history, their own suffering
and their rejection of oppression, persecution,
discrimination and injustice, regardless of the identity
of the perpetrators and regardless of the identity of
the oppressed.
What is expected from the countries represented
here? To tear up the Charter of the United Nations? To
tear up the Universal Declaration of Human Rights?
To tear up the Geneva Conventions? To tear up the
Rome Statute, which was 50 years in the making? Or
to place an asterisk indicating that those rules apply
to all countries except Israel? What should they do?
Openly adopt double standards and say that those rules
can be applied only to some and not others, that there
are perpetrators who can never be held to account and
victims who can always be deprived of justice? Not many
would be comfortable with such destructive hypocrisy.
We decided at the end of the Second World War
to build an international law-based order. We have
enacted rules, not directed against anyone but for the
benefit of all, so that humankind can act in a way that is
compatible with that denomination, act humanely and
advance a more just and peaceful world.
Having a court to uphold those rules in the face of
the worst crimes — genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and the crime of aggression — striving
towards its universal jurisdiction is our duty towards
those who endured horrors in the past and those who
are enduring them as we speak. It is our duty towards
future generations, to spare them and protect them
from the recurrence of such horrors. There is no cause
more noble. There is no objective more deserving of our
collective efforts.

21-332287/10

A/76/PV.31

11/11/2021

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/76/L.7, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation of
position before taking action, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): As in previous years, Israel has
decided to disassociate itself from consensus on draft
resolution A/76/L.7 for the reasons it has expressed in
the past. As early advocates for the establishment of an
international criminal court and as the nation State of
the Jewish people, we remain committed to ensuring
that perpetrators of mass atrocities that deeply shock
the conscience of humankind be held accountable. It
could not be otherwise.
We hope that the reform agenda upon which the
International Criminal Court has embarked will ensure
that the Court lives up to its original mandate and
brings an end to the politicization, double standards and
misuse of the Court, which have squandered its limited
resources and greatly undermined its core legitimacy
and legal authority.
We would like to see the Court advance, in a
genuine manner, the goals for which it was founded. In
that spirit, we urge State parties and all key stakeholders
to support measures that would align the Court’s work
with the objectives, principles and legal parameters
envisioned by its founders.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before action is taken
on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.7.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/76/L.7 and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/76/L.7: Albania, Andorra, Australia,
8/10

Austria, Barbados, Belgium, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala,
Hungary, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Montenegro, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Panama, Peru, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Spain,
Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.7?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/5).

A/76/L.7

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The position of the Russian Federation
on the activities of the International Criminal Court
is well known. Many say that bringing perpetrators to
justice is the key to peace. However, when a politicized
international judiciary takes up the case, the opposite
can be true.
The report (see A/76/293) under discussion today,
like all such preceding reports, is evidence of the
International Criminal Court’s policy of selective
justice. The Court continues to artificially adjust
the provisions of the Rome Statute to one political
situation or another, thereby discrediting the very idea
of international criminal justice. In order to justify its
own requests, the Court creatively interprets the norms
of customary international law on the immunity of
State officials.
Therefore, in considering the issue of the immunity
of a Head of State, the Court concluded that the
norms of international law concerning the immunity
of officials from foreign criminal jurisdictions
are — allegedly — inapplicable in the case of
prosecution by international judicial bodies.
Such an interpretation runs counter to the practice and
opinio juris of States that form customary international
law. A loose interpretation of international customary
law undermines the stability of the world order based
on international law and threatens international peace
and security by creating conditions for violations of
21-33228

11/11/2021

the fundamental principles of sovereign equality and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
In no situation has the Court’s work contributed
to the stabilization of a country, either by preventing
new crimes or promoting national reconciliation. All
the positive developments that we have seen, whether in
Libya or in Darfur, are solely due to the efforts of their
citizens and their national authorities.
We have heard many calls for States to consider
acceding to the Rome Statute. The Court itself was
called a beacon of hope. We would urge captains not to
follow the light of that false beacon of hope, lest they
bring their ships to grief on the rocks.
In practice, enthusiasm for international criminal
justice has led to the churning out of a number of
politicized, quasi-judicial bodies that have nothing to
do with the establishment of truth or the administration
of justice. We would like to emphasize that the goal
of bringing perpetrators to justice can be effectively
achieved by national judicial systems.
Moreover, as practice has shown, that goal can be
achieved with significant savings, in both procedural
and material resources, as well as with a greater
guarantee of due process and respect for the rights of
participants in those proceedings.
In the light of what I have said, the Russian
delegation does not support the consideration of the
report of the Court and dissociates itself from the
consensus on resolution 76/5.
I wish to conclude by making a few comments on the
statements of the Georgian and Ukrainian delegations
(see A/76/PV.30).
I will not comment on the clichés and baseless
accusations that they listed. Instead, I will draw attention
to something else: the rare case in which our evaluations
of the International Criminal Court have something
in common. Considering their appeals addressed the
Court as well as their nature and substance, it is clear
that those delegations also consider the Court to be a
politicized instrument that has nothing to do with the
search for truth and justice.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): While my country, Syria, fully respects the
jurists who make up the International Criminal Court,
its position regarding the Court is one of opposition.
We reject the suspicious and unexamined tendencies by

A/76/PV.31

Governments of certain States regarding the expansion
of the universal jurisdiction concept in an illegal
and distorted manner. My country’s position is also
based on the rejection of unwise practices that those
Governments have adopted when dealing with the
concepts of justice, accountability and impunity, given
that those practices are selective and imbalanced.
My country’s delegation, driven by the spirit of
cooperation, chose not to impede the discussion of this
agenda item, but we reiterate that the delegation of my
country, the Syrian Arab Republic, disassociates itself
from the consensus on resolution 76/5, entitled, “Report
of the International Criminal Court”, especially given
that my country is not a party to the Court and does not
recognize the Court’s competence or mandate.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise
of the right of reply, may I remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five
minutes for the second intervention and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): Israel is once again deeply
disappointed that certain actors here have decided
to sidetrack this annual debate for their own narrow
political goals and aspirations. As we have witnessed
with other situations, conflicts cannot be solved on the
battlefield or through heinous acts of terrorism using
one’s own civilians as human shields, by celebrating
so-called humanitarian organizations that allow
themselves to be fronts for terror, or by celebrating socalled martyrs who murder our innocent civilians, be
they Jewish, Muslim, Druze or Christian.
I will say something on a very personal note — and
I say it as a mother who has done serious mileage with
her small children in bomb shelters and as an aunt of
five nieces who live near the Gaza border and who have
known only the threat of rocket fire for their entire
young lives. I say it as a friend and a relative who has
lost — as all my fellow countrymen and countrywomen
have lost — precious loved ones to gruesome terrorist
attacks. Our conflict cannot be solved in the courtroom
with vexatious or frivolous litigation, be it at the
International Criminal Court or elsewhere.

21-332289/10

A/76/PV.31

11/11/2021

I actually agree with my Palestinian colleague
that neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis are less
human or less deserving. Indeed, we can pave the
way to a better future for Palestinian children and for
Israeli children — my own included — only when the
Palestinian leadership finally decides to cease to act
unilaterally and sits down at the negotiating table with
a sincere and genuine readiness to discuss outstanding
issues and accept necessary, albeit at times painful,
compromises.

that we are not human or do not act humanely, using
classic anti-Semitic tropes that the speaker himself
clearly has little understanding of.

My Palestinian colleague can hurl false accusations
at my country and cynically appropriate loaded
terminology borrowed from important historic and
current racial justice movements and — as someone who
has never himself been a victim of anti-Semitism — he
can mock and cheaply dismiss our pain, or insinuate

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 77?

10/10

But we all know full well that our conflict has
nothing to do with race, and everything to do with
messy, complicated, conflicting claims, legal and
otherwise, that we will only be able to solve together,
as partners sitting around the negotiating table and not
as courtroom adversaries.

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

21-33228
