THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
tIl
MEETING:

18 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
, . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/15194 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , . . . , . . . . . . . .

I

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2379)

SiPV.2379

NOTE
>

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
, Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
‘quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965,became fully operative
on that date,

2379th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 18 June 1982, at 6.15 p.m.
Prcsidcnt:

Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the discussion of the item entitled ‘The situation
in the Middle East,’ in accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”

P/*~sent: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
I.

Adoption

3. The proposal by Jordan is not made pursuant to
rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
but, if approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as those conferred on Member States pursuant to rule 37.

agenda (S/Agenda/2379)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/15194
and Add. I and 2).

4. Does any member
on this proposal?

of the Council

wish to speak

5. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The United States regularly objects to permitting the
PLO to participate under the same rules which govern the participation
of Member States. The United
States supports the right of the PLO, or indeed any
other interested party, to participate in debates here
under terms which are appropriate to its status. It
seems perfectly clear that to treat the PLO as though
it were a State is not treatment appropriate to its
status, since it clearly is not a State but is a collectivity which acts in the name of a people but has no
juridical and territorial embodiment.

The wweting ~w c-ollPd to order crt 6.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/15194 and Add.1
and 2)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion jbrn French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Israel, Lebanon, the Netherlands and Sweden in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda, In accordance with the
usuai practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. For that reason, the United States will oppose
permitting the PLO to participate under this rule and
asks that a vote be taken on this question. We shall
vote no.
7. The PRESIDENT
(intarpretution
from French):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak,
I shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on the
proposal by Jordan.
A vote IV~LStaken hy show of hands.

At the invitcrtion of the> President, Mr. Hum (Isrcrel)
lrnd Mr. TLrbni (Lebtrnon) took plclws crt the> Corrncil
iobl~; Mr, Schelterna (Netherlands) und Mr. Thunhorg
ISllqeden) took the plcrc~s rc.wrwdfiw theIn crt thP side
of the Courwil chcttnher.

In fcwour: China, Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire
Agrrinst: United

2. The PRESIDENT
(interprcjtation fro/n Fwnc+h):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
a letter dated 18 June from the representative of
Jordan [S//5238] which reads as follows:

States of America

Ahsttrining:
France, Japan, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
I

Kingdom

of

12. Obviously the situation in Lebanon is fraught with
uncertainty as well as with pain and turmoil.
13. The United States has voted today to extend this
mandate without any extension of responsibilities.
functions or territorial scope because we believe that
this course will contribute most directly and clearly to
the restoration of the peace and well-being of the arei1
and to the restoration of the authority and sovereignty
of the Government of Lebanon.

8. The PRESIDENT
(illtrrprrtrrtion
jiwn
French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 18 June from the representative of Jordan [S//5239] which reads as follows:

14. The mandate has been extended for two months.
During that period, while the situation stabilizes, we
in the Council will have the opportunity to collectively
study what best serves the common good of the people
of Lebanon and the peace of the region.

“1 have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘Situation
in the Middle East,’ in accordance with rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.”

IS. Mr. DORR (Ireland): The six-monthly mandate
of UNIFIL
expires on I9 June and it was necessary
to renew it by then if the Force was to continue in
being.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to accede to this request.

16. Until two weeks ago it had seemed that this
would be a normal, though not of course routine.
matter, and that we would have been able to renew
the mandate for a further period of six months as we
have done often in the past. That is no longer the
case.

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jbn
French):
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period
I I December 1981 to 3 June 1982 [S//5/94 rind Add./
crnd 21. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/15235, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of consultations
by the Council. I understand that the Council is prepared to vote on the draft resolution. If there is no
objection, I shall now put this draft to the vote,

17. The events of the past two weeks have brought
a ma.jor change in the situation in the region. The full
impact of that change cannot yet be understood. But
it is impossible to speak here in a limited way about
the UNIFIL
mandate without addressing oneself.
to some degree at least, to that larger question.
18. How does one describe those events’? The ceasefire which by and large had held reasonably well since
24 July 1981 was broken in early June. During the
night of 4/5 June massive Israeli armoured forces.
brushing aside UNIFIL
invaded Lebanon. They huve
now occupied the whole of southern Lebanon up to
the suburbs of Beirut, and they hold that city under
siege. No reliable figures are yet available.
but it
appears that Israel’s invasion of Lebanon has cosl
thousands of Lebanese and Palestinian lives as well 11s
the lives of several hundred Israeli soldiers. It has
brought widespread destruction and has macle hundreds of thousands homeless.

lrn .f~~sour:China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Spain, Togo, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Zaire
Agrrinst:
Ahstcrinirqq:

None
Poland,

Union

of

Soviet

Socialist

Republics

19. Israel has justified its actions by invoking
the
legitimate
right of self-defence. I cannot but I-L‘peat here again what I said on 8 June: Where is the
where is the sense of proportion
correspondence,
[2377th meeting, prrrtr. 34]? Can this really bring true
peace to Galilee, now or ever? It seems me that, on
the contrary, the spiral of violence has been given
another violent upward twist and that we are farther
and farther removed from any hope of a comprehensive peace settlement in the region.

10. The PRESIDENT
(irztoprcttrtiolr
.fiorn Fwnrh):
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
have asked to be allowed to make statements following
the voting.
I I. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): The United States is pleased that the Council is
extending the mandate of UNIFIL
for a period of two
months. We are likewise pleased and grateful that the
troop-contributing
countries are prepared to continue
to so materially assist the Organization in carrying out
its responsibilities.

20. As my Prime Minister, Mr. Haughey, emphasizcd
in a debate in the Irish Parliament on I6 June, Ireland
2

adheres firmly to the Middle East policy enunciated by
the member States of the European Economic Community in their Venice declaration of 13 June 1980
[S//4UOY]. We believe strongly in the need for a negotiated peace settlement which would take account of
all aspects of the Middle East problem, including the
right of Israel to peace and security and the right of the
Palestinians to recognition and self-determination as a
people. We therefore strongly deplore and condemn
the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. It may have succeeded
in the short term by sheer weight of military force,
but in the long term the fruit of what has happened
over the past two weeks can only be a deeper bitterness for which Israel and all of us may yet pay heavily
in years to come.

cil-that
is, up to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon. Instead it had to contend with the
so-called d~~,ftrc*toforces of Major Haddad, based in
a strip between the southern lines of UNIFIL
and the
Lebanese border. Those forces were armed, directed
and supplied at all times by Israel, and UNIFIL
was
subject to frequent harassment by them. UNIFIL
also
came into conflict at times with the armed elements
to the north, which tried to infiltrate its lines, and the
Force suffered deaths and injuries from both quarters.
25. Many times over the four-year period the Council reiterated in successive resolutions its determination
to ensure that the Force would indeed be allowed to
operate fully throughout the area assigned to it up to
the international
border. But this remained at all
times an aspiration. The aspiration was piously repeated in successive resolutions of the Council, But
it was never something which the Council or its members were prepared to insist on or to carry into effect.
Still, and despite these circumstances,
UNIFIL
was
one stable element in a very unstable region.

21, These are, however, wider issues which I do not
wish to address here in detail. There will be a time for
that later. There is one aspect of what has happened,
nevertheless, which is directly relevant to our present
decision on the UNIFIL
mandate. That is the contempt
shown for a United Nations peace-keeping force which
was brushed aside by a vastly superior military force
-by tens of thousands of troops with heavy armour
and with naval and air support. On this point something
must be said.

26. Together with 10 other countries, Ireland has
maintained
a contingent of some 750 troops with
the Force since 1978. Why have we done so?
27. Like most of the other small countries which
took part, we had no direct involvement in the affairs
of the region and no direct interest to serve there.
We sent our troops to southern Lebanon and we kept
them there despite the difficulties and the losses because the Council, through the Secretary-General,
asked us to do so. We responded because we wanted
to strengthen and uphold the principles of the United
Nations and because we believed we were contributing, even though in a small way, to the effort to bring
peace and stability to a troubled region for the benefit
of all its people, I repeat, for the benefit of all its people. That is not mere rhetoric-or,
if it is, it has been
backed by four years of service by our soldiers in very
difficult circumstances.

22. The concept of United Nations peace-keeping as
it has evolved over the years is a fragile one, but it is
one of the notable successes of the United Nations.
Though peace-keeping contingents carry light weapons, United Nations peace-keeping is quite a different
matter from military or enforcement action. Peacekeeping is a gentler art. It always depends fundamentally on consent-the
consent of the parties to the conflict and the consent of the Government of the country
where the force is to be stationed. But it is not just a
matter of consent in the sense of grudging acquiescence. To be fully effective a peace-keeping force
should not only have no enemies: it should receive full
co-operation from all concerned. The peace-keeping
force is there in their interest. Its function is to separate
forces which are mutually antagonistic, but not to
subdue them. Its authority is moral rather than physical
or military. The force indeed has behind it the authority
of the Security Council and the international community as a whole. But United Nations peace-keeping
troops on the ground can never be more than a thin
blue line. That line exists only so long as it is given
acceptance and respect.

28. When the United Nations is criticized as ineffective, as it so often is today, let this be remembered
as the effort of the small countries to make it effective.
Let it be remembered too that for over 2.5 years other
small and middle-level
countries from every region
-Africa,
Asia, Europe and Latin America-have
sent their men to serve in other peace-keeping forces,
a total of more than 300,000 in all.
29. We I I countries are now asked to continue that
commitment
for a further interim period pending the
working out of some more permanent arrangement in
the region. We are being told essentially that much
has now changed; big things may be afoot; new ideas
may emerge: it is not yet certain that we will be needed
when the smoke has cleared, but we should not go away
in case we are.

23. Since it was established in 1978 [~.~.volr/fion
425 f/978)], UNIFIL
has operated in extremely difficult conditions. Its mandate has always been difficult
and ambiguous, One side in the conflict has focused
on one paragraph of that mandate: the other side has
focused on another.
’ 24. But the United Nations has lived before with
ambiguity. More serious in this case was the fact that
UNIFIL
was never allowed to deploy fully throughout
the whole area of operations assigned to it by the Coun-

30.

We accept this approach reluctantly as the best
can do for the moment. But it is clear that

the Council

3

--

--

it creates an even more difficult situation for the countries contributing troops to UNIFIL.
We have to ask
ourselves now why we should stay when we have no
certainty that we will eventually be needed, what we
will be allowed to achieve while we stay and how far
those who wish us to stay will help us to achieve it.

lieve that it is acceptable that Israel should remain
indefinitely in Lebanon or that the United Nations
should condone this. Israel will have to withdraw to the
internationally
recognized
boundaries,
as it was
already obliged to do unconditionally
under the terms
of resolution 509 (1982), which we adopted unanimously here on 6 June.

31. Ireland has a double interest in these questions
-as a member of the Council and as a troop-contributing country.

37. Taking account of all that I have said, however.
Ireland, as a member of the Council, has voted for the
draft resolution before us as an interim measure. and
as a troop-contributing
country we are prepared to
maintain our existing commitment
to UNIFIL
for the
interim period for which the mandate has now been
extended.

32. After careful consideration as a member of the
Council, we have agreed to join in the decision which
the Council has just taken. This means leaving the
Force in being for an interim period. In addition, as a
troop-contributing
country, Ireland is also prepared
to retain its contingent with UNIFIL
for the period
now decided on by the Council.

38. I should like to say, finally, that my Government
has decided within the past few days to make available
a sum of 100,000 Irish pounds to the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for emergency
relief work in Lebanon,

33. But if we agree, as we do, then I believe that we
are also entitled to insist on certain basic conditions,
There are certain obvious requirements which simply
must be met. If they are not, then the moral authority
arid the credibility of the Force, and perhaps of United
Nations peace-keeping in general, will trickle slowly
-into the sand.

39. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (irztrrpwtation
from Russiotz,l:
The
question which is today being considered by the
Council goes far beyond the scope of the officially
approved agenda.

34. The first requirement
is that UNIFIL
be given
full co-operation in whatever it is now expected to
do. There is a limit-an
obvious limit-to
how far a
United Nations peace-keeping force can be brushed
aside by superior military forces, treated with contempt
and still retain the credibility
which it may yet need
to serve a future purpose. To retain that credibility
in the present difficult interim period, UNIFIL
contingents must be allowed freedom of movement and the
Force must be given co-operation in carrying out the
functions assigned to it, including in particular the
humanitarian
tasks it will now assume under paragraph 2 of the resolution.

40. Two weeks ago Israel carried out another largescale aggression against a sovereign Arab State.
Lebanon. The Israeli troops broke through thle lines
of the military units of the United Nations that were
sent into southern Lebanon pursuant to a decision of
the Council following Israel’s aggression in 1978. The
Government of Israel is thus once again showing its
utter disregard of the Council and its decisions, which
have binding force for all States Members of the
Organization.
The Israeli troops have invaded deep
into Lebanese territory, sowing death and destruction
among the Lebanese and among the Palestinians who
had sought refuge in that country. The occupying
forces have seized more than one third of the territory
of Lebanon, barbarously destroying dozens of POWlation centres, and have now laid siege to the capital
of the country, Beirut. A serious threat has arisen to the
sovereignty and independent existence of Lebanon.

35. The second requirement is that the present decision to extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for an interim
period must be seen as inherently a temporary expedient. It is an interim arrangement for what was, in
theory at least, an interim force. The word “interim”
must now, for once, be given its full meaning.

41. The scale of this recent criminal action by Tel
Aviv is truly horrifying. Many thousands have been
killed or wounded, hundreds of thousands have been
left homeless and without any means of survival. The
entire Palestinian people has fallen victim to the Israeli
aggression. A policy is pursued against it that can be
described only as a policy of genocide.

36. That is not to say that Ireland will not be ready
in appropriate
circumstances
to consider a new or
expanded role for UNIFIL
if the Council should so
decide. My Government wants to maintain our commitment to, and our involvement
in, United Nations
peace-keeping in the area and United Nations peacekeeping in general. What I want to do here is simply
to emphasize strongly that the present prolongation
of
the mandate is no more than a holding operation.
Some much larger decisions must be faced and new
dispositions made for anything beyond this temporary
period. It will be vital this time that Council decisions
once taken should be fully respected and fully implemented by all concerned. In particular, we do not be-

42. The aggressor does not conceal the fact that its
heavy blows are directed primarily against the Palestinian movement of opposition, against those fforces
that stand in the way of the plans to decapitate the
Palestinian people and to settle the Palestinian problem
on the basis of the notorious “administrative
autonomy” worked out at Camp David. At the same time,
4

there are other far-reaching objectives, namely, to
terrify the Arab peoples and to force them to abandon
their struggle for their legitimate rights and submit to
the military and strategic designs of the imperialists in
the Middle East. But the Palestinian problem, the right
of the people of Palestine to self-determination
and to
establish their own State, has been, is and will remain
the heart of a settlement in the Middle East. Until this
problem is resolved, the struggle for a just solution
will continue, despite terrorism and murder by the
Israeli occupiers.

Israeli aggression. Washington does not hide the fact
that the United States intends to extract from the
situation considerable political and military strategic
advantages for itself.
48. In such circumstances it is essential to put an
end to this cynical juggling with the fates of peoples,
which has once again brought the Middle East to the
dangerous brink.
49. The Soviet Union considers that the Council,
as the organ bearing the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
immediately
take steps to halt the Israeli aggression,
force Israel to implement
resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982), and defend the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon and the legitimate rights and
interests of the Arab peoples.

43. The Soviet Union has on frequent occasions
emphasized
that this present adventuristic
policy
could cost Israel and its people dear. In a statement
by the Soviet Government
published on 14 June,
Israel was once again warned with great seriousness
that events in the Middle East, in a region in the immediate vicinity of the southern frontiers of the Soviet
Union, cannot but affect the interests of the Soviet
Union [see S//5223, annex].

50. To refer specifically to the item on the agenda,
the Soviet Union found it possible not to oppose the
extension for a limited period of the mandate of
UNIFIL.
At the same time, it should be emphasized
that this is an interim measure. As the SecretaryGeneral stressed in his report:

44. In the light of recent events, we can see particularly clearly that direct responsibility for the actions
of the Israeli aggressor lies with its senior partner and
protector,
the United States of America. It is the
United States that has armed Israel to the teeth and by
its connivance given Israel the green light to carry out
criminal anti-Arab actions. It is the United States that
is providing diplomatic cover for the policy of State
terrorism being pursued by Tel Aviv.

“recent developments
have radically altered the
circumstances in which UNIFIL
was established
and under which it functioned since March 1978.”
[Sl/5/94/Add.2,
pccln. I I I
In this connection a number of questions arise, questions that the Council will have to study and consider
in the coming weeks.

45. It was no mere chance that the invasion of Lebanon was preceded by the deal between Washington
and Tel Aviv relating to the so-called strategic alliance
and by massive supplies and deliveries to Israel of
American weaponry; and it was no coincidence that on
the eve of the Israeli attack Israel’s Defence Minister, Sharon, visited the United States. When the
invasion was already in full swing the Prime Minister
of Ist-ael, Begin, received an invitation to go to Washington for talks with the American President about the
so-called new situation that had developed in the
region.

51, Sir Anthony
PARSONS
(United
Kingdom):
My Government is horrified by the terrible suffering
and damage which have been inflicted upon Lebanon
and its people. Large numbers of innocent men,
women and children have been killed or wounded.
Hundreds of thousands have been made homeless.
Whole coastal cities have been devastated.
52. The dangers to international
peace must be
evident to us all. We are seriously concerned about
the risks of the conflagration spreading. Already there
has been bitter fighting between Israeli and Syrian
forces.

46. In the Security Council the American representative blocked the adoption of a draft resolution
(S//S/8.5] that could have helped put an end to the
Israeli aggression in Lebanon. To date there has been
not a single word of condemnation from the United
States of those piratical actions by Israel or in defence
of human rights, something that the American representatives are always very eager to preach about under
any pretext, or even without any.

53. The events leading to this awful destruction have
been clearly set out by the Secretary-General
in his
report to the Council [S//.51Y4/Add./].
Beginning with
the bombing of Beirut by Israeli aircraft on 4 June,
he has described how hostilities escalated despite
appeals for restraint both by him and by the President
of the Council [S//5/63].
On 5 June the Council met
12374th mc~tina] and unanimously adopted resolution
508 (1982), calling upon all the parties to the conflict
to cease immediately
and simultaneously
all military
activities within Lebanon and across the LebaneseIsraeli border no later than 0600 hours, local time,
on 6 June 1982. The PLO responded to this call, but

47. The situation in Lebanon remains critical. The
United States and Israel are now making efforts to
strengthen to the advantage of the aggressor the situation that has developed in that country. The Israeli
leader and the American representative, Habib, acting
at one with them, have in fact stated a number of
political demands to make more secure the fruits of
5

Israel did not. The following morning, 6 June, Israeii
forces invaded Lebanon forcing their way through the
UNIFIL
lines at gunpoint. That evening the Council
met again [2375rh lneetin~] and unanimously adopted
resolution 509 (1982), calling for the immediate and
unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forces. The PLO
and the Lebanese Government accepted that resolution, but the Government of Israel did not. The invading
Israeli forces have subsequently advanced to the
outskirts of Beirut, leaving a wave of destruction
behind them.

lost if the Force were precipitately
disbanded. We
also believe that, in so far as circumstances permit.
the Force may be able in the interim to play a heipfut
and humanitarian role. In this context we call on the
Government of Israel to show the full respect for
UNIFIL
which it has so far failed to show.
58. On behalf of my Government,
I should like to
pay a tribute to the officers and men of UNIFIL,
and
to their Governments, for the selfless efforts which
they have made, and are continuing to make, on behalf
of the international community.
We do not accept
the misguided criticisms that have been made about
the Force’s inability to prevent the Israeli advance.
As the Secretary-General has rightly stated, the Force
has neither the mandate nor the military capacity to
counter an invasion [S/15/Y4/Add.2].

54. The facts are plain. Israel has invaded Lebanon
in flagrant violation of international
law and of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as in complete disregard of the demands of the
Council. My Government
regards the invasion and
occupation as a violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty,
and we cannot accept that the Israeli action amounted
to self-defence. Together with the other member
States of the European Community, we made our position clear in a statement issued at Bonn on 9 June
[S//5/9.5, onnp.r]. In that statement the Ten called
urgently on all the parties concerned to act in accordance with Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509
(1982), and in particular called on Israel to withdraw
all its forces immediately
and unconditionally
from
Lebanon and to place UNIFIL
in a position to accomplish its mission without hindrance. The statement
continued that should Israel refuse to comply with
those two resolutions the Ten would examine the
possibilities for future action.

59. We acknowledge the difficulties which confront
General Callaghan and his men in maintaining UINIFIL
and its positions after the Israeli invasion has made it
impossible for them to carry out their mandate. We
salute with gratitude their readiness to respond to the
international
community’s
wish that they !jholjId
nevertheless remain on the spot until better times.
when it may again be possible for them to exercise all
their functions. Meanwhile, they deserve the continued
support and appreciation of the international community.
GO. Tonight, our thoughts must be above all with
Lebanon and the people who live there. The heartfe’tt
sympathies of the British Government and people go
out to the people of Lebanon in their plight. My GOVernment is contributing to the urgently needed humanitarian relief effort through the international agencies.
both bilaterally and via the European Community.
We
hope that all countries will co-operate in this international effort.

55. My Government
strongly supports the independence, sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and national unity of Lebanon. We believe that it is the duty
of the Council to uphold these essential conditions.
We want, as we believe the Lebanese people want,
to see a Lebanon free from the violence and suffering
which have been its tragedy.

61. Above all, it is essential that the fighting should
now come to an end, and that Israel should comply
with Council resolution 509 (1982) and immedliately
withdraw ail its forces from Lebanon to the internntionally recognized boundaries. The rule of international law must be upheld, or we shall ail suffer the
grim consequences of the failure to do so.

54. At the same time, we believe that there can be
no real peace or stability in the region unless the aspirations of the Palestinian people are also taken into
account. We do not believe that it is either wise or just
for Israel to seek to deny people the right which it
claims for itself. Any lasting and peaceful solution will
have to confirm both Israel’s right to peace and security and the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination. These principles have been set out in the Venice
declaration [S//4009]. They are principles which my
Government believes remain essential to the search for
peace.

62. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpcr~~ltion
.fivo!??
Chinese): The Israeli authorities, in defiance of the
relevant resolutions of the Council and of the principies of the Charter of the United Nations, have taken
the obdurate course of carrying out a policy of aggression and expansion. They have flagrantly launched ~l
massive military invasion against Lebanon, forcibly
occupied large tracts of territory of the central and
southern parts of Lebanon, bombarded and attacked
Lebanese cities and towns and Palestinian
refugee
camps, thereby causing bloodshed and spreading death
among tens of thousands of innocent Lebanese and
Palestinian civilians.

57. Our immediate task this evening was to consider
the future of UNIFIL.
My Government
warmly
supports resolution 51 I (19821, extending the Force’s
mandate for two months. We believe that it is still too
early to know whether there is a role for UNIFIL
in the new and radically altered circumstances
in
Lebanon. But we believe that it is right to preserve the
option for such a role, an option which might well be
6

63. At present, Israel is using its announcement of a
cease-fire as a camouflage to continue expanding its
acts of aggression. It has surrounded the urban areas
of the Lebanese capital of Beirut, thereby creating an
extremely grave situation. The Israeli authorities have
openly trampled underfoot the norms of international
law and have carried out naked aggression against a
sovereign Arab State, in a premeditated
attempt to
wipe out the resistance forces of the Palestinian people.

meddling from outside, strengthen their unity and
persist in the struggle against the common enemy.
70. We wish to address an appeal to all peace-loving
and justice-upholding
countries and peoples to make
common efforts to curb Israeli aggression, support
the just struggle of the Arab peoples and defend peace
in the Middle East.
71.

Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (inr~rfi-o/n French): May I first of all congratulate
you most warmly on your accession to the presidency
of the Council for the month of June.

prctcrtion

64. It has committed a new crime against the Palestinian people and seriously aggravated the situation
in the Middle East region. The Chinese Government
and people express the utmost indignation and strongly
condemn this Israeli act of aggression,

72. Your eminent diplomatic qualities, of which you
have already given proof, Mr. President, together with
the constant desire of the friendly Government of
France to contribute by concrete actions and initiatives to the solution of the major problems of international concern, are a guarantee of the success of out
work under your presidency.

65. At a time when Israel’s frenzied invasion of
Lebanon
was being condemned by the people of
various countries unanimously,
the United States
Government
openly used its veto power in the United
Nations to prevent the Security Council from adopting
a draft resolution condemning Israel for its refusal to
withdraw its troops [S/15/85]. This only resulted in
heightened Israeli aggressiveness and in the failure of
the Council to fulfil its task of defending international
peace and security, The United States connivance at,
and support for, Israeli aggression should be condemned.

73. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing, for the distinction and skill
with which he guided the work of the Council during
the month of May.
74. Finally, I should like to thank the SecretaryGenera1 for the clarity of the reports which he has
submitted to us on the present events in Lebanon
[S/151Y4 unu Add.1 and 21.

66. Because Israel has wantonly invaded Lebanon,
UNIFIL
has long found itself unable to discharge its
functions. However, in view of a possible need that
may arise from the development of the situation in
Lebanon and the request of the Lebanese Government, we voted in favour of the resolution which has
just been adopted.

75. In speaking in this debate, our sole concern is
to respect the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law.

67. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate that
the Chinese Government has always held that Israel
must withdraw from the Arab territories occupied
since 1967, that the Palestinian people must regain
their national rights, including the right to return to
their homeland, the right to self-determination
and the
right to establish a State, and that there must be a
comprehensive
and just settlement of the Middle East
question.

77, I recall that, following our independence, Lebanese citizens, whose great erudition fascinated us,
came to teach in our schools and universities. We
were impressed by their great open-mindedness,

76. The present agony of Lebanon, a State Member
of the United Nations, the loss of human life and the
destruction of property of all kinds are causing us great
anxiety.

78. Furthermore,
we have memories of the Lebanon
of the 1960s and before-memories
of our various stays
in that lovely country, memories of a gay, welcoming
and prosperous people, devoted to dialogue as a result
of their position at the intersection of the Western and
Eastern worlds and of the Muslim and Christian worlds.
We remember a people whose contribution
to international co-operation
and to the international
community’s
efforts to promote understanding
among
peoples and international
peace and security has
always been remarkable.

68. We firmly support the Lebanese, Palestinian and
Syrian armed forces and people in their just struggle
to resist Israeli aggression and safeguard their national
rights. Israel must comply with the relevant resolutions of the Council, stop its aggression against Lebanon immediately
and withdraw all its troops from
Lebanon unconditionally.
69. It is the great Arab people, with its glorious tradition of struggle, which will determine the destiny of
the Arab nation. The unity of the Arab people is the
best guarantee of the victory of the Arab nation. We
are deeply convinced that, pursuing the general policy
of striving to achieve the lofty goal of the Arab nation,
the Arab peoples will certainly be able to eliminate

79. Today, that people, which has been stricken by an
unjust fate, and which has already lost its characteristic smile, seems to be destined to lose everything
if the United Nations does not react firmly and appropriately.
7

80. Nevertheless,
we admire the determination
of
Lebanon to remain itself and to defend its sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity.
In accordance with the Charter, the United Nations
has no alternative but to protect Lebanon from destruction, humiliation,
annihilation and flagrant attacks
against its sovereignty, independence
and territorial
integrity.

Force and to co-operate in the achievement
objectives.

of those

86. Zaire, which voted in favour of resolutions SO8
(1982) and 509 (1982), considers that concrete and
effective measures should be adopted to put an end ta
actions against the territorial
integrity, unity. sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon within
its internationally recognized boundaries.

81, The tragedy of the Lebanese people today,
weaponless in the face of attempts to dismantle its
country and in the face of threats to and constant
violations of its territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political
independence
within its internationally
recognized boundaries, is especially moving for us of
Zaire, for we ourselves have greatly suffered from
similar violations and threats in the course of our
history. We must therefore express our anxiety with
regard to the obstacles which continue to be put in the
way of the implementation
of resolution 509 (1982),
the harassment of the United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Lebanon and the challenge they are facing
in carrying out their functions. This is clearly described
in the reports of the Secretary-General
in paragraphs 36
and 37 of document S/IS 194 and especially in paragraphs 12, 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22 of document S/15194/
Add. 1.

87. The Council should furthermore call on Member
States which are able to do so to use their influence
with the parties concerned to ensure on the one hand
compliance with resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (19821
and on the other hand that the Force is able to ‘accomplish its tasks fully and without obstruction. The difficulties placed in the path of UNIFIL
in its efforts to
deliver food and medicine to the civilian population
affected are certainly very regrettable.
88. It is of the utmost importance that the parties
concerned heed the appeal of the Council in the successive resolutions it has adopted on the question, fol
the purpose of the Council is, and must be, to guarantee strict respect for the integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon within it:; intcrnationally recognized boundaries and for the provisions of the relevant conventions on the treatment of
civilian persons in time of war.

82. We should like to pay a special tribute to the
commander, the soldiers and the civilian personnel
of UNIFIL for their courage, devotion and professional
conscientiousness in the face of harassment, threats
and even, for some of the Force, death.

89. It was in that spirit that the Republic of Zaire
voted in favour of resolution 511 (1982), which 1~1s
just been adopted, with the aim, on the one hand, of
restoring to Lebanon its territorial integrity, full sovereignty and political independence within its boundaries and, on the other hand, of assisting in the fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to the Force by the
Council.

83. We continue to believe that it was essential, in
the obvious interest of Lebanon, which the United
Nations must protect, and for the sake of the credibility of the United Nations in general and the Security Council in particular,
to renew the UNIFIL
mandate for a reasonable period in the hope that the
parties primarily
concerned will co-operate
with
UNIFIL
in discharging its mandate, without restrictions or obstacles, and that all the members of the
Council will reaffirm their confidence in the usefulness of the United Nations peace-keeping forces in
Lebanon.

90. Furthermore, the delegation of Zaire is particularly pleased by the final preambular paragraph of
resolution 5 I1 (1982), which states that the Council
bears in mind “the need to avoid any developments
which could further aggravate the situation and the
need, pending an examination of the situation by the:
Security Council in all its aspects”, and I emphasizt:
this, “to preserve in place the capacity of the United
Nations to assist in the restoration of the peace”.
We have always said that instead of continuing to de4
with individual aspects of the Middle East situation,
it is high time to begin new efforts to consider all
aspects of this thorny problem with a view to finding
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Middle East crisis on the basis of the relevant SCCUrity Council and General Assembly resolutions.

84. What has recently happened in Lebanon,
in
particular the harassment of the UNIFIL
troops, must
not happen again if we do not want to strike a blow
at future United Nations peace-keeping
operations
and thus severely weaken the Security Council’s
ability to fulfil its main responsibility
regarding the
maintenance
of international
peace and security.
I do not recall any situations on such a scale and
involving such brutality in the past.

91. In conclusion, I should like to say that Israel has
a right to peace and security, just as the Palestinian
people has certain inalienable rights, in particular
its
right to establish a sovereign independent State. which
must be recognized and respected, for the question
of Palestine is at the core of the Middle East crisis.

85. We can only deplore the lack of co-operation by
the parties concerned in the efforts of UNIFIL
fully to
discharge its mandate. The Council must immediately
call upon all the parties concerned to refrain from
activities incompatible
with the objectives
of the
8

92. Mr. NOWAK (Poland): Poland abstained in the
vote taken a short time ago. Our previous reservations concerning
certain important
political
and
financial aspects of UNIFIL
remain valid. They are
even more timely in the light of recent developments
in the situation in the region.

“Expressing the profound indignation
of Polish
society, the Government
of ‘the Polish People’s
Republic resolutely condemns the new Israeli war
against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples and
the objectives that are being sought. It calls for the
immediate cessation by Israel of hostilities and for
the withdrawal of its forces from Lebanon’s territory. Continuation
of the aggression threatens to
spread hostilities in the region, with sinister consequences for world peace.

93, There is no need to emphasize that this meeting
is taking place in special circumstances. The ominous
sounds of Israeli armed aggression against Lebanon
were clearly audible here; they reached this chamber
as the barbaric attacks continued unabated in spite
of the cease-fire that was declared, in defiance of the
unanimous
resolution of the Council demanding an
immediate
cease-fire and unconditional
withdrawal
of Israeli forces from Lebanon, and in flagrant violation and disregard of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.
The wave of protests, the outrage of public opinion and
the condemnation
of this new brutal act have been
world-wide.
They have found expression, inter crlicr,
in numerous statements and communiquCs. On 9 June
the following statement was issued by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Polish People’s Republic:

“Poland expresses its solidarity with the victims
of the barbaric aggression and will continue consistently to work towards a comprehensive and just
solution of the Middle East conflict, taking into
account the rights and interests of all the States and
peoples in that region.”
94. Yesterday, the spokesman for the Polish Government pointed out in his statement that the aggressor
was continuing the invasion to create afrrit trccxompli
particularly with regard to undermining the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon and to the physical elimination of the Palestinian nation and its organizations fighting for the attainment of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians to self-determination
and the
establishment of their own State. The spokesman said:

“On 5 June Israeli ground, naval and air forces
invaded
Lebanon, and are continuing
criminal
hostilities,
to which the civilian population-women
and children-are
falling victim.
This massive
attack constitutes another act of Israeli aggression
against the Arab States, and against the sovereignty,
inviolability
and territorial integrity of Lebanon.

“The Government of the Polish People’s Republic strongly condemns the criminal aggression of
Israel against Lebanon and the Palestinian nation.
It is with indignation
and growing concern that
Polish society watches the barbaric methods used by
the Israelis.

“The aim of the invasion is the physical liquidation of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, the destruction of their political and military organizations,
terrorizing
the Arab nations and imposing on Lebanon the Israeli-American
policy of dictating from
a position
of strength and imposing separatist
solutions in the spirit of Camp David which negate
the inviolable rights of the Palestinian nation.

“Their efforts to exterminate
the Palestinians
in Lebanon should be stopped immediately.”
95. The statement went on to say that the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon would not have been possible
without the support given to the aggressor by its
imperialist
protectors in blocking the action of the
Council, This poses the threat of a dangerous spread
of the Middle East conflict. The responsibility
for
that will be borne by Israel and those States which
do not use their opportunities
effectively to stop the
aggression.

“Israel’s aggression constitutes a violation of the
basic norms of international law and of the principles
of co-existence among nations and is a cynical challenge to the United Nations, as is demonstrated by
such facts as the crossing by a part of the Israeli
tank forces in Lebanon of territory controlled by the
United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
Israel’s arrogant disregard for the recent Security
Council resolutions calling on it to cease aggression
immediately
and withdraw its forces from Lebanon.

96. The Polish Government
demands that an end
be put to the invasion of Lebanon and that an immediate withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from that
country be carried out.
97, It is obvious that the solution of the conflict in
the Middle East cannot be achieved through war and
aggression. It cannot be achieved through so-called
strategic alliances protecting the aggressor, through
the plans of so-called administrative
autonomy,
through arrogant ultimatums.
It can be attained only
as a result of peace negotiatiohs with the participation
of all parties concerned and by taking into consideration their vital rights and interests, including the

“Israel’s
aggression against Lebanon and the
Palestinians
has been prepared long in advance.
It was preceded by the barbaric bombing of Beirut
and other Lebanese cities last April, May and early
June. Obviously, Israel would not be able to pursue
this policy of aggression and terror against the
Arab States and the Palestinian people without the
support and connivance of its imperialist protectors.
9

inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Such is the
firm point of view of my Government.

be construed as an acceptance of the intolerable
presence of Israeli troops in the UNIFIL area, nor of
the restrictions imposed upon the freedom of movement of the Force. We therefore appeal urgently to the
Israeli Government to respect UNIFIL
fully, to withdraw the Israeli units from the Netherlands an.d other
UNIFIL
sectors at once and to allow humanitarian
assistance without hindrance.

98. The PRESIDENT
(intclpretntion
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
99. Mr, SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands):
Mr. President, I thank you and the members of the Council
for allowing me to participate in this debate. As a
Member of the United Nations and in particular as
a contributor of troops to UNIFIL,
the Netherlands
Government
is profoundly
concerned
about the
recent developments in Lebanon. In their statement
of 9 June [S//5/95, tr/z!ze.r], the members of the European Community
strongly condemned
the recent
Israeli invasion of that country. My Government
deeply regrets the countless casualties, particularly
among the civilian population,
and the large-scale
destruction the Israeli invasion of Lebanon has caused.

103. In the opinion of the Netherlands, it is quite
inconceivable that UNIFIL
should be given an additional lease of life only to be harassed and vilified in
the course of its duty. The credibility of the United
Nations and its peace-keeping operation in L.ebanon
is at stake.
104. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the
commitment
of the Netherlands
Government: to the
concept of the peace-keeping operations of the United
Nations. If this concept has been shaken by Israeli
violations of UNIFIL,
we should in no way lose sight
of the importance of peace-keeping operations for the
containment of conflicts nor, for that matter, of the
achievements
of various peace-keeping operations
in the past and, indeed, of UNIFIL
over the past
four years.

100. The Netherlands Government strongly supports
the territorial
integrity of an independent
Lebanon
in a region where all States can live in peace and
security free from outside threats, aggression or acts
of violence. Together with its partners in the European Community,
the Netherlands
has repeatedly
stressed that the Palestinian people must be placed,
by an appropriate process defined within the framework of a comprehensive peace settlement, in a position to exercise its right to self-determination.
The
recent display of force cannot be -justified under international law and creates the danger of further escalation of the conflict rather than the conditions for a
durable
settlement.
My Government,
therefore,
repeats its urgent call on all parties concerned to act
in accordance with Council resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982) and, in particular, calls on lsrael to withdraw all its forces immediately
and unconditionally.

10.5. The PRESIDENT
(i/ztP~p,.etntion,fr’om Frcrrdrl:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 139of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
106. Mr. MAKSOUD:
The resolution submitted and
voted upon today constitutes the expression of intcrnational insistence on the continued legitima’cy of ii
United Nations presence in Lebanon. It is an insistence
that is also, one hopes, pre-emptive of any attempt tu
deny the authority of the Council to deal with the
problems that have arisen as a consequence of Israel’s
repeated incursions into Lebanon and its most recent
invasion of that country.

101. I now turn to UNIFIL.
The Israeli violations
of the UNIFIL
area and the continued presence of
Israeli troops and units in various positions have
seriously undermined
the mandate of UNIFIL.
In
these circumstances, UNIFIL
cannot properly perform
its duties. If we have nevertheless agreed to maintain
our troops for the limited period the Council has just
set, it is because of the protection and humanitarian
assistance UNIFIL
can extend to the population and
because we hope UNIFIL
can be preserved for a future
role, that is, if the terms of resolution 509 (1982) are
to be implemented.
It would not be expedient at this
moment to go further into this matter, since the situation remains too fluid and too unclear. However,
I should like to state that in the future UNIFIL
should
serve the interests of all parties concerned, should be
ensured of their full co-operation in the implementation
of a durable mandate and should operate in an uninterrupted and clearly defined area,

107.

In spite of the fact that the Council resolution
arrangement, it is to hi’
hoped that that interim arrangement can be implemented and that the content and substantive parts of
the resolution will be taken seriously. It is also to be
hoped that the Secretary-General
will report
as
quickly as possible on the implementation
of Council
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).
has been called an “interim”

108. This insistence on a legitimate United Nations
presence, coupled with the growing concern over
Israeli violations, is, however, making the worId
community
aware that Israel’s studied contelmpt fol
the resolutions of the United Nations is nothing but
an attempt on its part to remove the international
authority from the scene so that it can pursue its own
objectives of destroying Lebanon and of dis#persing
that country’s population, Lebanese as well as Palestinians.

102. Our willingness to continue our participation
in UNIFIL
for this limited period should in no way
10

109. The juridical
continuity
represented by the
Council resolution forms a backdrop to the carnage
Israel has wreaked in Lebanon as it pursues a vendetta
unprecedented
in modern history-save
for the possible exception of that carried out by Hitlerian nazism
against the people of the Jewish faith. It is a vendetta
masked in the hypocritical Israeli statements-such
as those Menachem Begin made today and yesterdayby which that country attempts to persuade us that its
ravaging of Lebanon and the carnage it is wreaking
there afford an opportunity for peace. Israel has even
had the audacity to claim that what it is doing is analogous
to events that once occurred in Czechoslovakia.

113. What are the strategic objectives of the United
States that this invasion is supposed to serve? An
entire Arab people has been alienated as it witnesses
the carnage around the capital of Lebanon. For the first
time, that capital is being threatened by an invasion
force, alienating the entire Arab world. The United
States is reinforcing an impression which we had hoped
we could avoid-an
impression that the United States
has weakened its commitment
to its friendship with
the Arab countries by buying time for Israel to pursue
the unfolding objectives of its invasion.

114. The United States must reassess immediately
many of its assumptions and policies and behaviou!
patterns. It cannot lump together so-called foreigners,
because the only foreigner in Lebanon is the invasion
force of Israel. This attempt to lump together foreigners, so-called, in order to give Israel a sort of
equal share in determining Lebanon’s destiny cannot
be justified.

i 10. The tragedy, the human suffering, the death
toI1, the indiscriminate
attacks and the arrogance
with which the so-called defence minister of Israel
parades past the symbols of Lebanese sovereignty and
unity, as he did near the Palace of the President, all
reveal Israel’s contempt, which cannot be concealed
by its claims that it tramples upon Lebanese sovereign
territory out of a concern for its own sovereignty.
Behind its repeated claims that it is desirous of saving
Lebanon, Israel is destroying that country. When it
thrusts its military machine through that country it is
communicating
to the United States that what is
taking place in Lebanon is a test of superior American
arms in the hands of talented Israeli warriors.

115. New reality’? The invasion has created a new
reality’? Then there is a premium on aggression. There
is a premium on legitimizing
aggression for political
ob.jectives. That is what is bringing us to the brink of
destabilization
throughout the region. That is what is
making a comprehensive
and just settlement more
and more unlikely.
116. The United States in its attempt to exercise a
global responsibility has been propelled into a role in
Lebanon. If this role can be step by step, it nevertheless must ensure that in the process there is no compensation-political,
strategic or military-which
Israel
can reap from its invasion. Any attempt to translate
the military carnage that Israel’s invasion has caused
in Lebanon into any permanent political or strategic
benefit would let loose in the world community any
force seeking to utilize military means for political
objectives. The Arabs would not like to see the United
States, in any circumstances, viewing its commitment
to Israel’s existence as a commitment
to underwriting
Israel’s objectives without any question.

Ill.
In the United States today, there are elements
attempting
to maintain, as former Secretary of State
Kissinger
did yesterday, that, notwithstanding
the
misgivings one might have with regard to the Lebanese
tragedy, Israel is none the less providing an opportunity for the United States to achieve its own longestablished and cherished strategic objectives. I am
sure that, when the people of the United States realize
the extent of the civilian casualties-which
exceed
the 15,000 figure that has been mentioned-and
of
the maimed and the wounded, when they realize the
extent to which Israel has deliberately prevented ICRC
from delivering medicines, equipment and sanitation
equipment-when
they come to realize all those
things the constituency of conscience in the United
States will realize that to claim that the carnage that
Israel, in the name of its so-called self-defence and
security objectives, has inflicted upon Lebanon, a
carnage with genocidal dimensions, and the tragedy
that the Lebanese people and Palestinian refugees have
experienced in recent days is requited by the fact that
it represents an unprecedented opportunity for the
United States to achieve its own strategic objectives
is to commit an obscenity, to say the least.

117. Lebanon the system, Lebanon the country,
Lebanon the legitimacy
may have been denied the
instruments of power, but the resilience of the people,
their commitment
to Lebanon’s independence, to its
integrity, to its sovereignty have never faltered: on the
contrary, this has been reinforced by the dimensions
of the tragedy the Lebanese people are experiencing.
I 18, Israel’s attempt to decimate the Palestinians in
the refugee camps of Lebanon in order to subjugate
the Palestinians permanently
in the occupied territories of the West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza is a wellknown, established part of Israel’s inherent policy.
Unless the aspect of the problem is realized, with its
dire consequences for the chances of peace and stability in the entire Arab region, the world community
will come closer and closer to the brink of disaster, in
direct symmetry with Israel’s troops trying to surround
the capital city of Beirut.

112. What are the strategic objectives that Israel
claims for its invasion? It is attempting to persuade
the United States that these objectives are to provide
Israel with a so-called security belt in order to sanitize
-as it claims-a
region in Lebanon so that Israel can
establish in a permanent form, and institutionalize,
a
violation of Lebanese territorial sovereignty.
I1

119. The people in Lebanon are suffering today,
hanging on any sign of hope, appreciative
of any
sympathetic response. Israel’s genocide in Lebanon
requires from us more than sympathy and philosophy.
It requires firm determination
on the part of the international community not to allow any strategic or political benefits to result from such military means as
invasion and aggression. Unless that determination
is shown, we repeat once again, the credibility of this
body will be undermined,
just as UNIFIL
forces in
southern Lebanon have been trampled upon by the
invasion forces of Israel. And the fact that they have
been trampled upon should not surprise anybody in
the Council, because such action is inherent in Israel’s
studied contempt for the United Nations, the Charter
of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
Organization.

Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese indepcndlence. of
Lebanese territorial integrity, of the unity of Lebanon
within its internationally
recognized boundalries. as
well as for the restoration of the authority of the lawful
Government of Lebanon within that country.
126. The resolution adopted by the Council tonight
makes reference to its resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982). Our position with regard to those two resolutions is well known: we have stated it here in the
Council and it remains consistent. I shall therefore only
refer members of the Council to the letter which 1 sent
to the Secretary-General on 7 June and which reads
as follows:
“In the light of Security Council resolution SOY
(19821, I am instructed to communicate to ~OLI the
following:

120. The PRESIDENT
finterpr.Ptcrtionf,‘om
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, upon
whom I now call.
121. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I should
statement, not to deliver a sermon.

” ‘I. The “Peace for Galilee” operation w;ls
ordered because of the intolerable situation creuted
by the presence in Lebanon of a large number of
terrorists operating from that country, eqllippcd
with modern, long-range weaponry, threatening
the lives of the civilian population of Galilee.

like to make a

122. A unique opening is now presenting itself in
Lebanon, an opportunity
that holds great promise.
Israel, as I have indicated on numerous occasions,
including over the past fortnight, has no intention of
maintaining
any presence in Lebanon.
Operation
“Peace for Galilee” was prompted solely by dictates
of self-preservation
and self-defence, which is an
inherent right of every State and recognized also by
the Charter of the United Nations.

” ‘2. Any withdrawal of Israel military forces
prior to the conclusion of concrete arrangements
which would permanently and reliably preclude hustile action against Israel’s citizens is inconceivublc.
” ‘3. The inherent right of self-defence is one
of the fundamental
rights of sovereign States.
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations
reaffirms the right of self-defence of all Meml~~
States.

123. If all the statements made in the Council were
to be taken at their face value, nothing would be
simpler than restoring to Lebanon what is rightfully
Lebanon’s:
its independence,
territorial
integrity
and sovereignty in the fullest sense of these words.
The situation obviously is more complex than that,

” ‘4. The Government’ of Israel reiterates
its
statement published on 6 June 1982 that “isracl
continues to aspire to the signing of a peace tImeat)-’
with independent Lebanon, its territorial
integrity
preserved” ‘.I’ [S/15/78, ptrrtr. 51

124. As far as Israel is concerned, we have repeatedly stated-and
I state it here tonight again--that we
have no territorial ambitions whatsoever in Lebanon.
We do not covet even one single square inch of Lebanese territory: we do not want to stay in Lebanon or
in any part thereof. But we are entitled to demand, and
we are indeed demanding, that proper arrangements
be made so that Lebanon should no longer serve as
a staging ground for terrorist attacks against Israel’s
civilian population. We are entitled to demand, and we
are demanding, that concrete arrangements be made
that would permanently
and reliably preclude hostile
action against Israel’s citi,zens from Lebanese soil.

127. I wish to state that it is my Government’s
UI>~CI’standing that the resolution adopted by the Coutkl
tonight is not intended to change the existing mandate
of UNIFIL-subject,
of course, to the fundalment:~lIy
altered situation referred to in the Secretary-C;ener;11‘s
report of I4 June [s//5/94/,4&/.2,
parer. 171. Should,
however, any attempt be made on the basis of the
resolution adopted tonight to bring about a do’ .Jfrc*lu
change in the UNIFIL
mandate, irrespective of the
nature of such change, I am authorized by my Govcmment to state that any such attempt will be rejected.

125. Let me therefore state it once again: We fully
support, as we have over the years, the restoration
of Lebanese
so\/i:reignty-Lebanese
sovereignty
that has been eroded over the past 10 years, first by
the terrorist PLO and subseqliently by the Syrian army
of occupation.
We stand for the full restoration
of

128. In the course of our debate here tonight, a number of representatives engaged in all kinds of exaggcr:Itions, deliberate or otherwise, as well as distortions
and falsifications of the true situation in that pal-t of
Lebanon that is currently under Israeli control. Some
of those statements were quite predictable.
12

129. Mr. Maksoud’s
respect for the truth and
adherence to it are, of course, notorious. Thus we all
know how
to treat his sermons-erroneously
billed
as statements. He told the Council a few minutes ago
that Israel has prevented ICRC from operating in the
territories that have come under Israeli control ovet
the past two weeks. I have in front of me a press
communication
released by ICRC in Geneva today,
IS June. I do not wish to quote that statement in its
entirety; I shall quote just a few sentences:

with medical equipment and 20 ambulances. to study
immediate problems, including vaccination, infection
and water pollution, sewerage and plague prevention.
So much for the medical aid.
t31. From the start of the “Peace for Galilee”
operation, the Israel Defence Forces have been at
pains to ensure adequate food supplies for the civilian
population.
To this end, the Israel Defence Forces
distributed bread and milk powder, as well as a large
quantity of tents, within 48 hours of entry into Lebanese towns and villages, The Israel Ministry of Energy
has assumed responsibility
for the allocation of fuel
supplies. The Israel Defence Forces are repairing the
water, electricity and communications
systems where
damaged, as well as carrying out road repairs.

“In the medical field 300 wounded are receiving
treatment. This figure differs from the initial estimates made at the height of the fighting.”
In other words, ICRC, known for its caution, is clearly
telling us that the wild figures that have been floating
around, in this building also, ranging from 10,000 to
1.5 million-it
was not quite clear whether these were
fatalities, other casualties, displaced persons-were
all figures that exceeded the total population of that part
of Lebanon. lCRC is telling us that all those figures
were grossly exaggerated:

132. The Government
of Israel has appointed a
member of the Cabinet to co-ordinate aid to the civilian population in south Lebanon and has also set up a
committee on humanitarian aid to Lebanese civilians,
headed by the Director-General
of Israel’s Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. A joint United States-Israel committee has been formed to co-ordinate joint aid, Last,
but not least, volunteer groups formed by Israel’s
civilians are collecting food, clothing and blankets
for immediate dispatch to suffering Lebanese civilians.
Volunteer fund-raising is being organized and sponsored by various organizations, women’s groups. the
.Israel broadcasting
service, newspapers and individuals.

“In the medical field 300 wounded are receiving
treatment. This figure differs from the initial estimates made at the height of the fighting.”
The press release goes on:
“In Tyre, as in Sidon, the principal task of the
sub-delegation is dealing with displaced people, the
medical situation being under control.”

133. The time has come for all those engaging in
exaggeration,
distortion
and falsification
to call a
halt to this practice, especially when we are dealing
with individuals and groups which have not found the
opportunity
over the past six years to lament the
tragedy of Lebanon, which since 1975 has caused the
deaths of 100,000 Lebanese, the wounding of a quartet
of a million people and the displacement of more than
one million people. Over all those years we have heard
no statements even faintly resembling those made by
various representatives tonight. I shall come to some of
them individually
later.

Indeed, it is under control, so much so that there are
empty beds in hospitals in various cities in soutli Lebanon. One contributing factor, of course, is the fact
that we transferred some severe cases from the hospitals in Lebanon to Israeli hospitals to vacate beds
for those injured in the hostilities. Let me give the
true picture, not Mr. Maksoud’s picture. The Israel
Defence Forces have authorized the presence of
ICRC representatives in the area to make an assessment of the situation and evaluation of the requirements of the Lebanese civilian population.
Ten
tonnes of ICRC supplies have reached the area. The
chief medical officer of ICRC stated in a report after
touring Tyre and Sidon that “all casualties have
received the appropriate medical treatment.”
That
report also states that there is no need for additional
medical aid to the area.

134. What is this if not cynicism and bigotry in the
highest degree? I shall not respond to all the statements that we have heard tonight, but some of them
I can characterize only as belonging to the nauseating
procession of bigotry and cynicism.

130. A Swedish medical team attached to UNIFIL
has been authorized by the Israel Defence Forces to
admit Lebanese civilians to the hospital in Naqoura.
Eighteen ICRC auxilliaries have been given access to
the area. As I have said, Israel’s hospitals have been
opened to Lebanese civilian casualties. Medical clinics
have been set up in towns and villages in the Lebanese
territory entered by the Israel Defence Forces. A team
of 70 doctors, headed by the director-general of the
sick fund of the trade union, the Histadrut, and the
deputy chief army medical officer are now in Lebanon,

135. Let us consider briefly the statement made by
the representative of the Soviet Union. Of course, his
country’s role in destabilizing
the Middle East all
these years is well known. We also all know who the
stooges of the Soviet Union have been in the Middle
East all these years and who it has been that the Soviet
Union has-used in an attempt to destabilize our region
---first and foremost, of course, the terrorist PLO. Now
that some misfortune has befallen the Soviet Union’s
prot6g6s we hear the bullying statements of the Soviet
representative,
threatening a sovereign and indepen13

dent State. It is true that it is a small State, but when
it comes to sovereignty it is equal to that of the Soviet
Union.

143. The representative of the United Kingdom told
the Council that he was horrified by the events of the
past fortnight in Lebanon. I regret to have to point
out to him that over the past few years we sorely
missed expressions of horror on his part at the terrorist
outrages perpetrated by the criminal PLO against my
people,

136.

We have heard, not for the first time in the Counveiled threats against my country coming
from the Soviet representative who said that Israel
is going to pay dearly, and similar statements. We
reject these bullying tactics. We are not impressed by
them. We treat them with the contempt which they
deserve. The Soviet Union certainly cannot lecture
us-or
anybody, for that matter-on
international
aggression. The Soviet Union’s record on international aggression is too well known for me to elaborate.
We are told that the Soviet Union’s rights are affected
by what happens in Lebanon. How manv hundreds of
miles, Mr.’ bvinnikov,
separate Lebaion from the
Soviet border? Or is it thousands of miles?
cil, thinly

144. On one occasion last year, if I may refresh his
memory, we were even chided by him for calling the
terrorists “terrorists”.
But. as has been right.ly stated
by a leading statesman of our time--I
should Say.
rather, a leading stateswoman of our time--“A
crime
is a crime is a crime.” By the same token. a terrorist
is a terrorist is a terrorist.
145. We are not members of the Council, let alone
permanent members of the Council. And because of
that we are not in the position to block resolutions
that are being adopted here and that we consider
inimical to our viral national interests. But the fact
that the representative of the United Kingdom has that
ability does not confer on him any moral suiperiority
over other Member States in the Organization.

137. What exactly are the Soviet rights and Soviet
interests in what is happening in Lebanon? Are we
not entitled to some clarification on this? Israel borders
on Lebanon. Israel has no rights and no interests. When
Israeli children are being massacred from across the
Lebanese border and Israel responds, that is aggression. Mind you, those Israeli children were massacred
by peace-loving Soviet Katyushas and peace-loving
Soviet guns and peace-loving
Soviet sub-machineguns. And along comes the Soviet representative to
bully us. Indeed, we treat these bullying tactics with
the contempt that they deserve.

146. I do not wish to respond in great detail to the
representative of Ireland. On a previous occasion.
and again today, he has engaged in a dubious attempt
at book-keeping, which we totally reject. It has no
moral or legal basis whatsoever.
147. For reasons that must by now be obvious in the
light of the survey that I gave of the true situation in
south Lebanon, we equally reject his description of the
situation in those parts of Lebanon now und’er Israeli
occupation. His statement today is yet another exprcssion of his well-known tendency to adopt a blinkered.
selective, one-sided and lopsided position on the
matter before us, as well as on other issues affecting
my country.

138. The Soviet representative spoke of the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty. It was your country.
Mr. Ovinnikov,
that was instrumental
in destroying
Lebanese sovereignty.
You are not interested in
restoring Lebanese sovereignty. You never were.
139. And if the Soviet representative speaks the way
he does, his Polish colleague, of course, has to follow
suit. So we heard a statement from the representative
of Poland which I can only characterize as slightly
ludicrous.

148. He raised the issue of proportionality
within
the framework of the book-keeping that he is suggesting
here. Let me ask him a very simple question.
On
23 April 1979, the PLO beasts perpetrated a particularly despicable crime in Nahariya, northern Israel,
western Galilee, in the course of which they dragged
a father and his four-year-old daughter to the beach.
then clubbed the girl to death, smashing lher head
against the rocks in the presence of the fatlher. And
then, right after murdering the child, they murdered
the father. Heaven forbid, not the other way around:
PLO beasts are not that merciful.

140. The representative
of the martial law rigime
protested the destruction of political organizations,
and I made a note of what he said: “the destruction
of.. . political . . . organizations”.
I am not quite
clear whether he was or was not oblivious of what he
was saying. What about the destruction of certain
political organizations in Poland these days‘?
141. We were told that Polish society had expressed
its indignation--that
is another quote. Which Polish
society: the one that has been stifled by the martial
law rCgime? And what exactly are the channels fol
expressing indignation in Poland these days?
142. And then, of course, we have the strange predilection of the Polish representative for talking of
solidarity on every occasion, He did it again today.
What is it that attracts him so much to that word?

149. I reported that outrage-one
of the most despicable in the long catalogue of PLO crime-in
my letter
to the Secretary-General [S/13264]. Incidentally,
that
outrage occurred on Holocaust Day, which we in Isr~l
and throughout the Jewish world mark to commemorate 6 million men, women and children--l.5
mil-

,

lion

I

children-who

Second World War.
4

1

were

exterminated

during

the

150. I ask the Irish representative point-blank: What
exactly is the price of that child? What is the proportionality? So let us stop this silly book-keeping.

159. Through its resolution SO9 (1982). the Council
has unanimously
directed Israel to withdraw
its
forces .‘forthwith
and unconditionally”
from Lrbanese territory.
My Government
has condemned
Israel’s refusal to implement that resolution as it is
required to do under the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations. Israel’s invasion has caused, and
continues to cause, vast suffering among the civilian
Lebanese and Palestinian populations. To attempt to
alleviate the plight of the victims, my Government
decided yesterday to allocate 20 million
Swedish
kronor-corresponding
to about $3.3 million-to
the
reliefoperations
of United Nations agencies and ICRC.

151. To sum up, we strongly and categorically
deplore and condemn the statement of the representative of Ireland. We deny his right, and indeed his
constant practice, to lecture us on international law
and morality.
152. The PRESIDENT
(intclp/.rtotio/l,fi,om
Frcnc*h):
The next speaker is the representative of Sweden.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

160. We fully expect Israel to facilitate the relief
efforts of the international community and, in general.
to honour its commitments under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War’ and the Geneva Convention relative to
the Treatment of Prisoners of War,’ of 12 August
1949. It is also our view that members of the PLO
taken prisoner should be treated in the humanitarian
spirit constituting
the basis for the third Geneva
Convention and the Additional Protocols of 1977:

153. Mr. THUNBORG
(Sweden): Mr. President,
I should like to extend my thanks to you and to the
other members of the Council for granting me the
right to speak in this debate.
154. It is not customary for my delegation to request
to be invited to take part in debates of the Security
Council. Since Sweden was last a member of the
Council in 1976 we have, in fact, done so only once
before, and then on a matter which had been initiated
by Sweden as a member.

is in the area while the civil161. As long as UNIFIL
ian population is suffering deprivations of all kinds,
it is inconceivable to my Government that UNIFIL
resources should not be put to such use as may be
possible in providing relief to the population, in as
wide an area as possible and not confined to what has
been the Force’s area of operations: this applies in
particular to the UNIFIL
hospital in Naqoura, which
happens to be staffed by Swedish personnel.

155. It is an indication of our very deep concern,
therefore, that I have asked to be heard by the Council
on this occasion, I have done so as the representative
of a country that participates in UNIFIL with a medical
military company and that over the years has contributed units or officers to practically every peacekeeping operation undertaken by the United Nations.
In all, over 40,000 Swedish soldiers have served in
those operations.

162. My Government is convinced that the war in
Lebanon will.once again make it evident that the question of the future of the Palestinian people cannot be
settled through the use of force. It will also become
evident that Israel cannot secure its right to live within
secure and recognized boundaries by military means.
All parties must realize that the cycle of violence has
to be brought to a halt. Only through negotiations can
a lasting peaceful solution be attained.

156. My Government views with the utmost concern
the situation which has ensued from the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. The admittedly tenuous peace in the
area has been shattered and the conflict threatens to
escalate into an even wider war that could endangel
peace even beyond the region. The invasion flagrantly
violates not only the independence of Lebanon but
also the political authority of UNIFIL
and of the
Security Council, which, in its resolution 425 (1978),
instituted the Force, supposedly with the consent of
all the parties.

163. It would seem that for some time to come the
LJNIFIL
operation will find itself in a rather foggy
political landscape. There might be no clear lead stars
to indicate the course to take. As a troop contributor,
Sweden will be guided by the following considerations:
To the best of our knowledge, there has not so fa
been any call for the withdrawal of UNIFIL
by any
of the parties directly engaged in the military activities
which arose out of the Israeli invasion, nor has any
of the troop-contributing
countries signalled an intention to withdraw from the operation. The history of
United Nations peace-keeping
in the Middle East
has taught us a disastrous
lesson of what a drastic and
ill-advised removal of a United Nations peace-keeping
force can entail.

157. To a Government as thoroughly committed to
the concept of peace-keeping through the United
Nations as my own, the open contempt displayed by
Israel towards the UNIFIL
operation is very disturbing
indeed. The Israeli army has simply overrun the positions held by the United Nations forces to launch a
majoi attack against another party. All previous
encroachments and violations by the parties, and there
have been many, are dwarfed in comparison.
158. I should like to underline in this context that the
entire concept of peace-keeping rests on the assumption that the parties will co-operate in good faith with
the peace-keeping forces.

164.
As long as it is clear to us’that the parties directly
concerned, as well as the Council, are striving to find
an acceptable formula for the continued presence of

IS

---

UNIFIL,
we believe it to be our duty to the United
Nations to stay on under the present mandate.

that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the rekvant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of ,the pruvisional rules of procedure.

165. We have no illusions about the arduous task
ahead in trying to devise an acceptable formula. We
take it for granted that a continued UNIFIL
operation
will not be construed in such a way as to confirm or
secure, either directly or through a proxy, the advancement of positions which Israel has obtained through its
aggression against Lebanon.

(intc/.pr.rtrrtion.f,.o,l?
Frcac4):
170. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative of tlhe Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,

166. It is the firm belief of my Government that a
new mandate for the continued existence of UNIFIL
in southern Lebanon must be based on the three objectives laid down in the original mandate which, through
paragraph 3 of its resolution 425 (1978), the Council
gave to UNIFIL,
namely, those of

171. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Ever since 1948 and earlier, Arab representatives and
others have spoken in this forum informing the world
of Israel’s crimes against the Palestinians and warning
of the dire consequences of the expansionist nature of
the Zionist State. Time and again, and drawing from
our bitter experiences, we have alerted the world to
the perils Israel poses to our region, as well as to the
world at large. Our warnings have always emphasized
that Zionism is a negation of Arab existence, and alI
this while Israel was indeed proving the validity of our
worst fears, first in Palestine before 1948 and up to the
present, then in the Golan, and now in Lebanon. If
some Westerners have, for one reason or another.
remained deaf to our pleas, we are confident that this
latest carnage, this latest blood-letting
in Lebanon.
will, we hope, dispel any remaining doubt as tfo whether
Israel can abide by any norms of international
behaviour or can overcome a birth defect which allows
it to indulge in aberrations.

L.
confirming the withdrawal of Israeii forces
[from’ Lebanon], restoring international
peace and
security and assisting the Government of Lebanon
in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the
area” I
167. I have already emphasized the strong views of
my Government as regards the value of peace-keeping
through the United Nations. Since the concept was
evolved in the 195Os, it has proved to be an effective
instrument at the disposal of the international
community for the containment of conflicts. It is essential
that peace-keeping in the form that has been developed
within the United Nations be maintained as a function of the Organization.
To us it is clear that it is in
the broader interests of all States that the international
community as a whole, acting through its universal
organization. should assume responsibility
for operations of this nature.

172. This gory human tragedy will be the final test
for those who seek to justify this genocide HS well as
for those who remain silent. To those still hesitant
or intimidated,
we say: “Speak out, or else history
will judge you as harshly as those who stood1 by while
the Nazis committed their atrocities.”

168. Let us not, however, forget what the acronym
UNIFIL stands for: the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. I am certain that we, the troop-contributing countries, the members of the Council, as well
as the parties and concerned Governments
everywhere, are all anxious to underline the word “interim”.
We do not wish to perpetuate indefinitely an interim
arrangement. What we want to see is real progress
towards a lasting and comprehensive
settlement of
the Middle East conflict, a settlement that will ‘make
it possible for Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace
side by side within mutually recognized and secure
borders. A prolongation
of the mandate of UNIFIL
could be a contribution
to this general goal provided
that all parties involved respect the mandate and functions of UNIFIL.

173. Never before has an Israeli act of a.ggression
been characterized by so much brutality; mever hefore has an Israeli act of aggression assumed the
proportions of a large-scale massacre, a genocide;
never before has the world’s conscience been so
shocked, yet so passive, as while watching this wanFun
massacre. Figures indicate approximately
800,000 displaced civilians, the majority of whom have been
forced to take shelter in the open, where they remain
vulnerable to systematic onslaughts. Figures indicate
tens of thousands of wounded, the great majority
of
whom are unattended. Figures indicate more thun
10,000 dead, the majority of whom remain unburied.
The Israelis have done and are still doing their utmost
to kill off those still alive by sadistic methods which
portray the congenital savagery in the Zionist mind.
One United States columnist quotes in The iV~~~~b )i~k
Tires of I4 June the novelist John le Can-&, who
wrote:

169. The PRESIDENT
(intop~cf~rtion,~om
Frerwh):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have just received a letter from the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite

“TOO many Israelis, in their claustrophobia,
persuaded themselves that every Palestinian

I6

hi\\*e
man

I

their determination
to withstand foreign encroachment upon their land or upon their own national interest, in a region of the world that is one of the most
sensitive because of its strategic situation and its
wealth.

and woman and child is by definition a military
target, and that Israel will not be safe until the pack
of them are swept away.”
174. But this time, while sweeping away and massacring the Palestinians, the Israelis are also sweeping
away and massacring the Lebanese,for the Lebanese
are Arabs and all Arabs who stand in Israel’s path
must be liquidated by all possible means. particularly
by the latest models of lethal United States weapons.
This Zionist design is rooted in Hertzl’s colonial
dreams and those of his disciples and has been faithfully and systematically carried out in Palestine, Lebanon and the Syrian Golan Heights.

177. The invasion of Lebanon, with its goal of eliminating Palestinians and Lebanese alike, is bound to
backfire on Israel and its supporters. All the calculations in Washington and Tel Aviv, some of which we
heard from Secretary of State Haig himself on Sunday,
I3 June, are but empty dreams that will be buried under
the rubble of Lebanon. The United States should not
forget that the Palestinian revolution
was born in
refugee camps and that it has grown up as a result of
the Israeli aggression and occupation carried out since
1967, The PLO, supported by the Arab nation and by
the overwhelming
majority of nations, embodies the
rejection of oppression. But oppression remains the
official policy of the United States and of its surrogate,
Israel.

175. The Council has adopted two resolutions on the
invasion of Lebanon [rrsoll~tion,s 508 (1982) and
509 (/Y&2)], neither of which has been, respected by
Israel. The United States veto against a third warning
to Israel on a draft resolution [S/1.518.5] consolidating
resolution 509 (1982) has only helped Israel to intensify and escalate its bestial aggression against Lebanon and the Palestinian people. The draft resolution
introduced by Spain was described by the United States
chief representative
as “not sufficiently balanced”
[2377th merting, prrnr. 271. We wonder if the United
States still considers the wording more pertinent
than the massacre committed by its friend and ally,
that island of democracy: its friend and ally, the only
democracy in the Middle East. This is their friend and
ally. It is no longer a secret that the United States
considers the Israeli invasion of Lebanon as a new
and valuable asset for enhancing its strategic interest
in the area. It is not aggression that must be halted,
according to Mr, Blum and Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
but
that a diktat should be imposed upon Lebanese, Palestinians and Syrians alike, a diktat that will place the
entire region under direct but joint United StatesIraeli control.

178. This massacre must stop immediately,
even if
the Council has to be called upon to meet night and
day. At the same time, Israel has to withdraw all its
forces unconditionally
and immediately
from all of
Lebanon. Israeli war criminals must be brought to
justice without delay. Israel must be expelled from the
United Nations for its gross violations of its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and for its
crimes against humanity. The massacre of its innocent victims demands that justice be done. The Council
can no longer delay the application of mandatory sanctions against Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter.
179. The Syrian Arab Republic, whose destiny is so
tightly linked to that of the Palestinian people and to
that of the Lebanese people, reiterates that it will
continue to exert all efforts in the fulfilment of its
Arab national obligations and duties towards all its
brothers. The Syrian Arab Republic will perform its
declared national duty to preserve the unity of Lebanon, its independence and sovereignty. We shall spare
no effort to stand by Lebanon and the Palestinian
revolution during these tragic events, the responsibility
for which falls upon the shoulders of the United States
and its Israeli surrogate.

176. The United States is flouting resolution 509
(1982), in which the Council “demands that Israel
withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally
recognized boundaries
of Lebanon”. The United States is therefore condoning
the Israeli occupation of Lebanon in order to exact
conditions that reward the aggressor, whose territorial and political ambitions in Lebanon are all too
well-known. What was not achieved by the tripartite
Camp David conspiracy is to be accomplished by a
two-pronged assault-an
assault against the Arabs
under occupation simultaneously or concurrently with
genocide outside-in
the hope that the use of unlimited
force against Arabs-and particularly Palestinians-in
our region will bring about the subjugation of the entire
region. How shortsighted that doctrine is, and how dire
the results will be. Has not the Arab nation throughout
its long history repelled all aggressors, regardless of
the cost and of the duration of the struggle against
the intruders? Never have the Arab masses been more
conscious of the contradiction
between their own
interests and those of the imperialist and reactionary
circles. No enemy force can ever detract or diminish

180. In conclusion, Lebanese, Palestinian and Syrian
blood is being shed on Lebanon’s soil, strengthening
the bonds of kinship and paving the road to total
liberation. On I4 June, President Hafez Assad told a
delegation representing the Palestinian resistance:
“The Palestinian cause remains our major sacred
cause which we shall continue defending with all
means at our disposal, irrespective of sacrifice and
suffering.”
181, The PRESIDENT
(intcrpr.cttrtio/z,fi’nm F/~~/~c,hj:
I now call on the representative of Lebanon.
17

182. Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon): I suspect that I am
expected to propose a motion of thanks to Israel and
the Israeli representative for the paradise that prevails
in southern Lebanon following the Israeli occupation
and for the fact that there has been such a small number of casualties, such a small number of wounded,
such a small number of people in hospitals. It is not
my intention to engage in polemics over figures. I think
the scope of the tragedy is there for all of us to see.
Pictures have been printed here and film clips have
been shown on television. It would be an insuIt to the
memory of the dead and to the sacrifice of the wounded
and displaced were 1 or the Council to transform this
discussion into a petty piece of accounting, as has been
suggested by the representative of Israel.

world community,
and particularly
those countries
that contributed their men to a gentle peace-keeping
task, to use the Irish representative’s words, al11wanted
Lebanon to live. All countries wanted Lebanon to live.
except one, Israel, which has defied and is now
defying the decisions and resolutions of the Council
and the very arm that the Council has created to install
peace-keeping in Lebanon.
188. Today’s resolution-and
I had thought that the
debate was going to be only on that resolution-is
another commitment.
It is a challenge. But that very
commitment, only an hour old, is also being defied by
Israel, which has announced that it will not obey
Council resolutions or abide by them.

183. Perhaps Israel wants to ponder the following
question: How is it that the whole world is always
wrong and only Israel is right, not only on policy, not
only on behaviour, not only in the matter of imperialism, but also on casualty figures of the dead, the
wounded, the maimed and those dispersed? I shouid
know. and when I was given the floor here I was wondering whether I would be speaking in the name of a
Government
or in the name of a displaced people,
one that today, in their own country, consists of
refugees roaming from camp to camp and from city to
city, from destruction to destruction.

189. The Council has taken a risk by asking UNIFIL
to stay, to maintain positions, to ensure freedom of
movement and to perform a humanitarian taslk. 1 need
not remind members of the Council, who have all read
the reports of the Secretary-General and other reports
circulated in this house, that three, four, five convoys
of UNIFIL carrying ICRC supplies and ICRC workers
have day after day been prevented from entering the
martyred city of Tyre, while, according to the United
Nations reports, no less than 3,000 people has been
stranded on the beach for more than two days with
no water, no food and no supplies.

184. I wish to thank those who have spoken on this
matter and I am sure that the noble sentiments that
have prompted them to do so transcend the cynicism
and black humour of the representative of Israel.

190. I think that international history will consider it
commendable and I think it is beyond the (cynicism
displayed here, that those men should have tried and
tried again and are still trying, and that they should be
willing, as representatives
of their countries hitve
announced, to try again and to stay in south Lebanon
in the hope that in due course they may be needed.
No words can sufficiently express the tribute that we
owe them and their Governments and countries.

185. What has happened in Lebanon is not a tragedy;
it is a cataclysm, a human cataclysm. My country was
crucified. It was crucified politically:
it was crucified
socially: it was crucified economically.
But above all,
it was crucified in its soul and in its heart. It is very
fashionable nowadays to draw up maps for Lebanon
and constitutions for its future. Mr. Blum’s colleague,
Mr. Moshe Arens, the Ambassador to Washington,
went so far as to write-not
without cynicism-that
perhaps an enclave in north-east Lebanon, no more
than a quarter of the country, should be given to
Syria to meet and accommodate
Syria’s security
concerns. I refer to the Wtrll Street Joumc~/ of I I June.

191. We have been treated to lectures on the security
of countries. My country is one that has always helieved in peace through openness: we believe in un
open society and we believe that democracy cannot be
defended by force of arms and destruction. I think thilt
the time may have come for us to ask the wolrId community once more to recognize that what we are paying
for today is precisely our attachment to peace and the
fact that we have refused, although it is probilhly
within our means, to become an aggressive country,
a country that founds its unity and its system of Government on expansion and aggression.

186. My country is not at the disposal of anybody.
It is not for sale nor is it for hire, and I do not think
our
history warrants that we should today stand here
before the world community prepared to be partitioned,
divided or handed over as spoils to the various parties
engaged in the invasion and the battle.

192. While people are redrawing our map, I want to
say that I am proud that the Lebanese have stayed
together in unity, that despite all the gambles that have
been taken here and there on their disunity, on the
dismemberment
of that small country that the world
has loved, they have remained one and shall remain
one.

187. I know that Lebanon is a disrupted society
today. I know that it is a territory almost destroyed.
I know it is a martyred country. Almost five, years
ago, we came to the Council calling “let my people
live” ]207/.sr mwting, ptrl*tr. 161. There was a response
from the Council. It was not only a commitment,
it
was a challenge. Everybody met the challenge and the

193. While thanking our friends who are today
worried about our future and willing to cont:ributc to
18

assisting us, may we tell our enemies that the future
of Lebanon shall not be constructed in the shadow of
the guns of occupation and destruction. The Lebanese
are mature enough to know what future Lebanon
desires and deserves, and for them the commitment of
the international
community is sufficient encouragement and a sufficient source of confidence.
194. Lebanon is for the Lebanese and for the Lebanese alone, and the Lebanese and the Lebanese alone
will know what future to construct for Lebanon.
195. The PRESInENT(intp~p~et~,fion~om
I shall now speak as the representative

F~~pnch]:
of FRANCE.

196. In associating itself with the decision just
adopted by the Council to extend for two months the
mandate of UNIFIL,
my delegation would emphasize that, despite the particularly dramatic situation
in the region, the objectives set for the Force under
Council resolution 425 (1978) remain fundamental,
even though present circumstances in the region are
different from those in which UNIFIL
was established
and has functioned since March 1978.
197. Since the legitimate authorities of Lebanon so
desire, my Government
is in favour of the interim
renewal of the present mandate of the Force. This
decision must, of course, be followed by a thorough
review of the situation so as to redefine the modalities
of the UNIFIL
mission and enable it fully to discharge
the duties assigned to it.
198. My delegation would recall, furthermore, that
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982). which we supported fully, remain valid.
199. Finally, I should like to say how appalled France
is by the sufferings being endured by the civilian populations in Lebanon, France knows that they are in dire
need of help. It is most concerned at the gravity of
the problems that have arisen in this regard, which
obviously require attention urgently.
200.

I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

20 I. The representative of Poland has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.
202. Mr. NOWAK (Poland): It was predictable that
the representative of Israel would again indulge in his
usual provocative remarks regarding, infu ~liu, the
term “solidarity”,
although this time he did not try to
speak Polish.
203. In this connection I wish only to state that we
are not ashamed of the word “solidarity”
or, in Polish,
“.solid(r~i7o,sP” , and that we shall continue to keep it
in our vocabulary and to use it both internally and
externally whenever necessary, and in particular when
referring to such cases as the plight of the victims of
the Israeli aggression.

204.

So we re.ject the bullying

tactics of Mr. Blum.

205. I regret that he has seen fit to leave the room.
It seems that he is willing to dish it out but less willing
to take it. If he were present I should like to ask him,
using language similar to that used by him in one of
his statements earlier this year, a simple question:
Are there no limits to hypocrisy, Mr. Blum?
206. The PRESIDENT
(intc~l~r.ct(~tiot~.frwt~~
Frcw~l~).
The representative of the Soviet Union has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.
207. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (iMtrr’l~r’Ptrrticlr7 ,fhm Xussitrn):
Mr. 3lum
has acted today like the reckless driver of a car who
collides with another car and, fearing the consequences, leaves the scene of the accident. Mr. Blum’s
absence does not, however, relieve me of the duty of
giving him an appropriate
reply, especially since
today’s statement by Mr, Blum is noteworthy for its
new heights of hypocrisy, He tried to affirm here that
the Israeli aggression against and occupation of Lebanon are almost boons to that country. One quality is
needed to speak like that-a complete lack of conscience-and
it is certainly true that Mr. Blum has no
conscience whatever.
208. The reason why the Israeli representative chose
to focus his attack primarily on the delegation of the
Soviet Union, my country. is quite simple: in order to
try to change the context within which the discussion
here in the Council is taking place, namely, that here in
the Council, if we listened carefully to all the statements
made, we would notice that Israel found itself almost
virtually isolated. One delegation, the United States,
did of course take a special position, but there is
nothing new in that.
209. Mr. Blum complained in vain that Israel does not
have the right of veto. Mr. Blum. unlike other representatives, has a very rare quality: he does not have
two hands. but three: and the third hand is right there.
It is the hand of the United States, and it was raised in
the Council when it was a matter of punishing Israel
for the fact that it had annexed the Golan Heights.
That hand of the United States was raised in its veto
so as to prevent measures from being taken against
Israel for all the horrors it has committed in the West
Bank. The United States hand was raised in defence
of Israel only recently, just a couple of days ago.
so that the Council was prevented from taking effective measures against Israel, the aggressor, for its
aggression against Lebanon. So the question arises:
Why should the United States be so submissive? Why
should the United States be so willing to use its veto
for Israel’? It is because the United States is in the
hands of Israel and is trying to follow its own imperialist policy in the Middle East. It is for the sake of
that, for its younger partner, that it uses its veto. That
was the purpose of the strategic alliance between the
United States and Israel in the Middle East.

that I and my country deplore every human life lost
-Lebanese,
Palestinian,
Syrian and Israeli.
We
want to see an end to all bloodshed in the region and
we want to see peace and security for all peoples in
the region-Lebanese,
Syrian, Israeli and Palestinian.

210. We said that today Israel found itself isolated
in the Security Council. Today Israel found itself
8isolated in another hall nearby, where the special
session of the General Assembly on disarmament is
taking place. Only 52 delegations remained to hear
the statement made by Prime Minister Begin: over
two thirds of the States Members of the United Nations
were not present to hear that statement. Does that not
show the extreme isolation of Israel in the United
Nations? Does that not show how the overwhelming
majority of States Members of the United Nations
respond to Israel and its aggressive policy in the
Middle East?

217. I will leave it to the judgement of others to say
whether anything I have ever said here or anything
I may ever say here could lead anyone to believe thal
I could ever think otherwise.
2 18. The PRESIDENT
(intoprcttrtion,f,,o/n
Frrac*hl:
Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, wishes to make another statement. With the consent of the Council, I ilnvite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make thal
statement.

21 I. And lastly, one final point: the Soviet Union
does not threaten anybody just to give comfort to
Mr. Blum. Israel’s own expansionist policy in the
Middle East threatens it itself. Israel, and the United
States standing behind its back, is doing everything,
using crude, brute force to reduce the Arab peoples
and countries to naught so that they can impose on the
Arab peoples and countries their own system and order
in the Middle East. Israel is the anti-Arab executioner
in the Middle East, and the axe it holds in its hand
has been given to it by the United States. But that
policy is, in fact, suicidal for Israel. Israel should
think twice before it is too late, but perhaps it is already
too late.

2 19. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I was accused of exa,ggerating.
My knowledge of English betrays me because I do not
know what the antithesis is when the Israeli representative says that there were 300 wounded. Semanlic
acrobatics may be tolerable at times, but ‘when one
tries to downgrade a tragedy that assumes tlhe dimension of a holocaust I think that indicates a cynicism
indicative of a very sinister plan and a sinister mind.
220. ICRC today issued a statement that it has
medical supplies prepared at Larnaca, Cyprus, for aid
ready to go to Lebanon for 250,000 woundled in the
first month. Why should ICRC have so much medicine
for so many people when there are only 300 wounded,
unless it is in a conspiracy with Israel to plan the
murder of the remaining 249,700? ICRC has also prepared aid at Larnaca for 100,000 wounded in the second
month and 50,000 wounded in the third month. Even
assuming that the 250,000 people are slightly ,wounded.
and need only one month’s treatment, that the 100,oM)
are a little more seriously wounded and need two
months’ medical supplies, and that the 50.000 ure
seriously wounded and need supplies for three months.
50,000 divided by 300 will show who is exaggerating
-or whatever the opposite of “exaggerating”
is. That
covers the question of ICRC.

212. The PRESIDENT
tintprpI’~tCltion,fr’orn
French):
The representative of Ireland has asked to speak in
exercice of the right of reply. I call on him,
213. Mr. DORR (Ireland): This is the first time that
I have ever had to engage in a right of reply. I will
keep it brief and non-polemic since I respect Mr. Blum
and his people. I still think that what Israel has done
in recent weeks is both wrong and dangerous, and
I believe that that must be said.
214. Mr. Blum accused me of bizarre book-keeping
because I talked of “disporportion”.
For my part,
I agree that no one can weigh one human life against
another. It was not ! but he who began to count when
he spoke here on 6 June and counted a total kill since
July 1981 in PLO attacks of 17. He also mentioned
241 wounded [2375th mreting,
pcrt~c. 341. I still think
.it is fair to say that there is a disproportion in Israel’s
response,

22 I, Mr. Langmade, Deputy Assistant Admlinistrator
of the United States Agency for International
Development, quoted in The Washington
Post, has said that
there are today 600,000 new refugees living in Beirut
and southern Lebanon. The United Nations Disaster
Relief Organization has said that in one city, Sidun,
there are approximately 2,000 killed, 10,000 wounded
and 200,000 homeless. The souks-the markets-have
been almost completely demolished. The Labib Abou
Taher Hospital has been destroyed-accord)&
to the
definitions of the military leaders in Israel. that is
supposed to be a PLO stronghold. The port installations
have been severely damaged. There are numerous
decaying bodies-I
do not know what “numerous’”
means-throughout
the city, and there is a considerable
chance of spreading epidemics of plague and cholera.
The estimated cost of the total damage in the city of
Sidon alone is about $2 billion.

215. Mr. Blum reminded me today-as
he did last
week-of the sufferings of his own people throughout
history. I did not answer him then; 1 cannot answer
him now. No one contemplating
the enormity of what
the Jewish people, his people, have suffered throughout their history-and
especially in Europe one generation ago-can ever answer that question,
216. Finally, Mr. Blum asked me a direct question
about the price of a child killed in Israel in April 1979
[P(II’(I. 149 crbow~.
I will answer: I think it is priceless,
absolutely without price. I have said here many times
20

222. I do not want to refer to the various United
Nations statements and the statements of the representative of Sweden and others who can testify to who
is the liar, who is covering up genocide.

people were stranded on the beaches without water
and without shelter blr/rr. 18Y ahol~~].
23 I. I hope that the Council is aware of the letter
sent by Chairman Arafat to the Secretary-General
requesting the immediate dispatch of a special commission to investigate the Israeli crimes and atrocities
and the present situation in Lebanon ].SLYJS//5226].

223. The PRESIDENT
(intc~tp~etcrtion,f,.om Frmch):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

232. I am talking about the hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians in Lebanon who, as guests of Lebanon,
still yearn for the day when they will return to their
homes, no longer being forced to make Lebanon their
abode.

224. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
When we arrived here this evening we understood
that the Council would deal with the extension of the
mandate of UNIFIL.
That is why we thought that
things would go smoothly, without any debate.

233. The PRESIDENT
(int~rpr.crcrticln.f,‘orn French):
I call on the representative of Israel, who wishes to
speak in exercise of his right of reply.

225. We are grateful to the representatives of those
countries that have contributed to UNIFIL
for their
explanations of their position with regard to the atrocities committed
by the Israelis in the latest of their
invasions.

234. Mr. LEVIN (Israel): It would of course be very
comforting if I were to follow some of the declarations
by representatives here and, just because Mr. Blum
has left, were to leave many things without comment,
especially things that referred to him personally.

226. I have asked to make a statement in order to
clarify two points, The criminals are apparently experts
at creating misnomers. Some time ago we heard about
an operation called “Bright Star”, in which the American rapid deployment force was involved in planning
aggression against the Arab countries and Africa.
Now we have heard about something called the “Peace
for Galilee”
operation, I wonder where those concerned dug up that name.

235. But I feel compelled to reply to some of the
remarks made here and comment on the cynicism,
and in one case especially, the sheer gall and temerity
we have witnessed here. The representative of Syria
came here talking about mass murders and the conscience of the world having been shocked. That was
said by the representative of a minority Government
-of a Government which has instituted a minority
rule, tyrannizing a much larger majority, razing one
of the most ancient cities of its own country-not
going
out fighting Israel, but tyrannizing its own population.
I think that is very characteristic of the representative
of Syria and the kind of philosophy that he represents.

227. When I read the Secretary-General’s
report on
UNIFIL
[S/1.5/04], I, too, did some book-keeping.
From the report I learnt that in the period December
1981 to May 1982, Israel committed 1,393 air violations
and 384 sea violations against Lebanon lihid., part/. 461,
and that during the same period there were I7 incidents
against UNIFIL
positions [ihid., para. 47.1. There is
also a special section in the report on the barbarous
attack of April and the barbarous attack of May
[ibid., prr,as. 49 md 501.

236. I should like to point out regarding Mr. Maksoud’s allegation, another falsification, regarding the
so-called destruction of the hospital that goes by the
name of Labib Abou Taher in Sidon. We have here
before us an article written by The NCJ\I’ York Tinws
correspondent Shipler from that city, in which he describes his visit to the hospital and his talk with some
of the people whom he found there. The hospital is
functioning and everything is in order. I think Mr. Maksoud has some of his signals mixed on that, as well
as on some other things.

228. I looked through the report and did not find a
single example of any action across the Lebanese
border from the north to the south. That makes me
wonder whether the people of Galilee were not living
happily and securely, and whether it was the intention
of the authorities
in Tel Aviv that those people should
not go on living happily and securely. Did they provoke
the attack in order to bring us back to a state of war?
Is that criminal mentality of the Nazis still there?

237. I should like to say to the representative of the
Soviet Union that it is true that his country is not alone
in its actions: it enjoys the phalanx of the numerous
countries it has subjugated since the Second World
War.

229. I ask that because this afternoon I recalled the
description given by such people as Albert Einstein of
the Irgun Zvai Leumi and the party called Herut, which
is under Begin’s leadership: “criminal”,
“Nazi”,
“Fascist”.

238. We know what has come about and we have
remarked on the allegations made by the representative of the Soviet Union as well. But things stand out,
and we know exactly what is happening today in the
area under Israeli control in Lebanon, and facts speak
for themselves. Israel is making a very great effort to
take care of those who have suffered unfortunately

230. People speak about the suffering. Cannot People
think about suffering without numbers, be they 30%
3,000 or 30,000? There are victims of the unwarranted,
unjustified, uncalled-for invasion of Lebanon. As my
colleague the representative of Lebanon has said,
21

----

because of the situation that has developed. And we
will not permit these allegations to go unanswered.

Litho in United Nations.

New

York

0400

22

XR-60989~June

19x9-~.U.cU
