S/2015/426*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2164 (2014), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2015 and requested me to report to it ever y three months
on the implementation of the resolution and the Mission’s mandate. The present
report provides an update on major developments since my previous report, of
27 March 2015 (S/2015/219), and recommendations for the extension of the
mandate of MINUSMA.

II. Political process
2.
There have been significant developments in the inter-Malian dialogue since
my most recent report. On 15 May, the Government, the Platform coalition of armed
groups, composed of Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de
résistance I (CMFPR-I), a faction of the Coalition du peuple de l’Azawad (CPA), a
faction of Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad (MAA) and the Groupe d’autodéfense
touareg Imghad et alliés (GATIA), and representatives of two of the Coordination
coalition of armed groups, namely another faction of CPA and of CMFPR -II, signed
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process (Accord pour la paix et la réconciliation au Mali issu du processus d’Alger)
in Bamako, in the presence of the international community and national
stakeholders. The other movements of the Coordination which includes the
Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA), the Haut Conseil pou r
l’unité de l’Azawad (HCUA), the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad (MAA), the
Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de résistance II (CMFPR -II)
and a faction of the Coalition du peuple de l’Azawad (CPA), did not sign the
agreement, but they did initial it the previous day, on 14 May, in Algiers. Such
developments constituted important progress, while dialogue continued with a view
to securing the adhesion of all parties to the agreement. Those efforts, however,
have been hampered by the serious deterioration of the security situation across the
north of Mali since the end of April, particularly in Ménaka (Gao region), which
saw ceasefire violations by all Malian parties and violent clashes between Platform
and Coordination elements.
* Second reissue for technical reasons (30 June 2015).

15-09275* (E)

010715

*1509275*

S/2015/426

Inter-Malian dialogue and reconciliation
3.
Following the initialling of the draft agreement by the Government and the
Platform on 1 March in Algiers, the mediation, comprising Algeria, the United
Nations/MINUSMA, the African Union, the Economic Community of West Afri can
States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger, continued its efforts to bring all
parties to initial the draft agreement. On 17 March, a delegation of the international
community travelled to Kidal to meet with representatives of the Coordination, who
had gathered to consult with their constituency. During that visit, the Coordination
submitted a list of observations to be considered and discussed prior to its initialling
of the agreement. The mediation indicated that no further amendments to the draft
peace agreement would be considered. On 18 March, during a press conference, the
Minister of Digital Economy, Information and Communication and Government
spokesman of Mali announced the Government’s decision not to enter into further
negotiations with the Coordination. Following discussions with the mediation,
however, the Government later accepted to discuss implementation issues,
subsequent to the initialling of the agreement by the Coordination.
4.
The Government of Mali also organized sensitization activities relating to the
agreement. On 31 March, the Minister of Solidarity, Humanitarian Action and
Reconstruction of the North, of the Government of Mali, visited the refugee cam p of
Tabarey-Barey in the Niger, where he presented the content of the draft agreement
to Malian refugees there. On 4 and 6 April, the Minister of National Reconciliation
travelled to Nouakchott and to the M’bera refugee camp in Mauritania to sensitize
Malian communities there to matters relating to the agreement and to encourage
their return once conditions would so permit. Meanwhile, popular demonstrations
took place on 11, 12, 14 and 15 April in Kidal, Ménaka and Ber to denounce the
Coordination’s intention to initial the agreement.
5.
Between 14 and 19 April, MINUSMA, in line with its mandate concerning the
protection of civilians, which includes the mitigation of intercommunal violence,
supported a peace caravan to Goundam Cercle. The initiative of elected and
traditional local leaders, particularly the chief of the Kel -Antessar tribe, was
undertaken to help restore trust between the communities of Goundam. Peaceful
messages were disseminated to people in over 20 localities in the Cercle, including
members of Arab, Peulh, Songhai and Tuareg communities, as well as
representatives of the M’bera refugee camp in Mauritania. Activities included large
public meetings in Bintagoungou, Douékiré, Goundam, Mbouna and Scale, as well
as focus groups aimed at promoting reconciliation. The initiative helped foster
dialogue between communities and improve confidence, in order to prepare for the
reintegration and voluntary return of refugees from the M’bera refugee camp.
6.
Following discussions held in Algiers on 4 April between my Special
Representative in Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, Mongi Hamdi, and the Secretary -General of MNLA,
Bilal Ag Acherif, the latter indicated, in a letter addressed to the Mini ster for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Ramtane Lamamra, that the Coordination would be
willing to initial the draft agreement, provided that consultations would be held on
their outstanding observations on the text. On 6 April, Mr. Lamamra invited the
parties to Algiers for an initialling ceremony, scheduled to take place on 15 April.
On 10 April, however, the spokesperson of MNLA issued a communiqué on behalf

2/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

of the Coordination reiterating its refusal to initial the agreement “in its present
form at that date”. During further talks held in Algiers from 14 to 19 April, the
Coordination delegation, led by the Secretary-General of MAA-Coordination, Sidi
Ibrahim Ould Sidati, reaffirmed its commitment to initial and sign the agreement on
the condition that a set of issues be addressed first, including guarantees from the
mediation. In consultation with the Government of Mali, the mediation decided that
further discussions would not be pursued and that a formal signature of the
agreement would take place in Bamako on 15 May, to which all Malian parties
would be invited. The Government of Mali thereafter transmitted invitations to the
ceremony to national and international representatives.
7.
Efforts to facilitate the adhesion of the Coordination to the agreement in time
for the signing ceremony continued nonetheless. Following difficult and intense
discussions that took place in Nouakchott, on 25 and 26 April, between my Special
Representative and the leadership of the Coordination, Mr. Ag Acherif confirmed, in
a letter addressed to my Special Representative on 26 April, that the Coordination
would agree to initial the agreement prior to further consultations. That effort was
set back on 27 April, however, when combatants from GATIA and MAA -Platform
attacked and took control of Ménaka, a town Coordination forces had been
occupying under the terms of the ceasefire agreement of 23 May 2014. The incident
set off a series of retaliatory ceasefire violations by the Coordination, fuelling a
spiral of violence by all sides that threatened to derail the peace process.
8.
As detailed in the next section, MINUSMA immediately initiated contacts with
the parties at all levels to defuse tensions and prevent a further escalation of
violence. My Special Representative proposed a series of recommendations to end
the wave of violence in the north, with a particular focus on the situation in Ménaka.
The Coordination initially refused a new invitation to attend consultations in Algiers
unless the Platform withdrew from Ménaka, but eventua lly agreed to travel to
Algiers on 13 May, at the insistence of my Special Representative. On 14 May, the
Coordination initialled the agreement in the presence of the mediation and other
parties, while insisting that discussions be held with the Government before it
would sign the agreement.
9.
On 15 May, the formal signing ceremony of the agreement took place in
Bamako. The ceremony was attended by 10 Heads of State and several
representatives of governments and international organizations, as well as a
significant number of national actors, including representatives from civil society,
political parties, traditional and religious leaders from the northern and southern
regions and former Heads of State and prime ministers. In addition to my Special
Representative, I was represented by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations. Following consultations with the Security Council on 7 May, the Under Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations articulated, in a statement that he
delivered on my behalf, the principles that would guide United Nations support for
an agreement signed by only some of the parties, namely, that dialogue would
continue, the agreement would remain open for signature by outstanding parties,
ceasefire commitments would remain valid and efforts would be made to identify
those elements of the agreement that could be viably implemented pending the
signature of the agreement by all parties. Large demonstrations later took place, on
26 May, in Bamako and Goundam (Timbuktu region) and on 27 May in Timbuktu
city, to express support for the peace agreement.

15-09275

3/21

S/2015/426

10. Following intense engagement by my Special Representative and other key
stakeholders, a series of consultations took place, from 27 May to 5 June, between
the mediation and all Malian parties in Algiers on a two-step road map with a view
to facilitating the adhesion of Coordination to the agreement. First, the road map
aims to mitigate the prevailing security situation by re -establishing ceasefires,
building on arrangements for Ménaka and reaffirming the parties’ commitment to a
cessation of hostilities throughout the country. Second, the road map consists of
consultations between the parties on the modalities for the implementation of the
agreement, including the establishment of the Comité de suivi de l’accord, the
implementation framework foreseen by the agreement. On 5 June the Coordination,
the Government of Mali and the mediation signed a summary of preparatory
consultations on the implementation of the peace agreement and a ceasefire
arrangement that inter alia provided for the disengagement of the parties from
Ménaka. The Platform refused to sign those two documents.

III. Security, stabilization and protection of civilians
11. During the reporting period, the frequency, intensity and geographical spread
of clashes and attacks increased, especially in the period leading up to and
immediately following the ceremony for the signature of the agreement held on
15 May. Tensions escalated between the Platform and the Coordination, both
seeking opportunities to assert influence and make territorial and political gains.
Clashes and movements of armed groups mainly occurred in the Gao and Timbuktu
regions, but also increasingly towards the south, in Mopti and Ségou regions, and
led to significant displacement of civilians.

Clashes between and attacks by compliant armed groups
12. On 27 April, GATIA and MAA-Platform elements unexpectedly attacked and
took over the town of Ménaka from the Coordination, which had been occupying it
under the terms of the 23 May 2014 ceasefire agreement. Elements of the Malian
armed forces, previously sheltered in the co-located Malian armed forcesMINUSMA camp, left the premises and were active both inside and outside the
town. Fighting between armed groups continued in the following days on the
outskirts of Ménaka and in key locations in the area. MINUSMA deployed joint
investigation teams to assess the fighting and its consequences and supported the
deployment of a joint observation and verification team from Gao on 29 April.
MINUSMA immediately reinforced its military presence in the town so as to deter
further violence.
13. The Coordination retaliated by launching a series of attacks against
Government- or Platform-held localities in Timbuktu region. On 28 April, four
Coordination vehicles were observed in the close vicinity of Timbuktu. The
Coordination leadership in Ber requested the departure of the Malian defence and
security forces from Timbuktu and indicated its intention to enter the city in order to
oust them. As the parties reinforced their positions, MINUSMA engaged with and
obtained the commitment of the local Coordination leadership not to enter
Timbuktu. In the following days, several attacks against the Malian defence and
security forces were conducted in Timbuktu and Mopti regions and resulted in four

4/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

civilians being killed and nine being injured; 19 members of the Malian defence and
security forces were killed and 15 were injured; and eight persons were abducted.
Three elements of the Coordination were killed and four were wounded. In addition,
12 inmates escaped from the prison in Diré (Timbuktu region). Looting and stealing
from the civilian population by Coordination elements were also reported in
Ténenkou (Mopti region). Attacks by the Coordination against other armed groups
were reported in Timbuktu region, including kidnappings, looting and arson.
14. With the aim of encouraging a return to the observance of the ceasefire, the
Force Commander of MINUSMA organized an extraordinary meeting of the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security on 2 May, in Gao, with the participation of
Government, Platform and Coordination representatives. The findings of two joint
observation and verification team missions conducted in Timbuktu and Ménaka on
29 April were presented, and it was concluded that violations of the ceasefire
agreements had been committed on all sides. Further joint observation and
verification teams were sent to Bintagoungou, Goundam and Leré. MINUSMA
proposed a disengagement plan for Ménaka, which provided for a pullback of all
armed groups from the town and the assumption by MINUSMA of responsibility for
security in the town and the establishment of a protective “red line” 5 km north of
the town. The Platform rejected the proposal, remaining in Ménaka, while
Coordination representatives questioned the Mission’s impartiality in denying them
access to the town as provided for in previous ceasefire arrangements.
15. On 8 May, an armed confrontation between Ganda Koy ele ments and
individuals suspected of criminal activity took place in Arbichi village, 42 km from
Gourma-Rharous (Timbuktu region), resulting in the death of one suspected
criminal and the arrest of another, who was handed over to the Malian armed forces
and taken into custody in Timbuktu. The clash triggered a series of incidents, with
the Coordination storming villages located along the Niger River, causing the
displacement of people from the northern, Coordination -controlled bank of the river
to the southern bank, controlled by the Malian armed forces and Ganda Koy
elements. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), as of 1 June, 59,565 persons have been displaced in recent
weeks as a result of the insecurity.
16. Starting on 13 May, fighting around Ménaka resumed, with Coordination and
Platform elements clashing at In Kadeouane, approximately 80 km north of Ménaka.
Members of the Malian armed forces left their camp and took up positions within
and north of the town, where they have remained in defensive positions since
15 May. MINUSMA continued to advocate for the disengagement of all Malian
parties from the town and communicated to the Coordination that any offensive
movement towards Ménaka would be interpreted as a threat to the civilian
population. Two further efforts to convene the CTMS to discuss the Mission’s
Ménaka proposal failed when the Platform, despite commitments to the mediation
team, refused to attend. On 26 May, some 1,000 protesters gathered in fron t of the
Mission’s camp in Ménaka, demanding a meeting with the Government and
MINUSMA leadership. MINUSMA also received a letter from the town’s mayor,
requesting MINUSMA to expand its authority in the town and to enlarge the
proposed protection zone up to 30 km. MINUSMA continues to provide medical
evacuation of injured combatants from the area.

15-09275

5/21

S/2015/426

Asymmetric and extremist attacks
17. Violent extremist and criminal activities increased in all northern regions and
southward into Mopti and Ségou regions. The incursion of extremist elements and
the targeting of local authorities and of suspected informants of the Malian defence
and security forces in Mopti region, as well as attacks in Bamako, were particularly
worrisome developments.
18. Attacks against local administration officials in Mopti region led several of
them, including seven sub-prefects and one mayor, to leave their posts. On 26 April,
a vehicle carrying the prefect of Youwarou and the sub -prefect of Dogo hit an
improvised explosive device or mine on the Dogo-Déké axis; no casualties were
reported. On 29 May, four rockets were fired in the direction of the airport in Gao
by unknown assailants, without causing casualties or damage.
19. Attacks against civilians also intensified, leading to 9 civilians being killed
and at least 14 being injured by improvised explosive devices or mines and, for the
first time in Gao, by a rocket attack. Numerous acts of retaliation, abductions and
threats against civilians were also registered in Gao, Mopti, Ség ou and Timbuktu
regions. During the reporting period, two Malians and one Romanian were
kidnapped. From mid-March to 20 April, logistics convoys, mainly of MINUSMA
and its suppliers, faced several attacks, including on the Ménaka -Ansongo (Gao
region), Timbuktu-Goundam (Timbuktu region), Gao-Almoustarat (Gao region) and
Gao-Gossi (Gao and Timbuktu regions) axes. Those attacks resulted in five civilian
contractors being killed and three being injured, while five vehicles were damaged
or destroyed by gunfire and mine attacks. In response to the intensification of
attacks on civilian vehicles, on 27 April, the Malian armed forces began escorting
civilian transport vehicles on the Timbuktu-Goundam, Goundam-Tonka (Timbuktu
region), Timbuktu-Douentza (Timbuktu and Mopti regions) and Gao-GossiDouentza (Gao and Timbuktu regions) axes.
20. Attacks against the Malian defence and security forces using improvised
explosive devices also increased during the reporting period. Five incidents were
recorded, resulting in two uniformed personnel being killed and nine being injured.
21. MINUSMA was the target of numerous attacks, mostly involving the use of
improvised explosive devices, but also encountered one mortar attack in Kidal.
Twelve peacekeepers were injured, in multiple attacks, and nine additional
peacekeepers were injured on 15 April, when an attacker attempted to break into the
Mission’s camp in Ansongo (Gao region) with a suicide vehicle -borne improvised
explosive device and detonated the device outside the camp. On 17 April,
Al-Mourabitoun claimed responsibility for the attack.
22. In addition, on 16 May, an attack with a suicide vehicle -borne improvised
explosive device was launched against a force convoy of MINUSMA that had
established its overnight position in the vicinity of Almoustarat (Gao region),
leading to the minor injury of one peacekeeper. On 20 May, an armed attacker
unsuccessfully tried to set fire to a vehicle of the Mission parked outside the house
of MINUSMA military personnel in Bamako, then open ed fire on a local guard, the
house and other vehicles, and threw two hand grenades, which did not explode. On
22 May, 11 mortar shells were fired at the Mission’s camp in Ber (Timbuktu region),
landing 5 m away from the camp, without causing casualties. On 25 May, a shooting
incident in Bamako, which Malian authorities and MINUSMA are still investigating,

6/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

resulted in one peacekeeper being killed and a second being injured. Meanwhile, on
28 May, an armoured vehicle escorting a MINUSMA convoy, including the Force
Commander and Police Commissioner, hit a mine or improvised explosive device
about 20 km east of Timbuktu; three peacekeepers were injured and the vehicle was
destroyed.

Protection of civilians
23. While civilians in northern Mali were rarely deliberately targeted by attacks,
they suffered collateral damage, including from improvised explosive devices and
mines, as well as rockets. According to the United Nations Mine Action Service,
50 civilian victims of such incidents (including 9 who were killed and 41 who were
injured) have been registered during the period under review. In addition to civilian
casualties, improvised explosive devices, mines and explosive remnants of war
hindered freedom of movement and affected access to services and eco nomic
opportunities.
24. The Mission implemented its protection of civilians mandate through a variety
of measures. In order to respond to the growing violence in the Timbuktu region,
MINUSMA was in direct contact with the Coordination leadership and loca l
authorities to try and defuse the situation. MINUSMA further organized assessment
missions to Bintagoungou, Diré, Léré and Goundam (Timbuktu region), following
clashes in those localities, so as to engage with and reassure the population as well
as to evaluate the security situation and its impact on civilians. MINUSMA
immediately initiated investigations of the sites of attacks in support of local
security authorities. In several cases, MINUSMA assisted with the evacuation of
wounded civilian victims, such as in Ansongo (Gao region) on 15 April. In Gao,
Mopti and Timbuktu regions, the Mine Action Service completed explosive search
and clearance operations in public buildings, as well as in private houses, which
were previously occupied by armed groups, enabling the safe re-establishment of
State authority and the return of displaced people. During the reporting period, the
Mine Action Service conducted risk education sessions on explosive hazards for
15,025 people and education sessions on small arms and light weapons for over
8,700 people in communities at risk in Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
25. Despite being constrained by the need to allocate significant resources to the
protection of MINUSMA camps and escorting logistics convoys, the force deployed
long-range patrols to areas of heightened tension, such as Ténenkou (Mopti region)
in order to deter further clashes and reassure civilians. Similarly, MINUSMA police
undertook long-range as well as coordinated patrols with Malian security forces to
reassure the population. In Ménaka (Gao region), the force deployed 200 additional
troops, as of 28 April, to reinforce the existing MINUSMA presence and deter
attacks on civilian-populated areas.

IV. Human rights protection
26. The Mission documented violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law during the period under review. A total of 19 civilians
were killed in instances of summary executions (9 civilians), indiscriminate mortar

15-09275

7/21

S/2015/426

and rocket attacks (8 civilians) or during armed clashes by parties to the conflict
(2 civilians) in Gao, Kidal, Mopti and Ségou regions.
27. MINUSMA undertook examinations of alleged summary or arbitrary executions
of civilians. Three civilians were victims of summary executions by unidentif ied
individuals for alleged cooperation with Malian armed forces in the Ségou region.
On 29 March, unidentified armed men on motorbikes entered the village of Tokala
(Ségou region) and summarily executed two persons perceived to be informants to
the Malian armed forces. On 22 April, the chief of Dogo village (Mopti region) was
shot and assassinated by two men on a motorbike, while in the market, while on
12 April, 1 km south of the same village, a young Peulh, perceived to be an
informant of the Malian armed forces, was assaulted by four armed men, strangled
and left for dead.
28. In the context of clashes between elements from all Malian parties in Tin
Hama (Gao region), six civilian men, all belonging to the Tuareg Kel Essouk group
and including a humanitarian worker, were executed on 21 May. Other incidents that
raised serious protection concerns include threats made against people cooperating
with MINUSMA and the Malian State in Djenné and Douentza (Mopti region).
29. As of 15 May, 219 conflict-related detainees remained in detention by the
State, either in Bamako or the regions. Of those detainees, 22 appeared on the lists
submitted by the Coordination for release within the framework of the confidence building measures of article 18 of the Ouagadougou preliminary agreement. In
April, two such detainees were released.
30. The Coordination and the Platform continued to detain fighters of opposing
groups as well as members of the Malian defence and security forces captured
during operations. On 22 May in Ber, Timbuktu region, MINUSMA facilitated the
release of 10 members of Ganda Koy and CMFPR-I, who had been held by the
Coordination since 28 April, while the Coordination continues to detain two
members of the Malian defence and security forces. On 27 April in Ménaka, the
Platform captured nine Coordination fighters, who are now held in Tabankort. Since
their transfer to Tabankort, MINUSMA has lost access to them. In Kidal region, the
Coordination continues to hold one GATIA fighter captured on 20 January in
Tabankort, while two more GATIA fighters captured in the same operation were
released in April. The Coordination also continues to detain 16 Malian armed forces
members captured on 22 May in Tessit, Gao region. MINUSMA has not been able to
establish conclusively the number, grounds and conditions of detention of all
persons held by armed groups, owing to limited information and a lack of access.

Conflict-related sexual violence
31. During the reporting period, MINUSMA documented 23 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence. A judge was appointed to conduct investigations into a
number of cases filed by non-governmental organizations on behalf of victims of
sexual violence. Meanwhile, 33 additional complaints of grave human rights
violations, including acts of conflict-related sexual violence, were filed on 6 March
at the court of first instance in Timbuktu against 15 members of armed groups. This
was the third such collective complaint filed since November 2014. Meanwhile,
only limited services are available to victims of sexual violence. MINUSMA is
closely monitoring the process.

8/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

Child protection
32. During the reporting period, 16 new cases of child recruitment by MNLA,
GATIA, CMFPR-II, Ganda-Izo and MAA-Platform in Ansongo and Intilit (Gao
region) and in Timbuktu region, as well as by the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa (MUJAO), in Mopti region, were recorded. Among those recruited
children, 15 were arrested and detained by the Malian defence and security forces,
some for as long as four months. Of those 15 children, 10 were released during
March and April, bringing the current number of children detained for their alleged
association with armed groups to 10. MINUSMA and UNICEF conducted six visits
to detention centres in Bamako and met with officials of the ministries of Women,
Child and Family Affairs, of Defence and Former Combatants, and of Justice, to
ensure the swift release of the detained children.
33. MINUSMA and UNICEF verified that nine schools were being used by armed
groups, while six additional schools were reported as being used by such groups.
The vocational training centre of Gao, which was vacated by MINUSMA Force on
6 December 2014, has been rehabilitated.

V. Re-establishment of State authority
34. There was limited progress in the re-establishment of State authority in the
north during the period under review. As of 23 April, the presence of State
representatives in Gao region was as follows: one governor; four out of five
prefects; and 18 out of 25 sub-prefects, mostly in the urban centres of Ansongo,
Bourem and Gao. In Mopti region, there was one governor; all eight prefects; and
43 out of 55 sub-prefects. In Timbuktu region, there was one governor; all five
prefects; and 17 out of 31 sub-prefects. All Kidal State officials (one governor, four
prefects and 11 sub-prefects) relocated from Bamako to Gao in mid -February,
pending their redeployment to Kidal. The overall number of sub-prefects present at
their duty stations, however, further decreased from 55 to 43 sub -prefects (12 left
their posts, owing to insecurity).
35. Despite serious concerns about their security, additional judges, prosecuto rs
and prison personnel returned to the north. In Gao region, the public prosecutor at
the court of first instance, the president of the tribunal and the investigating judge
returned and resumed their duties on 30 March. The new president of Timbuktu’s
tribunal of first instance, a judge and the prosecutor arrived in the second half of
March. The arrival of magistrates is expected to help tackle the exceptionally high
number of prisoners currently in pretrial detention. Following the signature of a
ministerial order to deploy additional staff to the north, MINUSMA began
supporting the Ministry of Justice for the deployment of approximately 30 corrections
officers to the north, so as to address the chronic understaffing in prisons.
36. MINUSMA and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
continued to join efforts to strengthen judicial and penitentiary institutions in the
north. On 20 March, MINUSMA police inaugurated and handed over rehabilitated
and equipped stations to the gendarmerie and national p olice in Gao. On 21 March,
the Mine Action Service completed the rehabilitation of three armouries in Gao city ,
in support of one police and two gendarmerie stations. On 24 March, the Maison
centrale d’arrêt of Timbuktu reopened, following the completion of its renovation

15-09275

9/21

S/2015/426

through a quick-impact project of MINUSMA. UNDP completed the rehabilitation
of the tribunal of Gourma-Rharous on 21 April and provided equipment to the
regional directorates of penitentiary institutions in Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu. In
addition, MINUSMA and UNDP, through the Global Focal Point for the Police,
Justice and Corrections mechanism, helped the Government to review its justice and
corrections reform plan.
37. The Mission continued to actively engage with and support representative s of
the Malian defence and security forces, the parliamentary commission on security,
defence and civil protection and civil society organizations involved in security
sector reform. MINUSMA reached an agreement to support the Ministry of Defence
and Former Combatants in the implementation of the military guidance and
planning law for the period 2015-2019, which was adopted on 13 February, starting
with a sensitization and planning workshop in Bamako. MINUSMA, in
collaboration with the National Democratic Institute, organized a two-day meeting
at the Bamako Peacekeeping Training Centre, on 31 March and 1 April, to sensitize
Malian civil society actors regarding their role in security sector reform and the
Mission’s support to the process. In addition, a pilot project to rehabilitate border
infrastructure at Labezanga, on the border between Mali and the Niger, was
finalized.
38. In March and April, UNDP supported the Government through capacity building activities on security sector reform, including by train ing 575 officers of
the national police, gendarmerie, civil protection and National Guard, 10 per cent of
whom were women.

VI. Humanitarian assistance
39. The deterioration of the security environment in northern Mali continued to
hamper the implementation of projects and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded a significant
increase in incidents affecting humanitarian access, with 30 such incidents recorded
between 1 January and 23 April 2015, compared to a total of 23 incidents in 2014.
Approximately half of the incidents were linked to violence against personnel,
goods and humanitarian infrastructure, while the others were linked to military and
armed group operations and hostilities. MINUSMA provided security and escort to
humanitarian actors in the regions in order to enable them to assess needs and
provide necessary assistance. Four cases of violence against humanitarian workers,
assets and facilities occurred during the reporting period, including the killing of
one staff member of the International Committee of the Red Cross by an extremist
group in Gao region, on 30 March. Another three cases linked to general insecurity
and criminality led to the temporary suspension of activities by non-governmental
organizations and/or their withdrawal in Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
40. As of 1 June, 59,565 additional internally displaced persons were reported
across the regions of Timbuktu (54,441), Gao (3,041) and Mopti (2,083), since the
surge in clashes in northern Mali on 27 April. This brings the total to 102,757. Some
732 new refugees crossed into the neighbouring countries of Mauritania (236), the
Niger (238) and Burkina Faso (258), adding to the 137,500 Malian refugees
previously registered in neighbouring countries by UNHCR since the crisis started
in early 2012.

10/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

41. The results of the harmonized framework, the analytical tool used to
standardize evaluation systems for food insecurity in West Africa and the Sahel, for
March 2015, indicated that at least 410,000 people would be in need of immediate
food assistance, from April to August 2015, and that some 2.7 million people would
be moderately food insecure. The World Food Programme (WFP) supported 90,000
internally displaced persons, returnees and individuals affected by economic and
environmental stresses with emergency food assistance, in March, and 130,000
individuals in April and May. WFP plans to scale up its assistance to provide at least
350,000 beneficiaries with emergency food assistance as the lean season
approaches. It also provided life-saving treatment to about 50,000 children and
pregnant and lactating women suffering from moderate to acute malnutrition in
March and April and planned to assist 55,000 malnourished people in May.
42. Only 27 per cent of the $377 million funding requirement for the common
humanitarian response plan in Mali for 2015 was mobilized as of early June, putting
the implementation of key humanitarian activities at risk this year.

VII. Early recovery and development
43. Despite the deteriorating security situation, several successful initiatives were
undertaken through MINUSMA quick-impact projects to help increase the
confidence, resilience and recovery of local communities. Initiatives ranged from
livelihood development and restoring access to water and electricity, to the
rehabilitation of government structures in those areas under government control.
Since 20 March, six projects were completed, 31 were ongoing and funding was
approved for an additional 55. The total budget for these 92 projects reached
$3 million.
44. On 11 May, MINUSMA and the United Nations Office for Project Services
began the assessment of 16 community violence reduction project proposals in Gao,
Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu, aimed at preventing the further recruitment of youth at
risk by armed and criminal groups and at contributing to confidence -building in
affected communities.
45. The United Nations country team began implementing four approved
Peacebuilding Fund projects in Gao and Timbuktu regions on: (a) peace education
in northern Mali; (b) strengthening the capacity of women and youth and their
resilience to conflict; (c) durable solutions for the peaceful reintegration of internally
displaced persons and refugees; and (d) access to justice for female victims of
sexual- and gender-based violence.
46. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) continued its coordination of the local reconstruction of mausoleums in
Timbuktu, with the support of MINUSMA. Rehabilitation work for three private
libraries of ancient manuscripts in the historic centre of Timbuktu continued through
a quick-impact project facilitated by MINUSMA. On 8 April, MINUSMA Force
visited the archaeological site of Es-Souk (Kidal region) and confirmed allegations
of looting by the local population. Es-Souk is on the tentative list of sites in Mali for
inclusion on the World Heritage List of UNESCO.

15-09275

11/21

S/2015/426

VIII. Operationalization of the Mission
47. As of 1 June, MINUSMA had deployed almost 83 per cent of all authorized
civilian staff: 84 per cent of international posts; 81 per cent of United Nations
Volunteers; and 85 per cent of all national posts. In terms of gender distribution,
32 per cent of international posts, 34 per cent of volunteer positions and 21 per cent
of national posts were occupied by women.
48. As of 1 June, the strength of the Mission’s police component stood at 1,055
personnel, reaching 73 per cent of its authorized strength of 1,440, with 65 per cent
of individual police officers (8 per cent of them women) and 76 per cent of the
formed police unit personnel (3 per cent of them women) deployed (see annex). At
the end of April, one of the formed police units stationed in Gao was repatriated.
49. As of 1 June, the strength of the Mission’s military component stood at 9,043
troops (including 244 military staff officers) out of an authorized strength of 11,200,
representing 81 per cent of the authorized strength for military personnel. Women
represent 2 per cent of the Force. The Force is composed of manoeuvre units (66 per
cent), enablers (29 per cent) and force multipliers (5 per cent) and is deployed in
Bamako (10 per cent), in Sector West (Timbuktu and Mopti regions) (26 per cent),
in Sector East (Gao region) (36 per cent) and in Sector North (Kidal region) (28 per
cent).
50. Efforts to achieve full operating capability continued. Over the reporting
period, tactical military unarmed unmanned aerial systems, complete with a
specially constructed runway, and three armed helicopters, were deployed in
Timbuktu. The Mission anticipates the deployment of two additional medium -range
helicopter units in Kidal and Timbuktu by August. However, MINUSMA still awaits
the deployment of a second infantry battalion, outstandi ng for more than 16 months,
and two force protection companies. A troop-contributing country capable of
providing an additional armed helicopter unit has yet to be identified. Concerns
remain regarding contingency-owned equipment for most of the infantry units.
51. The persistent targeting of convoy movements in northern Mali by criminal
and/or violent extremist actors, as outlined in paragraph 19 above, continues to pose
a serious threat to the ability of the Mission to deliver supplies to personnel and
bases in the north and causes significant delays to construction projects. The
deteriorating security situation, the lack of appropriate security vehicles, the
unavailability of alternative supply routes to northern Mali and the continued
non-functioning of Kidal airport as a result of vandalism have had a negative impact
on the ability of both the Mission and its contractors to ensure a timely resupply of
its northern deployments, especially in Aguelhok, Kidal and Tessalit. The Mission
continues to experience water scarcity in the Kidal area and is working through its
engineering contractors to address the situation. The increasingly critical situation
in terms of support operations in northern Mali was assessed in the context of the
review of the mission concept, which is addressed below.
52. During the reporting period, MINUSMA continued to implement its counter improvised explosive device strategy and action plan to improve the safety and
security of MINUSMA personnel. The two MINUSMA explosive ordnance dis posal
and route verification companies conducted 17 missions in support of convoy
movements, daily road clearance tasks and post-blast investigations, as well as
neutralizing improvised explosive devices and removing unexploded ordnance.

12/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

In-country training on improvised explosive device safety response was provided to
156 MINUSMA military and police personnel, as well as training in the use of
individual first aid kits, for 174 personnel, with a particular focus on infantry units.
Predeployment training in the field of counter-improvised explosive device
measures also began for forthcoming and rotating infantry units, with training for
863 troops completed during the reporting period.

IX. Financial aspects
53. I have submitted to the General Assembly, for its consideration, a note seeking
additional funding for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 in the amount of
$80.3 million (see A/69/828), in addition to the amount of $830.7 million previously
appropriated for the maintenance of the Mission for the same period under the terms
of General Assembly resolution 68/259 B, in order to enable the Mission to support
a counter-improvised explosive device action plan, including the counter improvised explosive device training for MINUSMA Force and police contingents,
improve Force protection capabilities and enhance the national counter -improvised
explosive device capacities of the Malian defence and security forces. At the same
time, my budget proposal for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, amounting to $936.1 million gross, is currently before
the Fifth Committee for review and consideration (see A/69/784). Should the
Security Council decide to extend the mandate of MINUSMA beyond 30 June 2015,
the cost for maintaining the Mission until 30 June 2016 would be limited to the
amounts approved by the General Assembly.
54. As at 29 May 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINUSMA amounted to $34.1 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,868.8 million.
55. As at 30 April 2015, amounts owed to troop and formed police contributors
totalled some $113.8 million. Reimbursement of troop/formed police costs has been
made for the period up to 28 February 2015, while reimbursement of the costs for
contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2014,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

X. Mission concept
56. With a view to informing the Security Council’s consideration of the renewal
of the Mission’s mandate and in the light of the changed political and security
environment in Mali since 2014, MINUSMA undertook a review of its mission
concept of October 2013. It will be finalized and approved by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support in July.
57. The revised draft mission concept has identified the following goal, towards
which all integrated efforts should be directed: “on the basis of a political
settlement, conditions are being established for legitimate and functioning State
authorities to provide basic security and services to the population”. Three core
Mission objectives were identified to reach this end state: (a) a sustainable and
credible peace process, supported by regional actors, that includes processes at the
national and subnational levels, to foster a viable peace agreement and its

15-09275

13/21

S/2015/426

implementation; and (b) security and stabilization, through integrated effort s, in key
areas critical to the peace process. This would require (c) the full operational
capacity of MINUSMA, including the capacity to protect and sustain the Mission
and conduct priority tasks. The protection of civilians and effective public
communication are identified as cross-cutting priority tasks.
58. In pursuit of those objectives and in order to maximize the positive impact of
the Mission’s limited resources, MINUSMA would focus its efforts in five key
geographical areas surrounding Gao, Kidal, Ménaka, Mopti and Timbuktu. A
multidimensional and integrated approach, tailored to the specific political, security,
governance, humanitarian and development conditions of each area, would be
elaborated, with resources aligned in support of area -driven efforts. MINUSMA
would continue to engage closely with Malian, international, regional and United
Nations partners. The draft Mission Concept is aligned with the United Nations
Peacebuilding and Development Assistance Framework and the benchmarking
exercise endorsed by the Government of Mali.
59. With a view to supporting effective mandate implementation, the revised draft
Mission Concept envisages that deployments in the current 16 sites will be oriented
in support of the three core objectives and priority geographical areas identified in
paragraphs 57 and 58 above, taking into account the degree of operational support
available. There would be locations where all Mission components would have a
continuous presence; sites that consist of military and police formed units, with
provisions for the temporary deployment of civilians; and bases intended for only a
military or formed police presence, in austere conditions, that would enable
expeditionary movements for larger military units.
60. This more targeted approach to MINUSMA deployment would lead to a
significantly increased demand on the Mission’s flexibility and mobility,
particularly with respect to convoy escorts, long-range patrols and aviation
capabilities. In particular, MINUSMA would need to be able t o sustain itself,
ensuring access to the main supply routes as well as main population centres. This
would require a reconfiguration of MINUSMA military and police assets so as to
ensure that military logistics capabilities are enhanced and support the Mis sion in
areas non-permissive for civilian contractual support. It would also require a greater
emphasis on sufficiently equipped military and formed police units, as well as
enhanced protection. The Mission’s progress in deterring and reducing the threat o f
mines and other attacks using improvised explosives on Mission personnel
illustrates the impact that can be achieved by ensuring that units have the
appropriate equipment, training and procedures to operate in asymmetric
environments. A qualitative rather than a quantitative approach will be pursued in
order to ensure that the Mission has the mobility and flexibility it requires, that can
be sustained in remote areas.
61. As a temporary measure, MINUSMA is putting together innovative
“survivability packages” to improve the operational status of some contingents,
until the capabilities envisioned in the respective statements of unit requirements
are achieved, either organically or by drawing on support from other deployed units.
The packages will include services relating to the provision of purified water,
electricity and minor engineering. In the longer term, however, non -performing
units will have to be reviewed and replaced so as to enable the Mission to achieve
the robust flexibility and mobility essential for its continued presence in and access

14/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

to the north. Other efforts under way to strengthen the performance of military and
police units include enhanced in-mission training and exercises. The Mission is also
engaging closely with its contractors to ensure that their transport capabilities meet
the qualitative requirements to operate along austere and insecure supply routes.

XI. Observations
62. The signing of the peace and reconciliation agreement by the Government of
Mali and some of the armed groups on 15 May in Bamako was a critical milestone
in the inter-Malian dialogue. I congratulate the Government of Mali and the
signatory armed groups for taking this important step forward. I am grateful for the
dedicated efforts of Algeria and the members of the mediation, as well as those of
the broader international community, that have encouraged and supported the peace
process, starting with the Ouagadougou preliminary agreement, of 18 June 2013,
and the Algiers process since July 2014. The presence of so many Heads of State
and representatives of Governments and international organizations at the signing
ceremony in Bamako reflects the unprecedented level of engagement of the
international community in the peace process.
63. Ultimately, the responsibility for peace lies with the Malians themselves.
Continued and sustainable progress towards peace and reconciliation requires the
genuine commitment and engagement of the Malian parties. An inclusive peace
process, supported by all parties to the conflict, is the only way to achieve the
political settlement to which all parties have declared their commitment. It is also a
prerequisite for addressing the insecurity, criminality, limited governance,
humanitarian needs and underdevelopment that threatens an i ncreasingly broader
swathe of Mali and its population. The Coordination’s initialling of the peace
agreement on 14 May is a hopeful step, but it now needs to take the next step. I urge
the leadership of the Coordination to be mindful of their responsibilit ies to the
communities they seek to represent and to sign the agreement without further delay.
64. The violence that has spread and intensified in the run -up to and since 15 May
is a clear indication of the risks that Mali will continue to face if dialogue is
interrupted. I am deeply concerned by the numerous violations of the ceasefire that
have taken place in northern Mali in the past weeks, by all armed movements,
including the takeover of Ménaka by the Platform on 27 April. The current violence
is increasingly targeting civilians and local authorities and is leading to serious
abuses of human rights by all sides. Thousands have been displaced from their
homes. The signature of the peace agreement cannot provide a licence to any party
to pursue military options. I urge all parties to abide by the existing ceasefire
agreements and declarations on the cessation of hostilities and to ensure their
continued participation in the mechanisms established to oversee their
implementation.
65. In the light of the urgency of the current situation, my Special Representative,
in collaboration with the mediation, proposed a twofold road map, first, to ensure a
global cessation of hostilities in the northern regions and second, to discuss
practical arrangements for the implementation of the peace agreement and to clarify
the parties’ respective observations on the agreement. Consultations on these two
elements, and the signing by the Government of Mali and the Coordination of
documents on the implementation of the peace agreement and on ceasefire

15-09275

15/21

S/2015/426

arrangements to address, inter alia, the situation in Ménaka, represent a significant
advance of the inter-Malian peace process. As a consequence, on 5 June, the
Coordination indicated that it will proceed to sign the peace agreemen t. I very much
welcome this. I regret, however, that the Platform refused to sign these
painstakingly negotiated arrangements and I urge the group to do so in the coming
days.
66. Looking forward, I encourage both signatories and non -signatories, supported
by the mediation, to focus on implementation modalities and on guarantees that
could reassure all parties that their concerns can be addressed in the implementation
phase. It will take the commitment and good faith of all parties to identify and start
implementing elements of the agreement that contribute to building confidence and
trust among the parties as well as providing tangible benefits for communities
throughout Mali. The polarization of the Malian population is fast becoming one of
the tragedies and future concerns of this conflict. I urge all parties to collectively
explain the peace process to the population so as to ensure public buy -in and foster
genuine national reconciliation at all levels. I also strongly encourage the
Government to do its utmost to deliver security and basic services in those areas
where it is present so as to reassure the population of its full commitment to the
well-being of its citizens.
67. At this critical juncture, the provision of continued coherent support by the
mediation and the international community will be essential to reassure the parties
that an inclusive political settlement is achievable. International support and
financial resources will be critical to enable practical implementation and early
wins. The donor community will need to be engaged to support the delivery of the
promise of economic development held out by this agreement.
68. I recommend that the Security Council give consideration to refocusing the
Mission’s mandate as follows: first, MINUSMA good offices efforts could be
directed towards facilitating and supporting dialogue with and among all
stakeholders to encourage the full adhesion of all parties to the agreement and its
concerted implementation. Efforts to facilitate dialogue towards reconcil iation and
social cohesion at the local and national levels could be reinforced by outreach to
and activities in support of local authorities, community and religious leaders and
civil society groups. Such efforts could help prevent the further increase of
intercommunal tensions and contribute to building confidence among the
population. To this effect, I encourage donors to generously contribute to the Trust
Fund in Support of Peace and Security in Mali, which is managed by MINUSMA.
69. Second, MINUSMA could continue to prioritize security and stabilization as
part of efforts to enable progress in the peace process. This could include an
enhanced role for MINUSMA in monitoring and supervising the observance of
ceasefires, including through strengthened ceasefire mechanisms, confidencebuilding measures and proactive engagement with all armed groups. Effective
monitoring and reporting will involve all of the Mission’s components in preventing
and investigating potential violations of agreed ceasefire arrangements, as well as
close engagement with all participating armed elements. To reinforce this effort, the
Security Council may wish to consider the introduction of sanctions against the
perpetrators of ceasefire violations. To this end, I would recommend that the
Council authorize the deployment of 40 military observers, in addition to the current
military authorized strength, to support MINUSMA monitoring and supervision of

16/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

ceasefires agreed between the Malian parties. Human rights monitori ng and
promotion, operational support for community violence reduction activities and for
efforts to combat impunity, as well as counter-explosives action and risk education
and robust action to protect civilians, in those instances where they are under
imminent threat of physical violence, could help support the re -establishment of a
more stable environment, which is essential for facilitating dialogue at all levels.
70. The third priority area of engagement could be in supporting the parties’
progressive and consensual implementation of the peace agreement. As the only
member of the international mediation with a presence in the north, MINUSMA will
have a lead role to play through its function as the secretariat of the Comité de suivi
de l’accord, as well as in the implementation of specific provisions of the agreement
on the ground. It can assist the parties in identifying and prioritizing those
implementation steps that would help to build confidence, encourage the adhesion
of outstanding parties and promote the inclusive, concerted and complete
implementation of the agreement. Such steps could include measures to promote the
justice and reconciliation components of the agreement, while also supporting the
parties in elaborating road maps and frameworks to address the security and defence
reform provisions of the agreement, including disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities. This will require presence, patient dialogue and sustained
engagement, which MINUSMA field presence can help to provide.
71. The recent increase in attacks against humanitarian partners raise s serious
concern, as they obstruct the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the affected
communities. I call on all parties to contribute to the creation of a secure
environment for humanitarian access and humanitarian space, and to disassociate
themselves from those perpetrating such attacks. Continued engagement and support
by MINUSMA to ensure timely and unhindered humanitarian access will remain an
essential Mission task.
72. Northern Mali is an extremely difficult environment in which to operate.
MINUSMA is likely to continue to face significant security and operational
challenges in the near future. Violent extremism, transnational organized crime and
banditry will still pose significant threats to ongoing stabilization efforts. I call on
Mali, the region and all international partners to continue to enhance efforts to
address these threats and to strengthen capacities to enhance border security.
73. Meanwhile, it is imperative that the units provided by troop- and policecontributing countries have the capacities and capabilities required to operate safely
and effectively in such environments. For this reason, I am not proposing, at this
point in time, an increase in the Mission’s military and police authorized strength,
beyond the 40 military observers referred to in paragraph 69 above, but I am
proposing a reconfiguration of their capabilities to improve their mobility, their
ability to proactively monitor and support ceasefires and confidence-building, and
their ability to protect and sustain themselves and the Mission. I call on bilateral
partners to support the deployment of contingents to Mali, including by providing
prior training and the necessary equipment.
74. The attacks against MINUSMA and its contractors are unacceptable and must
stop forthwith. I strongly condemn these barbaric acts and express my deepest
condolences to the families of victims of these crimes as well as to the Government
of Mali and the Governments of the countries of origin of the United Nations
peacekeepers who have lost their lives. I reiterate my appeal for the crimes to be

15-09275

17/21

S/2015/426

investigated and punished in earnest. I am grateful for continued coordination
between MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane, in line with their respective
mandates, and for the medical evacuation and essential assistance that the French
forces continue to provide to MINUSMA.
75. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the Mission’s mandate
for a period of one year, until 30 June 2016, with an increased authorized military
strength of 11,240 personnel, including the recommended addition of 40 military
observers, and maintaining the currently authorized police strength of 1,4 40
personnel, while also refocusing the mandate of MINUSMA, as outlined above.
76. Given the fluid environment in which the future of MINUSMA is being
considered, flexibility and responsiveness will be essential. If and when progress is
made in the peace process, consideration may need to be given to additional resources
and tasks in support of particular implementation activities. To that end, I encourage
the Security Council to remain actively engaged in support of the inter -Malian peace
process and to consider the periodic review of the Mission’s ma ndate in support
thereto.
77. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative for
Mali, Mongi Hamdi, and to all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel in
Mali, for their continuing hard work in very difficult conditions. I would also like to
express my gratitude to all troop- and police-contributing countries, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and bilateral partners, the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other
partners for their important contributions in support of peace and stability in Mali.

18/21

15-09275

S/2015/426

Annex
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali: military and police strength as at 1 June 2015
Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)
Country

Bangladesh
Benin

1 583
256

Total

Formed police units

Male Female

Male Female

Total

Male Female

Total

Total

Total police

– 1 583

–

–

–

140

–

140

140

–

140

–

27

1

28

140

–

140

167

1

168

256

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

857

14

871

20

2

22

–

–

–

20

2

22

Burundi

–

–

–

15

–

15

–

–

–

15

–

15

Cambodia

304

13

317

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cameroon

3

–

3

17

1

18

–

–

–

17

1

18

Canada

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Chad

1 097

13

1 110

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

China

388

14

402

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

123

–

123

11

1

12

–

–

–

11

1

12

Democratic Republic
of the Congo

–

–

–

5

1

6

–

–

–

5

1

6

Denmark

18

1

19

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

1

–

1

–

–

–

1

–

1

Egypt

63

–

63

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

El Salvador

87

4

91

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

1

1

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

France

18

–

18

5

–

5

–

–

–

5

–

5

Gambia

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Germany

7

1

8

7

–

7

–

–

–

7

–

7

Ghana

214

–

214

1

–

1

–

–

–

1

–

1

Guinea

232

–

232

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Guinea-Bissau

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Indonesia

37

2

39

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Jordan

1

–

1

3

–

3

–

–

–

3

–

3

Kenya

3

1

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Liberia

42

4

46

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Mauritania

6

–

6

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

170

4

174

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

15-09275

Male Female

Individual police officers

19/21

S/2015/426

Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)

Formed police units

Male Female

Male Female

Male Female

Total

Netherlands

452

22

474

18

6

24

–

–

–

18

6

24

Niger

854

5

859

8

1

9

–

–

–

8

1

9

Nigeria

155

25

180

2

–

2

119

20

139

121

20

141

Norway

18

3

21

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

45

4

49

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Republic of Korea

–

–

–

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Romania

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Rwanda

–

–

–

1

–

1

14

–

14

15

–

15

Senegal

662

2

664

11

2

13

273

2

275

284

4

288

3

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

226

17

243

1

2

3

–

–

–

1

2

3

Sweden
Switzerland

Total

Total police

Country

Sierra Leone

Total

Male Female

Total

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Togo

917

18

935

4

–

4

140

–

140

144

–

144

Tunisia

–

–

–

10

–

10

–

–

–

10

–

10

Turkey

–

–

–

1

–

1

–

–

–

1

–

1

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of
America

10

–

10

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Yemen

7

–

7

9

–

9

–

–

–

9

–

9

168 9 043

189

18

207

826

22

Total

20/21

Individual police officers

8 875

848 1 015

40 1 055

15-09275

S/2015/426

15-09275

21/21
