18

General Assembly-Eighth Session

Noting that the General Assembly has not studied
the draft Convention on Freedom of Information at
its sixth, seventh and eighth sessions and that the
Economic and Social Council. at its sixteenth session, did not consider the draft'Convention on Freedom of Information concurrently with the report of
the Rapporteur,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give priority, at its seventeenth session, to discussion
of freedom of information, including the report of the
Rapporteur, and to the formulation, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 631
(VII) of 16 December 1952, of recommendations for
the consideration of the General Assembly at its ninth
session;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
its discussion of freedom of information, to take into
account the views expressed on this subject at the
seventh and eighth sessions of the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to complete the
report on a programme of concrete action for the
development of information facilities in under-developed regions of the world, requested in General Assembly resolution 633 (VII) of 16 December 1952,
in time for consideration at the seventeenth session
of the Economic and Social Council.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

B
The General, Assembly,
Recal,ling its resolution 635 (VII) of 16 December
1952 in which it requested the Secretary-General, if a
representative group of information enterprises and of
national and international professional associations· expressed a desire to do so, to co-operate with it in organizing an international professional conference for
the purpose of preparing the final text of an International Code of Ethics for the use of information
personnel,
Noting that replies have already been received from
a number of the information enterprises and professional "associations consulted by the Secretary-General
in pursuance of the aforementioned resolution,
Considering that to await replies from all the information enterprises and professional associations consulted would unnecessarily delay the conference and
the preparation of the final text of the Code,
1. Invites the Secretary-General to address a further communication to the enterprises and associations
which have not yet replied, requesting them to do so
within a reasonable period, and, provided that a representative group of enterprises and associations expresses a desire to do so, to co-operate with the group
in organizing an international professional conference
for the purpose of preparing the final text of the Code
and measures for its implementation ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To bring the text of the present resolution to
the notice of the information enterprises and national
and international associations to which he communicated the draft Code ;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its ninth
session on any progress achieved.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

737 (VIll). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights and measures of implementation
A
FEDERAL CLAUSE

The General, Assembly,
Reca/,ling its resolution 421 (V), section C, of 4
December 1950,
Having discussed the draft resolutions contained in
documents A/C.3/L.366 and A/C.3/L.374 and the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/L.388,
1. Decides to transmit these draft resolutions and
the amendment to the Commission on Human Rights,
together with the records of the meetings of the Third
Committee relating to the federal clause;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps to ensure that the members of the Commission on Human Rights receive the above-mentioned
documents not less than two weeks before the opening of the tenth session of the Commission.
460th plena.ry meeting,
28 November 1953.

B
RIGHT OF PETITION

The General, Assembly,
Reca/,ling its resolutions 421 (V), section F, of 4
December 1950 and 547 (VI) of 5 February 1952,
Having discussed the draft resolution contained in
document A/C.3/L.372/Rev.l on the right of petition,
Decides to transmit the draft resolution to the Commission on Human Rights, at its tenth session, together
with the records of the discussion thereon in the Third
Committee.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

738 (VIll).

The right of peoples and nations
to self-determination
The General, Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 637 C (VII)
of 16 December 1952 and Economic and Social Council resolution 472 (XV) of 1 April 1953 inviting the
Commission on Human Rights to make recommendations concerning international respect for the right of
peoples and nations to self-determination,
Recal,ling also General Assembly resolution 648
(VII) of 10 December 1952,
Considering that the C9mmission on Human Rights
had been unable due to lack of time to prepare such
recommendations at its ninth session,
Considering the importance of the observance of
and respect for the right of self-determination in the
promotion of world peace and of friendly relations
between peoples and nations,
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
give due priority at its tenth session to the preparation
of such recommendations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Commission on Human Rights the summary records of the debate on this matter.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
