S/PV.7631

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7631st meeting

Wednesday, 24 February 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Suárez Moreno . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Martínez Montes
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/156)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-04909 (E)
*1604909*

S/PV.7631

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/156)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/156, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: Next month we will mark a grim
anniversary. The brutal conflict will have torn Syria
apart for five long years. It has been a relentless period
of violence and destruction. The Syrian people have
seen their country reduced to rubble, loved ones killed
or injured and millions of people displaced either
inside the country or in the region and beyond. They
have suffered far too much and for far too long. The
international community watched as Syria became
one of the largest and most destructive crises of our
times, with the majority of the population — some
13.5 million people — in dire need of protection and
humanitarian assistance.
The announcement by the Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group — the United States
and the Russian Federation — of a nationwide cessation
of hostilities, scheduled to come into effect this
weekend, is a welcome development and a long-awaited
signal of hope to the Syrian people. I echo the call of
2/6

24/02/2016

the Secretary-General for the parties to abide by the
terms of the agreement, to bring about an immediate
reduction in violence as a first step towards a more
durable ceasefire and to create the conditions necessary
for increased delivery of humanitarian aid.
I would like to take this opportunity to update the
Council in detail on the most up-to-date information on
humanitarian access.
As of 17 February, United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent convoys had reached the following
towns as part of the four towns agreement: 62 trucks
to Madaya, reaching 40,000 beneficiaries; 3 trucks to
Zabadani, reaching 1,000 beneficiaries; and 18 trucks
to Fu’ah and Kafraya, reaching 20,000 beneficiaries.
The convoys have preceded without any major security
incident, although there have been delays in delivery
as parties disagree over the terms of the agreement.
The second and last part of the deliveries is tentatively
planned for 28 February. The United Nations has
supplies ready to be loaded and delivered. Facilitation
by all parties, including the relevant letters from the
Government of Syria, must be provided. As part of
the agreements facilitated through discussions in
Munich earlier this month, we have been able to deliver
62 trucks in Madimayet, reaching 40,000 people. There
is another convoy planned through Madimayet, which
must happen this week. Again, it requires facilitation
by all parties, including the relevant letters from
the Government.
Despite those achievements, the process of
delivery has not been straightforward. For example,
the second Madimayet convoy left the warehouse on
Sunday, 21 February at 8 p.m. local time. By Tuesday
at 1 a.m. local time, we still had trucks waiting outside
the checkpoint to enter the town. Brave and dedicated
humanitarian workers slept in trucks in adverse
weather, waiting patiently to get help to the people that
needed it. Eventually supplies were delivered, and the
team worked through the night to unload the supplies.
Their bravery and commitment is humbling, and I
salute them all. I would like to remind the Council that
Madimayet is a mere 15- to 20-minute drive from central
Damascus. There is no reason that the mission should
take over 48 hours to reach the people who need help. It
is a clear violation of the safe, unhindered, unimpeded
access that the Security Council has continually called
for through its resolutions and other statements.
16-04909

24/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, in Kafr Batna, in eastern Ghuta, 15 trucks
delivered assistance to 10,000 people. Again, that was
not without complications. My team received approval
from the Government at 5.30 p.m. on 21 February to
deliver assistance to over 44,0000 people in several
towns in eastern Ghuta. After extensive negotiations,
the United Nations team finally departed in the early
afternoon on 23 February, and was only actually able
to deliver to one town — Kafr Batna. The date of the
next convoy is yet to be approved. Again, I insist on
immediate approval to allow the convoys to deliver. We
need immediate approval for the next round of convoys,
which will deliver to eastern Ghutah, Homs, Aleppo
and southern Syria.
Health supplies for some 30,000 people have been
denied for the convoys by the Ministry of Health. The
Resident Coordinator will submit an official request
to the Government for all medical items that were
removed to be included in future convoys. The Resident
Coordinator is also putting together a proposal to the
Government of Syria to reduce the number of procedures
and the length of time needed for inter-agency convoys
move. Humanitarian operations cannot continue to
be bogged down by unnecessary and unacceptable
restrictions, obstructions and deliberate delays that
are costing people their lives. The number, scope and
complexity of bureaucratic and other obstacles that are
placed in the path of simple aid deliveries are staggering.
To move a single truck, United Nations teams on the
ground need to acquire multiple layers of approvals
from officials at various different levels, necessitating
repeated rounds of negotiations over everything
from the target location, the amount and type of aid
supplies, the date, the time and the route to take. When
approvals are forthcoming, they are often not respected
or adequately implemented. In order for people in
dire need to receive the assistance they so desperately
require, the system must be urgently simplified.
The United Nations has also begun to use airdrops
as a means of humanitarian delivery in Syria. Although
there are a number of operational risks associated with
airdrops, we recognize that there are benefits to that
approach in some areas of Syria as a last resort. Earlier
this morning, a World Food Programme plane dropped
the first cargo of 21 tons of items into Deir ez-Zor. We
have received initial reports from the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent team on the ground that pallets have landed in
the target area as planned.

S/PV.7631

In summary, the United Nations and its partners
have reached 110,000 people in besieged areas. We have
approval to reach a further 230,000 people, including
through the airdrops in Deir ez-Zor. But we are still
waiting for approval for an additional 170,000 people.
We expect those approvals to happen immediately.
And, more broadly, the use of siege and starvation as
a method of war must cease immediately. The main
responsibility for doing so rests with the parties
maintaining the sieges, but it is shared by those who
put civilians in harm’s way by using them as shields for
military activities in besieged areas.
I cannot emphasize enough how high the stakes are
at this moment in the conflict. The Syrian people — who
are rightly sceptical of the international community’s
desire and ability to bring about an end to this hideous
war after years of inaction — need to see an immediate
difference in their daily lives on the ground because, up
until this point, it is they who continue to bear the brunt
of this crisis as violence has become more widespread,
systematic and extreme. Since the start of the year,
thousands of civilians have been killed, injured or
displaced as a result of air strikes, barrel bombs,
shelling, mortars, rockets, car bombs, improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, day after day,
right across the country.
This month alone, it is estimated that several
hundred people have been killed and over 70,000
displaced due to intense aerial bombardment in Aleppo
governorate. Heavy fighting and aerial bombardment
also continued in other parts of the country, including
parts of Idlib, Homs, rural Damascus and Dar’a. All too
often, that included attacks on civilian infrastructure
and basic services — including medical facilities,
schools, bakeries, places of worship and internally
displaced person camps, with a devastating impact on
hundreds of thousands of civilians. On 15 February,
on one single day, seven health-care facilities were
attacked in Idlib, Aleppo and Dar’a, reportedly by
Government and allied forces. Numerous civilians,
including medical staff, were killed or injured, and the
facilities largely destroyed. In Idlib alone it is estimated
that some 40,000 people will be left without access to
medical services as a result.
Groups designated as terrorist have similarly
continued their indiscriminate attacks on civilianpopulated areas. A few days ago, car-bomb attacks for
which responsibility was claimed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant reportedly killed more than 155

16-049093/6

S/PV.7631

The situation in the Middle East

people in Damascus and the city of Homs. In January,
similar attacks in the same locations killed dozens more.
Meanwhile, non-State armed groups have continued
shelling populated areas of Damascus, killing and
injuring many civilians over the past few weeks.
It is hard to believe that this conflict can be resolved
as long as there continues to be a complete absence of
protection for civilians. The agreement on a cessation
of hostilities must finally and unequivocally produce
what the Council’s resolutions and the basic tenets and
obligations that apply under international law have
not been able to achieve so far — an immediate end
to all targeted or indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and improved protection
of civilians. Enough is enough. This brutality must be
brought to an end.
Despite the intensified fighting, the United Nations
and its partners have continued to scale up assistance to
people in need, albeit at great personal risk to their staff.
Last month, the United Nations and its partners reached
millions of people in need with assistance through
all available routes. The World Food Programme, for
example, delivered food for 3.6 million people. UNICEF
provided water, sanitation and hygiene supplies for
more than 2 million people, and the World Health
Organization delivered nearly 660,000 treatments.
This month, significant amounts of supplies were
delivered through cross-border operations authorized
by the Council. During the first three weeks of February,
food assistance reached some 960,000 people, which
represents a 48 per cent increase as compared to the
same period in January. Health supplies were also
delivered for some 300,000 people in February. Large,
multi-truck convoys are crossing the three border
crossings of Bab Al-Salam, Bab Al-Hawa and Ar
Ramtha on a nearly daily basis. We will continue to stay
and deliver, but we remain concerned about the impact
of fighting and insecurity on humanitarian access and
operational space, in particular to the eastern areas of
the city of Aleppo. This fragile access to people in need
must be safeguarded at all costs.
Let me be frank. While the United Nations and its
partners are ready to take advantage of any opportunity
to reach people in need, granting access should never
be dependent upon political negotiations or ad hoc
deals on the ground. The protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance are legal
obligations that are incumbent upon all parties to the
4/6

24/02/2016

conflict at all times and for all types of assistance. That
is a fundamental and irrefutable tenet of international
humanitarian law and it must be respected. In that
regard, I once again call urgently on the Government
of Syria to approve without delay the more than 40
requests outstanding for inter-agency convoys to
deliver assistance to hard-to-reach and besieged areas. I
also call on non-State armed groups and listed terrorist
groups to fulfil their obligations.
There are no winners in the Syrian conflict.
Everyone is losing. But the highest price is being paid by
Syrian men, women and children who are seeing their
country, homes and families torn apart. This war has to
end. As much as we try, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance can address only the symptoms, not the root
causes. The international community and the parties
to the conflict must seize the momentum created
around the nationwide cessation of hostilities to bring
a political solution to the crisis. I cannot stress enough
that we must not let this opportunity pass. We cannot
take away that glimmer of hope from the people who
need it most.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. O’Brien has described a brutal situation
in my country and I am in full agreement with his
description. However, I differ with him in ascribing the
manifestations and reasons for that brutality. Today I
will therefore try to shed some light on the reality of
that brutality, which is shedding my people’s blood,
destroying our infrastructure and bringing all kinds of
terrorists to my country. As a matter of fact, this brutal
situation has been contributed to by some States that sit
on the Security Council.
It is regrettable that, despite the fact that about five
years have passed since the crisis began in Syria, some
Governments still insist on using the humanitarian
situation as a justification in order to achieve their
narrow political ends, as if the suffering of the Syrian
people were a mere commodity to be used for trafficking
and political blackmail by this or that Government. The
extent of the hypocrisy and cheap political exploitation
of human suffering may perhaps be made clear through
the way in which those States treat the humanitarian
16-04909

24/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

situation in Syria by comparison to their treatment of
such situations in other States.
The Security Council has adopted 15 resolutions
on the situation in Syria, four of which relate to the
humanitarian situation in the country. Every year it
has held dozens of formal and informal meetings, now
almost daily. However, in that time we have had no
resolutions dealing with the disastrous humanitarian
situations in Palestine, Libya, Yemen or Somalia,
despite the fact that in one Security Council meeting
Mr. O’Brien indicated that the humanitarian situation
in Yemen was far worse than that in Syria: more than
80 per cent of the Yemeni people are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.
As a Government, we cannot deny that there is a
humanitarian crisis in Syria. Millions of people are
displaced, refugees or disadvantaged. However, we
deplore the mistaken way that the crisis has been dealt
with so far. Looking at the situation from a partial
perspective, in isolation from the external, political,
military and economic interference in Syria, we do not
deny the depth of the humanitarian crisis, as the Council
well knows. However, we reject any suggestion that it
can be dealt with seriously without dealing with the
origins of and reasons for the crisis, which are rooted
in the spread of armed terrorist groups supported from
outside and their proliferation in our villages and cities
while using civilians as human shields.
The Under-Secretary-General called such externally
supported armed terrorist groups “non-State armed
groups”. We have witnessed no humanitarian crisis
anywhere apart from the areas that those terrorist
groups have entered. Adding insult to injury is the
fact that some States have imposed unilateral coercive
measures on the Syrian people, thereby aggravating
our suffering. In that regard, it is incomprehensible
that some insist on denying the role of the Syrian
Government, attempting to portray it as primarily
responsible for the humanitarian crisis, as we heard
just now in Mr. O’Brien’s statement. The height of the
paradoxical nature of this scenario is reached when
some accuse the Syrian Government of besieging some
areas with the aim of starving its own people.
However, they are unable to stop the continued
outflow of armed terrorists and the financial support
provided to them in the regions that they claim are
being besieged by our Government. Those terrorist
groups launch rocket attacks indiscriminately at

S/PV.7631

civilian areas and carry out suicide bombings, as
happened in Homs, Rif Dimashq and Hasakah. Other
areas, such as Kafraya and Fu’ah, and, for the past
three and a half years Dayr ez-Zor and Zahra, are
besieged from the outside by terrorist groups, while
others, such as in Madimayet, Madaya and Duma, are
besieged internally by terrorists. The terrorists prevent
the entry of humanitarian assistance or seize it for their
own use or to resell it to civilians. We have not seen
any images of so-called moderate terrorists starving.
Have representatives ever seen in the media an image
of a hungry terrorist in Syria? No, only the civilians
are hungry. Terrorists are not hungry because they
receive dollars and weapons. They come from all over
the world and do not go hungry. However, civilians
inevitably go hungry.
It has become clear that, in order to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria comprehensively and in
a sustainable manner, the Government must abandon
that misguided and failed approach. How can we put an
end to the humanitarian crisis in Syria while the Erdoğan
regime remains silent about the military attacks against
the Syrian territories, uses Turkish territory, including
the crossings used by the United Nations to provide
humanitarian assistance, as a passageway for the transit
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters, supplies
and weapons, and even uses humanitarian assistance
convoys to hide them? That regime imprisons customs
officers, judges and journalists who expose it. How can
the humanitarian crisis be brought to an end when the
Erdoğan regime brazenly uses the plight of refugees
to blackmail European States to gain political and
financial support?
Regrettably, some States on the Security Council
provide cover for the Erdoğan regime. A few days
ago those States refused a balanced draft resolution
emphasizing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria and rejecting external interference in its affairs
and in the outflow of refugees. Those are all universally
agreed principles that nobody can deny. However,
after the adoption of 15 Security Council resolutions
on Syria, some are trying complicate matters. It is as
if Syria were seeking another five years to prudently
analyse what is happening in its territory.
The Syrian Government is eager to extend all types
of humanitarian assistance to all Syrians affected by
the crisis wherever they are in its territory. That is our
duty and we are committed to it. Therefore, the Syrian
Government is open to coordinating and cooperating

16-049095/6

S/PV.7631

The situation in the Middle East

24/02/2016

with all States, United Nations entities, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and other international organizations working in
Syria to carry out that process, without propaganda
or attempts to demonize the Syrian Government. It is
clear that our Government is doing its best to deliver
assistance to its citizens wherever they are.

so-called Riyadh delegation as the sole negotiator with
the single goal undermining those talks by means of
direct instructions from those actors, in addition to
considerable procedural gaps, in particular when it
came to the representation of all elements of Syrian
society outside and inside Syria. Those factors led to
the failure of the most recent round of Geneva talks.

As a demonstration of this, the Syrian Government
informed the United Nations on 16 February that it had
agreed to allow the entry of humanitarian assistance
convoys to Dayr ez-Zor, Kafraya, Fu’ah, Madaya,
Madimayet, Zabadani and Kafr Batna. Those convoys
are a continuation of other convoys that have already
reached those regions and other areas and illustrate
my Government’s intention to facilitate the delivery of
assistance to all people in need wherever they are in
Syria. That was also emphasized by the Minister for
Foreign affairs to Mr. De Mistura at his latest meeting
with him in Damascus. The delay in providing consent
and the so-called administrative bureaucracy mentioned
by Mr. O’Brien is an indication of our eagerness to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
We care about their safety and security and do not want
any harm to befall them, such as, for example, a suicide
bomber exploding himself in front of a humanitarian
convoy vehicle. Yet, we are now back in the Council
and are hearing a different description about what
is happening.

We are now demonstrating our seriousness and
willingness to curb the bloodshed, restore security
and stability and implement the will of our people to
preserve our territorial integrity. We agreed to the
cessation of hostilities agreement on the basis of the
continuation of political efforts to combat the terrorism
perpetrated by Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations, in accordance with the Russian
and American announcement.

Resolving the Syrian crisis requires two
simultaneous approaches: first, combating terrorism
and, secondly, a political approach. Based on that,
the Syrian Government is committed to combating
terrorism and is pressing ahead with a political approach.
The delegation of Syria participated in the Geneva talks
and demonstrated its seriousness and commitment to
the talks, as witnessed by the Special Envoy himself.
The problem there was that some States imposed the

6/6

We are cooperating with the Russian side to
determine the groups and areas that will be covered by
the cessation of hostilities agreement. In that regard,
we underscore the need to establish control over the
borders, in particular the Syrian/Turkish border, and
to put an end to the support provided by some States
to the terrorist organizations, which enables them to
build their capacities, in order to avoid jeopardizing
that agreement. We emphasize the right of our armed
forces to deter any violation by those groups against
our Syrian citizens or our armed forces.
The ball is in the court of the other parties who still
support terrorism, a military escalation and external
interference and undermine the achievement of a political
solution by imposing unacceptable preconditions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-04909
