S/PV.8989

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8989th meeting

Tuesday, 8 March 2022, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Almheiri/Mr. Abushahab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Zhang Jun/Mrs. Gui Dan
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Verma
Mr. Coveney
Mr. Kiboino
Ms. Delgado Peralta
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Women’s economic inclusion and participation as a key to building peace
Letter dated 1 March 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/175)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28036 (E)
*2228036*

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 9.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Women’s economic inclusion and participation
as a key to building peace
Letter dated 1 March 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/175)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech
Republic, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iraq,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, the Maldives, Malta,
Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima Bahous,
Executive Director, UN-Women; Ms. Kristalina
Georgieva,
Managing
Director,
International
Monetary Fund; and Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly, civil
society briefer.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/175, which contains a letter dated
1 March 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Emirates to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
2/32

08/03/2022

Ms. Bahous: I thank Her Excellency Ms. Mariam
Almheiri, United Arab Emirates Minister of Climate
Change and Environment, and Her Excellency
Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh for their leadership and for
prioritizing a discussion on women, peace and security
on the Council’s agenda on International Women’s Day.
I wish everyone a happy International Women’s Day.
When the pandemic emptied the Chamber almost
two years ago, the Secretary-General called for a
global ceasefire. There was hope that, in the face of a
common enemy, there would be renewed international
cooperation and that, instead of spending money on
weapons, we would invest in science, health and social
protection for all, especially for women and girls.
Instead, we got more military spending, military
coups, seizures of power by force and a multilateral
system against the ropes. This very Council has spent
the past 10 days in multiple emergency meetings on the
situation in Ukraine. As the Secretary-General has said,
people demand peace. We must give peace a chance.
We also lost gains that took us decades to achieve,
especially on gender equality. We have fewer than nine
years to go until 2030, yet we are not on track to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
The coronavirus disease has further set us back
across those Goals, including on gender equality,
poverty and climate. International Women’s Day is a
day for reflection, renewed hope and increased action.
Today, we have an opportunity to do things differently.
It is clear to me, now more than ever before, that we
need another model of leadership on this issue.
One of the least discussed elements of our agenda is
women’s inclusion in economic recovery as an essential
element in our pursuit of peace. Study after study shows
that investing in women’s economic empowerment
yields enormous dividends for both peace and prosperity,
and that countries in which women are economically
marginalized and shut out of the workforce are much
more likely to go to war. We know that women are more
likely to spend their income on family needs and make
a larger contribution to recovery, and yet, large-scale
reconstruction and investments after conflict are
dominated by men and overwhelmingly benefit men,
while exclusion, discrimination and antiquated gender
norms keep women away from employment, land,
property, inheritance, credit and technology. That
script plays out across all conflict zones and situations
on the agenda of the Security Council.
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

In Afghanistan, we are rightly concerned
about humanitarian aid and frozen assets, but the
consequences of a new gender apartheid include
women’s employment plummeting sharply since the
Taliban takeover. In Yemen, enduring the world’s
largest humanitarian emergency, closing gender gaps
in women’s participation in the workforce would have
increased Yemen’s gross domestic product by 27 per
cent. More than half of the World Bank’s fragile and
conflict-affected countries are in sub-Saharan Africa,
where economic losses due to gender inequality stand
at $2.5 trillion. Not many conflict-affected countries
have data on women’s land ownership, but those with
that data show that it remains very low. In Mali, it is
just 3 per cent.
In Haiti, where more than 45 per cent of households
are headed by women, the pandemic led to a 24 per cent
decrease in women’s employment. Yet, as in many other
countries, the strategies to address the economic fallout
of the crisis remain largely gender-blind. In Ukraine,
humanitarian needs are multiplying and spreading by
the hour. Among the nearly 1.5 million people who have
fled, the majority are women and children. Here, too,
we risk the backsliding of women´s rights and women´s
access to employment and livelihoods.
Many of the women activists who have been invited
to speak before the Security Council have told us that the
private sector and private actors, including multinational
corporations, are often part of the problem when they
could be part of the solution. That is the case not just
in extractive industries and large agribusinesses, but
increasingly on telecommunications platforms. They
have a major role to play in facilitating inclusion and
preventing hate speech and targeted reprisals.
The solution, therefore, is clear. We need more
engagement, greater accountability and shared
responsibility. The Security Council can say much
more about women’s economic inclusion. Some of the
resolutions that cover women and peace and security
most comprehensively, such as resolutions on the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, have several paragraphs on economic
security, development issues and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources that tend to be gender-blind. The
Security Council could use such resolutions to call
for women’s meaningful engagement and inclusion
not only in peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
recovery, but also in decision-making, as well as in
in the prioritization of women-led businesses, women

S/PV. 8989

in front-line service delivery and support for the care
economy in all reconstruction and recovery initiatives.
I welcome today’s focus on the role of the
private sector and private-public partnerships as an
underexplored area for innovation. I would like to
share two examples of global initiatives in the area
of women and peace and security, where we invite
the private sector to play a larger role in women’s
peacebuilding work.
One example is the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, which has funded more than 500
women’s organizations in more than 26 countries since
2016. I am pleased that we have Ms. Coulibaly joining
us today from Mali to share her invaluable perspective
as a partner of the Fund. We put considerable effort into
bringing the private sector along, both as donors and
as pro-bono partners, but there is much more that can
be done to multiply fivefold the financing for women’s
organizations in crisis settings by 2030, as requested by
the Secretary-General.
Secondly, as part of Generation Equality Forum,
we now have a Compact on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, a multi-stakeholder
initiative that aims to move the needle on the issue
over the next five years. That includes strengthening
social protection mechanisms, promoting womenowned social enterprises and businesses, addressing
discriminatory legislation and practices that hinder
women’s economic empowerment and ensuring that
gender equality is a priority in national, regional and
global peace and development strategies. The Compact
has 158 signatories thus far, including several members
of the Council. However, we need to do more to
reach out to multilateral development banks and the
private sector.
There are many other ways in which private
sector actors can be champions of change. If engaged
meaningfully, they can play a positive role in creating
sustainable peace in support of the women and peace
and security agenda.
We have the blueprint and the business case to
support women’s economic inclusion. What we need
now is the political will to pursue it. I look forward to
working with the Council on the issue and to deepening
our investments in women and peace and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Georgieva.

22-280363/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

Ms. Georgieva: I convey my apologies for not
being physically present with Council members, but I
am so thrilled that, on International Women’s Day, the
Security Council has decided to concentrate on the role
of women in peace and security.
I would like to explicitly recognize Her Excellency
Ms. Mariam Almheiri for presiding over today’s
meeting. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Sima Bahous for her leadership of UN-Women, her
excellent remarks and our growing collaboration.
What we do today matters to the hundreds of
millions of women living in conflict and fragility. It is
an opportune time to reflect on the strength and power
of women in the face of war and destruction. Tragically,
in far too many places, that strength is being relentlessly
tested. My heart goes out to all women bracing against
the horrors of war, protecting their children, caring
for the wounded and sacrificing for their countries,
communities and families. Today, that is the fate of our
sisters in Ukraine. We admire their courage. We share
their pain. We stand with them. We support them.
We know that women bear disproportionately the
devastation of wars, and yet we also know that women
are the best hope for peace. In the words of Zainab
Salbi, like life, peace begins with women. We are the
first to forge lines of alliance and collaboration as
conflict divides.
Today I would like to make three points.
First, crises, be they conflicts, pandemics or more
traditional economic and financial crises, threaten to
set back years of progress in gender equality, therefore
slowing down progress in development. During the
pandemic, globally twice as many women as men lost
their jobs, owing to the kind of employment they hold,
lost social protections and often the burden of childcare,
care for family members — unpaid work.
Let us recall that women have a 20 per cent lower
labour-market participation than men to begin with. We
also have seen tremendous learning losses. We calculate
that over the lifetime of the generations affected by the
pandemic, $17 trillion will be lost because of that lack
of educational attainment. More dramatic is the fate
of girls. We know that 20 million girls in developing
countries may never return to school, and that means
that they are excluded from life’s opportunities
forever — for the duration of their lives.
4/32

08/03/2022

We also have seen during the pandemic genderbased violence rear its ugly head again. And, of course,
we know that this leads to serious socioeconomic
consequences; we have calculated those consequences.
But I also want to talk about the positive side. As
dramatic as those effects are, we need to remember that
overcoming them can be a massive injection of prosperity
for countries. Empowering women and reducing gender
inequality in fragile or conflict situations in particular
can have powerful economic benefits. If sub-Saharan
African countries reduced their level of gender-based
violence to closer to the world average, they could
see long-term gross domestic product gains of around
30 per cent — well-being for everyone.
That brings me to my second point. Gender equality
is critical for growth, resilience and socioeconomic
stability. It matters tremendously when women and
girls can reach their full potential. They do better, their
families do better, their countries do better, for the
benefit of everyone. Our analysis shows that improving
gender equality can increase economic growth quite
significantly, strengthen the resilience of families,
communities and countries, enhance financial stability
and reduce income inequality. We know that societies
with more gender equality tend to be more resistant to
violence and conflict.
The equal participation of women in socioeconomic
life is essential to preventing conflict and helping to
transition out of fragility. When women participate in
peace negotiations and in State-building processes, the
prospects for building resilience and enduring peace
and for inclusive and prosperous societies significantly
improves. The Security Council has such an important
role in promoting women’s inclusion in peacebuilding.
Yet too often women remain underrepresented and
excluded from decision-making processes. To change
that, we need all hands on deck. We need international
organizations, we need Governments, we need the
private sector, as we heard, so that we can have a chance
to reduce fragility by closing gender gaps to improve
prospects for development.
That takes me to my third point: we all have
responsibility to bear, and that applies to my institution,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF). I want to report
to the Council that we are relentlessly focusing on
helping our members design and implement economic
and financial policies to ensure greater resilience and
growth. We are zeroing in on social spending, which
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

is an efficient and effective way to allow for better
education for boys and girls, better health care, better
social protections and, as a result, stronger societies.
We believe that a country-tailored approach is vital,
so in our new strategy on gender that we will bring to
our Board this spring, as well as in our fragile and
conflict-affected States strategy, which we will present
to the IMF Board tomorrow, we explicitly emphasize
the role of gender equality. We see country engagement
strategies based on contributions from society where
the voices of women are heard, which is a major factor
for us in helping our members deal with drivers of
fragility such as gender equality, climate change, forced
displacement and food insecurity.
We are very keen to work with our
partners — humanitarian, development, peace and
security actors; 25 per cent of our members are
conflict- or fragility-affected States. We need to work
with the Council and with everyone to be successful in
those countries.
Let me conclude with this thought. Women and girls
are themselves powerful agents of change. They help
society transition from fragility to stability. They are
the foundation for a better future for all; we saw that in
peace processes from Northern Ireland to Colombia and
in places such as Liberia, where a women’s movement
helped bring an end to the civil war.
I would say, therefore, to all women and girls
to believe in themselves, to dare to reach their full
potential. They have the power to forge a brighter future
for our societies, for our economies, for our world. All
the power in the hands of women means a prosperous
world for all.
The President: I thank Ms. Georgieva for her briefing.
I give the floor to Ms. Coulibaly.
Ms. Coulibaly (spoke in French): I would like to
at the outset to thank you, Madam President, for giving
me this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the importance of women’s empowerment for peace and
security and the role that the private sector can play to
support women in the building of peace and stability.
My name is Sidibé Moussokoro Coulibaly. I am
the President of the Network of Women Economic
Agents in the Ségou region of Mali. The network’s goal
is to promote women’s and girls’ rights and to support
them in achieving economic recovery and in investing

S/PV. 8989

in efforts towards peace and social cohesion in Mali.
We have 7,847 women members, and we work with
120 women’s organizations locally as well as various
women’s groups.
As all present are certainly aware, Mali has since
2012 been facing a security, institutional and economic
conflict aggravated by the consequences of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. As in the vast majority
of conflicts, the complex crisis in Mali, which has lasted
for so many years, has had disastrous consequences on
the living conditions of the people, their communities
and their families.
We know that without economic development, there
can be no lasting peace. We also know that investing
in women’s economic empowerment generates
short- and long-term social dividends and increases
women’s participation in decision-making and conflict
resolution. During and after conflict, there is a sharp
increase in the number of households managed by
women. It is through their efforts that our communities
and families have remained resilient and supportive
despite the extremely difficult situation.
And yet women are still being left out. Like most
of our sisters and daughters living in conflict-affected
areas, we live in a context where socioeconomic
constraints are still significant. Social and cultural
norms are unfortunately used to justify harmful
practices against women’s rights.
The activities and income of women economic
operators have decreased and are unstable, and many
of us have lost our capital and investments. We have
difficulties in gaining access to factors of production,
financing and stable employment. These difficulties
are accentuated by the lack of financial resources
adapted to the types of activities women economic
operators engage in and to their specific needs as
women economic operators, especially in the context
of conflict. All these factors hinder our participation
in public decision-making, including in decisions that
affect us.
These challenges do not scare us. We are the pillars
of our families and our communities. We play a role
in building peace. Wherever we are active, we have
invested in social cohesion within our communities,
in local conflict-resolution initiatives, in receiving
internally displaced persons and survivors of genderbased violence, in educating children and in raising
awareness about non-violence and peace.

22-280365/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

Our network works to facilitate connections with
financial partners, including banks and microfinance
institutions, and to ensure a dialogue between them
and women so that their services are better adapted to
our needs. A tangible example of this is the women’s
financing project, which has organized round tables
with financial institutions in the Ségou region.
From 2012 to 2019, dialogues between banks and
microfinance institutions facilitated the granting of
credit to 200 women to realize their business plans
in seven localities of the Segou region, in the areas
of agro-food processing, agriculture, marketing and
crafts. This has enabled many beneficiaries to leave the
informal sector to formalize their activities and become
integrated under private sector umbrella organizations.
Thanks to their self-confidence and their
contribution to their families and the local economy,
they have gained recognition from their communities.
Many of them are now members of local development
and conflict-resolution committees, local gender
committees, and some have been elected as commune
councillors in their localities. This shows that by giving
women a voice, by trusting them and by facilitating
dialogue with financial partners — by mobilizing
locally available resources — we can achieve
remarkable results.
We recognize the contribution of the United
Nations to the rights and empowerment of women in
conflict-affected countries like mine. In particular, we
salute the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and
UN-Women, as well as all the donors who assist us.
The efforts remain insufficient, but we must recognize
the importance of women’s economic empowerment
for peacebuilding and for protecting their rights
and dignity.
We must also mobilize national and international
private sector actors to encourage women’s effective
participation in economic development for a more
inclusive and sustainable peace. Without economic
empowerment, there will be less participation
and leadership of women in decision-making and
greater violence.
It is imperative that women’s economic
empowerment be integrated into resolutions, peace
treaties and programmes for sustainable peace. It is
therefore recommended that the United Nations, the
international community and private sector actors
do the following: facilitate women’s and women’s
6/32

08/03/2022

organizations’ access to sustainable and flexible
financing that takes into account crisis contexts as
well as access to equipment in the economic sectors
where women are most active, keeping in mind that
access to financing is central to us and can also be
facilitated by setting up funds adapted to provide
guarantees; assist Governments in the development
and implementation of policies and programmes
that promote women’s economic empowerment by
developing women-owned businesses and providing
tax and procurement facilities, including periodic
consultations between United Nations representatives,
local women’s organizations, women leaders and
marginalized women’s groups on the development of
social and economic plans at the international, national
and local levels; support dialogue between the private
sector and women’s organizations to better understand
the structural challenges facing women in financing the
building of multifunctional women’s centres to serve as
sites of production, training, digitalization and which
counter obstacles to women’s participation by offering
such social services as schools and day-care centres
for children and reproductive-health services; and
finance advocacy activities by women’s organizations
to strengthen women’s movements and their leadership
and influence.
I am transmitting this message to the Council with
all my heart. If members wish to support my country
and build peace and stability in the world, they should
help women participate in economic recovery for a more
inclusive and sustainable peace. If women have income
and create jobs, they will contribute to caring for their
families, prevent conflicts, ease tensions, participate in
young people’s futures and create conditions for united,
sustainable and inclusive peace and development. The
Council should support us in having our voice heard
where decisions are made because that is how we will
build and affirm our transformative leadership in
favour of peace. In Ségou, we say that someone’s head
cannot be shaved in their absence.
The President: I thank Ms. Coulibaly for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates.
I am greatly honoured to preside over this
open date today, in particular on the occasion of
International Women’s Day. I thank Ms. Sima
Bahous for her insightful briefing and the work of
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

UN-Women. I also thank Ms. Kristalina Georgieva and
Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly for their briefings and for
sharing their experiences, commitment and concrete
recommendations on how the international community
can strengthen women’s economic inclusion in fragile
settings. I offer special thanks to the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund for its dedication in supporting
Ms. Coulibaly’s participation today. I also welcome my
fellow Ministers and thank them for joining us today.
As we have heard today, despite significant progress,
persistent gaps and challenges in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda still hinder
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation.
Women are critical to recovery and relief efforts, yet
their inclusion remains undervalued and their access
to opportunities, resources and markets remains
limited. The McKinsey Global Institute estimated
that global gross domestic product could increase by
$28 trillion — or 26 per cent — by 2025 by reducing
gender gaps in the workforce and increasing presence
in leadership positions, yet women are still excluded
despite that vital potential for growth. Women must
not only benefit from sustainable post-conflict
recovery; they must be in the driver’s seat as planners,
decision-makers and implementers in all sectors of
society to ensure sustainable peacebuilding.
Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), the private sector’s role in advancing
collective public goods has increased exponentially.
From combating climate change to responding to
humanitarian crises and addressing pandemics and
health emergencies, the private sector is a key partner.
It would be self-defeating to minimize or neglect the
private sector’s role in realizing the transformative
goals of the women and peace and security agenda.
Public-private partnerships can leverage their unique
and multidimensional roles in communities, not only
to improve women’s individual livelihoods, autonomy
and self-sufficiency in fragile settings, but also to
strengthen women’s opportunities to engage fully,
equally and meaningfully in their communities and to
rebuild their nations.

S/PV. 8989

the centre of post-conflict economic reform efforts.
That calls for greater inclusion of women and women’s
organizations in designing economic recovery plans,
adopting enabling legal and regulatory frameworks
and setting benchmarks to incentivize the allocation
of resources towards women’s economic inclusion.
As a founding member of the Women Entrepreneurs
Financing Initiative — a multi-donor trust fund — the
United Arab Emirates has contributed $50 million
in support of around 300,000 women entrepreneurs
gaining access to finance, market and networks in
countries such as Iraq, Yemen and Ethiopia.
Secondly, all relevant stakeholders need to better
understand and leverage the interplay with one another.
For example, Member States, the United Nations and
local women’s organizations can play a critical role in
connecting the private sector to local women in conflictaffected communities. They can ensure that trade
delegations, business round tables and conventions
include private sector representatives with aspiring
women entrepreneurs from crisis-affected areas.
Multi-stakeholder platforms, such as the Generation
Equality Forum’s Compact on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, could support such
links at the regional and local levels.
Thirdly, as the private sector benefits from stable
and peaceful societies, so too must it contribute to the
emergence of those societies. The private sector can
effectively be part of that by integrating opportunities
for social entrepreneurship, which would ensure that
their operations benefit the communities’ interests.
That must include women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation, as that is a key pillar in ensuring
sustainable peaceful societies.

The United Arab Emirates would like to propose
four recommendations for Member States, the United
Nations and the private sector to better empower and
support women in conflict-affected settings.

Finally, we must ensure that women have equal
access to all services that enable them to participate
in the economy. Together, the public and private
sectors offer a wide array of resources that support
women’s economic inclusion, such as access to digital
technologies, capacity-building in financial literacy and
vocational education. Throughout the past two years of
the pandemic, we have seen once again that technology
is a gateway to public spaces and markets. The digital
divide risks undermining those opportunities. We must
ensure that women enjoy access to that crucial tool in
securing their livelihoods.

First, in order to rebuild sustainable, inclusive
and equitable societies, women and girls must be at

In conclusion, peacebuilding is a unique opportunity
to re-evaluate priorities, redesign the social contracts

22-280367/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

of communities ravaged by conflict and promote
initiatives that bring about social change. That is not an
issue that can be addressed solely by Governments or
multilateral institutions or companies alone. It must be
a collective effort, pursued in a consistent manner. The
United Arab Emirates looks forward to continuing this
discussion with our briefers, fellow Member States, the
private sector and all relevant stakeholders.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Minister for Defence of Ireland.
Mr. Coveney (Ireland): I am pleased to join you
here today, Madam, under the Emirati presidency, on
International Women’s Day. We commend the United
Arab Emirates, along with the Niger, Albania and
Norway, for continuing the women and peace and
security presidency initiative that Ireland formed
with Kenya and Mexico last year. The continued
focus on the women and peace and security agenda
by members of the Council reaffirms its centrality to
international peace and security. Cooperation among
members is crucial if we are to protect and advance that
agenda further.
My thanks also to the briefers: Ms. Coulibaly,
whose perspective from her work on the ground was
illuminating, Executive Director Bahous and Managing
Director Georgieva.
The eyes of the world are currently on Ukraine and
our thoughts are with its people, including vulnerable
women and girls, who are facing trauma and hardship,
huddled together in makeshift bomb shelters, trapped in
cities brutalized by war or as refugees fleeing conflict
and violence within Ukraine or crossing borders in
their hundreds of thousands. The Russian Federation,
through its decision to launch an unjustified and illegal
attack, violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, has created a humanitarian catastrophe in
Europe, the likes of which we have not seen for many,
many decades. Ireland strongly condemns the Russian
Federation’s further invasion of Ukraine and its flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
core principles of international law.
We stand firmly with the people of Ukraine. Today,
on International Women’s Day, we want the women and
girls of Ukraine to know that we salute their resilience
and courage. The conflict is having a severe and
8/32

08/03/2022

disproportionate impact on them. We stand with them
now and into the future.
The international community and the Council in
particular have a responsibility to act to uphold the
rights of all women at risk due to conflict, wherever
that conflict may be taking place. We must never forget
or downplay that duty.
The topic of today’s debate is an important one, and
I would like to focus my intervention on three points:
first, delivering on our commitments to the women and
peace and security agenda; secondly, working together
to realize those aims; and thirdly, strengthening the
agenda’s relief and recovery pillar.
First, to fulfil the promise of resolution 1325 (2000),
we must protect and fortify the women and peace and
security agenda. Let us be clear — women’s rights
are human rights. They are universal, interdependent
and indivisible. Today’s debate reminds us of the gaps
that remain between the aims of the agenda and the
reality that we see on the ground. Those gaps widened
further during the coronavirus disease pandemic and
afterwards. Women have been carrying disproportionate
burdens across the board, as has just been pointed out to
us by our briefers, and we know that women’s economic
empowerment is truly achievable only alongside their
political and social empowerment as well.
We must acknowledge that advancing women’s
economic participation is not a panacea in itself.
Twenty-one years on, the core of the women and peace
and security agenda is seriously challenged, even at
this Council table.
We gather here on International Women’s Day.
On this day last year, Mexico and Ireland co-hosted
an Arria formula meeting on ensuring the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in United
Nations-led peace processes. That meeting conveyed
the clear message that women need to be directly and
substantively involved in United Nations-led peace and
political processes.
The past year has made clear that we have yet to
achieve that objective. Regrettably, equality advocates
still find themselves fighting to break down the societal
and structural barriers that prevent women from
assuming their rightful place at the negotiating and
decision-making tables.
Shockingly, conflict-related sexual violence
remains a weapon of war that is deliberately used.
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

Survivors still struggle for justice and for their rights
to be supported in post-traumatic situations. We know
how quickly gains, including economic gains, can be
eroded when the political tide turns.

financial institutions on peacebuilding activities.
The International Monetary Fund’s new Fragile and
Conflict-Affected States Strategy will be an important
part of those efforts.

Today, we need only to look at the continuing
erosion of women’s rights in Afghanistan by the
Taliban. Once more, women are being forced to argue
for their basic human rights: their right to work, to
education, to participate in civil and public life and to
even move freely around their own country, all in the
face of continued violence and intimidation.

Thirdly, relief and recovery in the wake of conflict
is essential in building sustainable peace. Ireland
knows from its own lived experience that recovery in
the wake of conflict requires firm and concrete actions.
The trauma and impact of violence are not simply
forgotten with the onset of a ceasefire or the signing of
a peace agreement.

In truth, the Taliban have broken their promise
to protect women’s rights and have disrespected the
international community’s calls to respect those rights.
Despite that, local women peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and other Afghan women continue to
fight for their right to be heard and to participate, at
times exposing themselves to grave peril in asserting
those rights.
Ireland will continue to use every opportunity to
amplify the voices of Afghan women. We must heed
their words, including during the current negotiations
on a future mandate for the United Nations in
Afghanistan, and we will play our part in ensuring that.
This debate is the third on women and peace
and security since October. Together with the
presidency initiatives, it shows real promise that,
together, we can reinforce this agenda. That is key
to realizing the transformative change promised by
resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, real progress does not occur in a vacuum
either. It must bring all stakeholders along. The Compact
on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, of which Ireland and the United Arab Emirates
are Board members, speaks to that imperative.
Ireland supports closer cooperation among the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action and all other initiatives and
bodies dedicated to advancing gender equality and
women’s rights. We fully support the work of the
Peacebuilding Fund. It is a highly effective, if all too
modest, instrument. We recommend the increased
percentage of the Peacebuilding Fund’s investment in
gender-responsive initiatives.
We also welcome increasing collaboration
between United Nations agencies and international

We must support women to process and recover
from the pain and wounds of conflict. The provision of
financial supports and pathways to justice and health
services is crucial to empowering women to respond
to their trauma. That includes access to comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services and rights.
Groups such as the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund are already doing critical work in that area.
We have also seen that public-private partnerships
can make a difference towards relief and recovery,
as, I think, you, Madam President, just mentioned.
We should work more to integrate them into our
own responses. We also need to see funding to fuel
women’s economic empowerment. Financing womenowned microbusinesses and providing educational
scholarships can be transformative.
Local women’s organizations and grass-roots
women peacebuilders also play an essential role. We,
the international community, must stand with them and
support them. Doing so helps women to secure their
rightful and active role in political, social and economic
life. But we must ensure that such support comes from
all of society, including national Governments.
As Europe has been plunged into war, we are hearing
a chorus call for peace. We know that sustainable peace
is not possible without women. The question today
is not whether, but how — how we in the Security
Council can work to ensure that women play their full,
equal and meaningful role in international peace and
security. The tide can turn towards a more equal world
if the political will is there. I believe that it is. We at this
table have a responsibility to ensure that the progress of
recent decades is not allowed to slide backwards. The
promises of the agenda must be made a reality.

22-280369/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I welcome you, Madam President, and thank
you for convening us here today to discuss this critical
issue. I would like to welcome all the ministers and
other guests who have joined us here today, and it is
also great to see so many women around the table at this
event. I thank our briefers for their powerful, insightful
and enlightening remarks.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to talk about the
women and peace and security agenda today without, as
was noted by the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, Ms. Georgieva, and Foreign Minister
Coveney, without acknowledging the horrific
consequences for women of Russia’s unprovoked,
unjustifiable war of choice against the people of
Ukraine. As in other conflicts, women are being forced
to make unimaginable choices — being forced to flee
their homes due to threats of imminent violence while
they continue to support their communities, families
and loved ones.
In particular, we must attest to the extraordinary
pain of mothers during this terrible time — mothers
who have been forced to give birth in bomb shelters;
mothers who have been forced to pass their children,
alone and terrified, onto crowded trains leaving the
country; and the mother chasing after the blue bloodstained blanket that held her 18-month-old, now dead
from Russian shelling. All those present have seen the
images of their pain.
Of course, many women are bravely coming
together to defend their homes, their communities and
their country, and we stand with them today, as every
day. Women are leading Ukraine’s efforts through
the new humanitarian catastrophe that Russia has
unleashed, just as they have been critical to building a
burgeoning democratic society over the past eight years
in Ukraine.
If Russia ever chooses to return to dialogue
and diplomacy, women must be meaningfully and
consistently involved. After all, we know that woman’s
full, equal and meaningful participation is not just a
moral imperative; it also increases the likelihood of
securing a long-term and sustainable peace.
10/32

08/03/2022

Women’s participation is essential for growing
economies. Our approach to women’s economic
empowerment must take into account the evolving
context for work, and we must collaborate with the
private sector, along with other partners, to ensure
full and meaningful access for women today, as in
the future.
One simply cannot expect to compete with the
world without half one’s workforce, and yet women are
still forcibly kept out of the workplace. That attitude
should be a relic of the past — one that I remember
seeing first-hand.
When I joined I joined the United States Foreign
Service in 1982, it was at a moment when the State
Department was facing two lawsuits that directly
applied to me: one for excluding black people and the
other for excluding women. Nearly 40 years later, the
State Department actively recruits and encourages
black and female applicants. The results are remarkable,
and we are so much stronger for it.
Despite this obvious truth, today women around
the world still face economic exclusion. Such exclusion
is particularly severe in fragile and conflict-affected
countries — precisely the nations and economies that
most need the full, equal and meaningful participation
of their entire workforce. Research has shown that about
30 million fewer women than men of working age are in
paid employment globally. Women who are in paid work
are often engaged in low-paid and low-return activities,
and very few women have the access and opportunities
to become entrepreneurs and business owners.
Not only are women critically underrepresented
and excluded from economic opportunities in fragile
and conflict-affected countries, but their access to
financial institutions also remains extremely limited.
That has become more apparent with the impact
of the coronavirus disease over the past two years.
Such practices block women’s access to capital. They
often make women dependent on others for access to
funds — even funds that they themselves generated.
Those discriminatory practices against women’s
economic inclusion not only deny women their basic
rights; they also fundamentally undermine efforts to
create strong, safe and prosperous societies.
When you give women access to capital, financial
services and job opportunities, it is not only the right
thing to do; it creates a societal wealth and resilience,
and that, in turn, generates long-term peace and
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

security. For example, in Senegal we have promoted
economic resilience and resistance to radicalization by
economically empowering 5,000 rural smallholders,
60 per cent of whom were women. They were women
who were exposed to violent extremism, but were better
able to resist it because they saw a better path forward.
That is the kind of approach we need to take on a
larger scale, and we should pair such programmes with
clear-eyed plans to address gender-based violence and
enhance safety and equal access to relief and recovery
assistance and opportunities for women and girls. That
is all the more pressing, given the conflict into which so
many women have been plunged in Ukraine. And, even
while we focus on Ukraine, we cannot take our eyes off
the challenges that women are facing elsewhere, such
as in Afghanistan and Ethiopia.
Since the Taliban’s takeover, Afghan women have
seen decades of hard-fought progress rolled back
almost overnight. We know that they are subjected
to increased threats of violence, that their ability to
engage in work and education has largely been stamped
out and that shelters, protection services and survivorsupport services are being shut down.
In Ethiopia and elsewhere, women have become
the explicit targets, with rape even being used as a
weapon of war against them. We cannot ignore that
horrific tactic. The United States therefore remains
fully committed to advancing resolution 1325 (2000) as
a matter of international peace and security. Economic,
social or political exclusion is antithetical to peace.
We must continue to press the women and peace and
security agenda forward because it is the right thing to
do and because it is core to our charge of maintaining
international peace and security for all.
The President: I now call on the Vice-Minister for
Multilateral Affairs and Human Rights of Mexico.
Ms. Delgado Peralta (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I warmly welcome Ms. Mariam Almheiri, Minister for
Climate Change and Environment of the United Arab
Emirates, and we thank her delegation for convening
this debate, which coincides with the commemoration
of International Women’s Day. We are also grateful for
the briefings by Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund; and civil
society representative Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly.

S/PV. 8989

At the outset, Mexico expresses its solidarity
with all the women and girls in Ukraine, whose lives
have been drastically impacted in recent weeks by the
invasion by Russia. We are aware of the vulnerable
situation of those who have been displaced from
their homes and have been forced to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries, and we are concerned about
the risks they run of becoming victims of sexual and
gender-based violence.
We urge that all political dialogue ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of Ukrainian
women in decision-making. I also reiterate the priority
that my country accords to addressing the women
and peace and security agenda with a comprehensive
approach, underlining its foundation in the indivisibility
and universality of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of women and girls in all their diversity, in
line with resolution 1325 (2000) and our obligations
enshrined in the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and other
international instruments.
Conflict-prevention, peacebuilding and reconstruction
efforts to achieve sustainable development everywhere
require ensuring the economic empowerment of all
women and girls, as they are key agents of change
in achieving economic growth, rebuilding the social
fabric and contributing to the stability of societies.
One of the structural barriers to gender equality
at the global level are socioeconomic inequalities,
entrenched poverty and the many intersectional forms
of discrimination and violence, which limit women’s
access to financial resources, land use and holding
and other productive assets. Those gaps, which are a
profound reflection of patriarchal systems, misogyny
and the unequal distribution of power in the world, also
contribute to conflict and are more acute in contexts
of fragility.
In particular, the coronavirus disease has
disproportionately affected women as a result of the
loss of jobs and, consequently, of income, in addition
to an overwhelming level of unpaid care work that
is historically and traditionally relegated to women
and girls.
Accordingly, all conflict-prevention, peacebuilding
and reconstruction efforts in the global context of
recovery from the pandemic must ensure a gender
focus in order to guarantee economic inclusion, reduce
the gap and segregation in the labour market, and

22-2803611/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

create decent jobs with access to comprehensive social
protection systems, including sexual and reproductive
health services, which are imperative for building
sustainable peace.
In that regard, we must listen to the voices of women
in all their diversity, especially women belonging to
traditionally excluded and marginalized groups. They
must be included, without discrimination of any kind, in
peace and decision-making processes. It is worrisome
to see the growing backlash in various parts of the world
against women’s human rights and such fundamental
freedoms as their physical and bodily autonomy.
The case of Afghanistan is one example. In the
Afghanistan crisis, Mexico played an active role in its
response to the refugee situation within the framework
of its long-standing tradition of solidarity and support
for people in need of humanitarian assistance,
including women and girls, who were given priority.
In particular, Mexico welcomed a group of five young
Afghan women, who were part of the Afghan Dreamers
team, and several members of their families. This
group is known internationally for creating ventilators
from used car parts for patients with coronavirus
disease. They now have scholarships to pursue their
studies. We have also welcomed journalists, activists,
environmental activists, the President of the Afghan
Access to Information Institute and other illustrious
women from Afghan civil society.
With regard to public-private partnerships for the
creation of conditions that enable sustainable peace
and security, we must first and foremost stress the
importance of private-sector actions focused on gender,
intersectionality and human rights. Some actions that
we propose include the following. First, investments
could be made in existing financial mechanisms to
support women’s organizations and human rights
defenders, who contribute to the climate of stability in
their communities. Secondly, there could be support
for women peacebuilders from the most disadvantaged
groups, such as women with disabilities, women
refugees, young women, female heads of households
and women members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community. Thirdly, access
to digital technologies of local women’s organizations
could be facilitated, as such technologies today can
also contribute to the prevention of violence and the
operation of early warning systems. Fourthly, women’s
community cooperatives or women-led businesses
12/32

08/03/2022

in debates on economic recovery and post-conflict
reconstruction could be promoted.
In 2021, the Generation Equality Forum, launched
the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action, of which Mexico was a
driving force. In addition to Member States, United
Nations bodies, regional organizations, civil society
organizations and private organizations participate
in the Compact. The Compact seeks to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
and humanitarian agenda by developing actions in five
thematic areas, including women’s economic security
and their access to resources and other essential services.
Mexico also recognizes the post-conflict recovery
initiatives and programmes supported by the United
Nations to promote women’s economic empowerment
and their participation in post-conflict economic
recovery. As concrete examples, I would cite the
commitment of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
Great Lakes region, which has strengthened the role
of women in peacebuilding efforts in the region, and
the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, which has taken specific action to promote
the economic empowerment of women ex-combatants.
Finally, support from peace missions should ensure
that post-conflict peacebuilding processes include
local women in all their diversity in relief and recovery
processes. Women must be part of the solutions in
their societies and contribute to public life, politics and
decision-making at all levels. That is why dismantling
barriers that also impede women’s enjoyment of their
economic rights and hinder their access to resources is
more urgent than ever.
Mr. Verma (India): We thank the United Arab
Emirates for convening today’s open debate on this allimportant issue. I would like to express my gratitude
to Her Excellency Ms. Mariam Almheiri, United Arab
Emirates Minister of Climate Change and Environment,
for presiding over this meeting. We appreciate the
insights provided by the Executive Director of UNWomen, Ms. Sima Bahous; the Managing Director
of the International Monetary Fund, Ms. Kristalina
Georgieva; and Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly, civil
society briefer, on this issue.
As we celebrate International Women’s Day today,
let me commence by recalling an exemplary contribution
made by an Indian representative, Dr. Hansa Mehta, to
the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

Rights. Way back in 1948, she insisted on rephrasing
the line “All men are born free and equal” to “All
human beings are born free and equal”. Visionaries like
her have brought us where we are today, congregated in
the Security Council and deliberating on an extremely
important theme: “Economic inclusion through
partnerships”. This becomes more pertinent as the
world order continues to grapple with a fragile postpandemic recovery.
We must therefore strengthen our resolve to harness
the transformative potential of resolution 1325 (2001),
which for the first time linked gender equality and
the maintenance of international peace and security
and recognized women’s participation as being key to
resolving conflicts and securing peace.
India’s development narrative has witnessed a
transformational change, from promoting women’s
development to entirely women-led development, and
from being exclusively Government-led to having a
multi-stakeholder inclusive governance model.
As the world’s largest democracy, India offers
a unique template for gender-sensitive governance.
More than 1.3 million elected women representatives,
who constitute nearly 44 per cent of the total elected
representatives, are leading political decision-making
at the grass-roots level. India is one of the few countries
to have had women at its helm as Head of State, Head of
Government, Defence Minister, Finance Minister and
External Affairs Minister.
On the question of socioeconomic empowerment,
the need to devise an overall institutional framework,
especially legal, to provide access for women to
economic opportunities and partnerships is an essential
prerequisite. Economic opportunities cannot be viewed
in isolation from other socioeconomic factors, especially
access to high-quality education. In this context, I
would like to mention that India has taken numerous
citizen-centric initiatives to take good governance
practices right to the grass-roots level. In this, digital
initiatives have been transformative in minimizing the
gender divide. We have leveraged digital technologies
to provide greater access for women to finance, credit,
technology and employment.
We have opened online bank accounts for over
445 million people, of whom more than 55 per cent of
account-holders were women. During the coronavirus
disease pandemic, this initiative helped in direct
benefit transfer to nearly 200 million women.

S/PV. 8989

Through the Mudra scheme, the Government provides
collateral-free loans to encourage entrepreneurship and
self-employment. About 70 per cent of its beneficiaries
are women-owned and -operated enterprises. Women
have consequently become economically empowered
and are providing employment to others as well.
To open up these economic opportunities, equal
access to education is fundamental. I am happy that a
large number of women in India are taking up education
in science, technology, engineering, mathematics and
medicine. In fact, for decades now, our girls have
outnumbered boys in our medical schools.
We now have women in important positions of
responsibility, not just in businesses, but also in the
areas of science and technology. Women scientists
have played a vital role in research and development
in various field, including the technology industry. In
fact, women are playing an important part in furthering
India’s space research and missions. About 27 per cent
of the key executive positions in spearheading the Mars
Orbiter Mission were led by Indian women.
Commissioning more women police officers and
women peacekeepers can be a game-changer in our
collective response to tackling conflicts. The Council
may recall the deployment of the first-ever all-female
formed police unit for United Nations peacekeeping
in Liberia in 2007 by India. The unit’s decade-long
service in Liberia resulted in a threefold increase in
female recruitment in the Liberian National Police
and an overall reduction of crime. It had a salutary
transformational impact on the fabric of Liberian
society and brought women to the forefront of political
and legislative decision-making.
However, it is also pertinent to acknowledge that
women have also suffered disproportionately, in the face
of violent extremism, conflicts and terrorist attacks.
That calls for the collective endorsement of a zerotolerance approach by the Council against terrorism.
Ensuring that women continue to have a stake in peace
processes in conflict zones is essential to securing the
long-lasting solutions to which we aspire.
We need to identify and eliminate barriers to
women’s optimum participation in the political process
and in decision-making, if we are to meaningfully
address their socioeconomic empowerment. Neither of
those two aspects can be seen in isolation. In order to
foster synergy between the two, democracy, pluralism
and rule of law are essential prerequisites. In that

22-2803613/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

context, we continue to underline the importance of
inclusive and representative governance in Afghanistan,
with the meaningful participation of women, as well as
the protection of women’s rights, in accordance with
resolution 2593 (2021).

Group of Seven (G-7) partners are leading the way in
mobilizing public and private investments to advance
gender equality and address persistent gaps in women’s
economic opportunities, such as access to digital and
financial assets.

A strong normative framework for the women and
peace and security agenda is an absolute imperative. It
can be strengthened only by increasing our collective
partnerships for greater women’s economic inclusion.
Member States should undertake measures to ensure the
elimination of violence against women and strengthen
their participation in peace and political processes,
thereby contributing to women’s economic inclusion.

Through the 2X Challenge: Financing for Women,
launched during the United Kingdom’s presidency of the
G-7 last year, British International Investment and our
partners committed to investing more than $15 billion
over the 2021-2022 period to advance that agenda in
developing countries. Such work includes supporting
flexible working practices, access to leadership
opportunities, financing and affordable products and
services. However, in a context where only 25 per cent
of women in fragile States have bank accounts, we
also need to consider innovative interventions, such as
microcredit loans.

India is committed to engaging with all its partners
to work towards the mainstreaming of women and peace
and security considerations for building inclusive,
peaceful and resilient societies. India’s experience
of enhancing women’s leadership across sectors will
continue to guide our actions.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I welcome you, Madam President, to the Council and
thank you for chairing today’s debate.
Our briefers and speakers so far have eloquently
highlighted the importance and the value of women’s
economic inclusion for maintaining peace and
stabilizing peace in post-conflict settings. Today’s
debate is timely, as we grapple with the challenge of
recovering globally from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, whose economic impacts
fell disproportionately on women and girls, and
risks, without effective intervention, having a longterm effect.
Our theme today is partnerships. May I highlight
three of them.
The first, as Ms. Coulibaly highlighted, relates
to the critical role of funding. The Government of
the United Kingdom is committed to working with
partner Governments, multilateral corporations and the
private sector to support women in fragile economies
in playing an equal role in the economy to access the
benefits of trade, globally, and to establish economic
partnerships as levers for equality. For example, in
Jordan, where women face the compound effects of
conflict, displacement and the impact of COVID-19,
the development programmes of the United Kingdom
provide cash transfers to refugees and at-risk Jordanian
women. More generally, the United Kingdom and its
14/32

Secondly, we are partnering to promote policies
designed to promote women’s inclusion, and their
full and meaningful economic participation. We
particularly welcome the theme of gender and climate
at this year’s session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, which is an opportunity to highlight the
role women can play in advancing the climate change
agenda after the Conference of the Parties (COP) to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Glasgow, and ahead of the COP to be
held in Egypt.
In addition, the United Kingdom has committed
with G-7 partners to new targets to get 40 million
more girls in school and 20 million more girls reading
by 2026. Overall, our vision is that all girls should get
12 years of quality education.
Thirdly, we seek to strengthen partnerships
here at the United Nations and here in the Security
Council in support of women’s economic, social and
political inclusion, while drawing on the experiences
we have heard about. I join others in highlighting the
particular reversals that the women of Afghanistan
have suffered since August. As we discuss the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, we will prioritize returning
Afghan women to their full meaningful inclusion in
Afghanistan’s economy and society.
The United Kingdom welcomes today’s debate,
which has underlined why economic inclusion should
be an integral part of a holistic approach to the women
and peace and security agenda, but I cannot finish
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

without stating the obvious. Economic inclusion is no
protection against bullets and bombs.

Index, which promote women’s inclusion in the
economic development of our country.

That has been made horribly clear over the past
13 days, and just yesterday, we witnessed Russian
shelling kill a Ukrainian mother and her two children,
as they sought to evacuate the city of Irpin. They were
not the first casualties. Tragically, they will not be the
last. Men, women and children, Russian as well as
Ukrainian, will continue to suffer until Russia ends this
brutal and unprovoked war.

At the regional level, the principle of inclusive
financial systems and the recognition that gender
equality is a critical pillar for advancing the development
of the African continent continues to shape the vision
of “The Africa We Want”. The appointment last month
of Ms. Nardos Bekele Thomas as the first woman Chief
Executive Officer of the African Union Development
Agency of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
demonstrates the Union’s commitments to accelerating
the empowerment of women.

I thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s debate.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya commends the
United Arab Emirates for organizing today’s timely
open debate, as we mark International Women’s Day.
We are pleased to see you, Minister Mariam Almheiri,
presiding over the meeting.
We also welcome the Ministers and other guests
who have joined us today. We thank all briefers for their
perspectives, particularly on the recommendations
that point to the tools, mechanisms and partnerships
needed to support countries transitioning from conflict
and conflict and post-conflict situations to build more
inclusive, secure, equitable and sustainable societies.
There is no doubt that women bear a disproportionate
impact of conflict. However, cultural and structural
inequalities often limit women’s capacity to participate
equally, fully and meaningfully in peace and economic
processes within their societies. Kenya therefore
urges for enhanced strategic collaboration with local
leaders, including local women’s networks and policy
formulators, particularly in transition settings, to ensure
that gender-responsive measures are put in place in the
areas of asset distribution and access to socioeconomic
opportunities, resources and markets.
Kenya continues to advocate for investment in
women peacebuilders in fragile and conflict-affected
settings. We also continue to affirm the importance
of the economic inclusion and integration of women,
including ex-combatants, refugees and victims of
conflict, to ensure long-term stability, economic
resilience and social cohesion.
At the national level, Kenya has seen the benefit
of having a development framework, Kenya Vision
2030, operating alongside our Women Economic
Empowerment Strategy and Women’s Empowerment

Today the African Union International Women’s
Day couch talk convened to mark this occasion under
the theme “Gender equality today for a sustainable
tomorrow: innovative solutions for financial and
economic inclusion for African women.”
We urge the relevant United Nations organs and
agencies to remain seized of the outcomes of such
discussions as they relate to the sustainability of peace
and development.
Such milestones should be recognized, celebrated
and supported as critical partnership opportunities not
only for women’s economic empowerment and security
but also for women’s agency in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, particularly
as it links to peace and development.
That said, much more remains to be done. In that
regard, I will briefly highlight six action points that we
deem necessary in efforts to ensure women’s economic
inclusion and participation as key to building peace.
First is the prioritization of women’s integration into
national economic frameworks and domestic industries
for economic sustainability. That necessitates securing
resources, the enactment of relevant laws and policies,
and the development of clear and practical programmes
that advance gender equality in all sectors of public life.
Second is the expansion of and enhanced access
to digital platforms to ensure women’s financial and
economic inclusion. We in Kenya have seen how financial
technology services such as mobile money transactions
have reinforced equity in economic empowerment.
Third is enhanced technical and vocational
training through partnerships between local women
entrepreneurs and peace and development agencies
and international and regional financial institutions,

22-2803615/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

to augment financial literacy and women’s economic
empowerment with inclusive and peaceful societies.

and their full participation in conflict-prevention,
peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery efforts.

Fourth is having an integrated response to
socioeconomic transformation, including having
women be part of the formulation of integrated national
financing frameworks that focus on financing national
sustainable development priorities and the Sustainable
Development Goals at the country level.

It is clear that mobilizing the international
community to acknowledge women as key actors in
peace processes has gradually reached a significant
level of resonance. Nonetheless, my country remains
concerned by the fact that 21 years after the adoption
of the milestone resolution 1325 (2000), on the women
and peace and security agenda, women continue to
be very hard-hit, particularly in fragile States and in
conflict situations.

Fifth is to ensure that analysis is brought into
national policy discussions and that that analysis is
also reflected in the formulation of implementation
indicators on the ground, particularly in monitoring
progress in the area of inclusivity and the financing of
local women peace actors.
Sixth is the use of the advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In that context,
Kenya welcomes the submitted advisory from the
PBC on the Commission’s Gender Strategy Action
Plan indicators. The Commission’s engagement
with and support for national and regional efforts to
promote women entrepreneurs and women’s economic
empowerment are part of the important benchmarks of
peace- and nation-building.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to
investing in women’s full and effective participation in
all aspects of public life, in keeping with our women
and peace and security commitments.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I welcome this high-level meeting because it echoes
one of the priorities of Gabon’s international advocacy,
namely, the resilience of women in fragile States and in
conflict situations, together with the primary role that
they should play at all levels of peace processes, from
conflict prevention to post-conflict recovery, including
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
I thank Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director of
UN-Women; Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund; and
Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly. I would be remiss if I did
not mention Ambassador Biang, who is very committed
to the HeForShe movement.
The topic that we are discussing today is of particular
interest to my country, which recognizes that strategic
trans-sectoral partnerships at the local, regional and
international levels are very useful tools to promote the
women and peace and security agenda, in particular
when it comes to the economic inclusion of women
16/32

The global context today, which is characterized
by many crises exacerbated by the pandemic, only
underscores this. Advocacy for women’s empowerment,
their economic inclusion and their participation must be
expanded at all levels in societies, especially conflictaffected societies, and must spread to all regions of
the world.
The crucial equation that we need to resolve in
most cases remains that of the lack of opportunities and
economic resources, which very frequently undermine
the leadership role and capacities of women and
prevents them from fully participating in the various
decision-making processes. That is something that can
be very clearly seen in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827), which underscores the fact that in
countries in conflict, women, who represent a substantial
part of the informal sector, were the most hard hit by
the economic consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. That terrible reality calls our attention to the
scope of the efforts that need to be undertaken by the
international community to strengthen the resilience
capacity of women through economic inclusion — it
being understood, of course, that combating economic
inequality goes hand in hand with crisis-prevention
strategies and economic recovery.
With three high-ranking women at the head of our
highest institutions — specifically, the Prime Minister,
President of the Senate and President of the Constitutional
Court — as well as various other outstanding women at
the helm of key ministerial departments, Gabon is, in
Africa, the epicentre of leadership of women as agents
of change and peacemakers. In my country, women are
fully involved in shaping the future of their societies
and are a major asset for the stability and lasting peace,
which make a Gabon attractive as a country.
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

From our experience, we deem it obvious that
providing women with their rightful central place in time
of peace is a catalyst not only for their empowerment
but also for providing an impetus to socioeconomic and
political progress by preparing them for the peaceful
settlement of differences that could emerge in future.
Gabon remains steadfast in advocating the inclusion,
participation and resilience of women, fully aware
that their full participation in all stages of conflictprevention, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding
processes contributes to a more sustainable peace.

of this war while working every day to enable their
families and their country to cope with it.

We call for the continuation of efforts initiated
and agreed upon at global, national and local levels
for a comprehensive and inclusive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions, as
well as for a better integration of the gender dimension
in peacebuilding efforts. We are convinced that
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly
with regard to the coordination of their actions taken
on the women and peace and security agenda, could
contribute significantly to better consideration of the
gender dimension in responses to conflicts and in
United Nations peacekeeping mandates.

In Afghanistan, since it took power by force, the
Taliban has been responsible for an increasing number
of abuses, including against Afghan women activists,
and unacceptable violations of women’s rights. The
exclusion of Afghan women from the political, social
and economic life of the country is an affront to the
human conscience. France condemns these abuses
and the eviction of women from socioeconomic life.
We support all Afghan women who are fighting for
the respect of their dignity and their rights. Through
them, France pays tribute to all women rights defenders
acting throughout the world.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize how
fundamental it is to create synergies of action, establish
strategic partnerships with women leaders at all levels
and create flexible funding mechanisms to support
women’s peacebuilding initiatives. Indeed, it is well
understood that promoting women’s empowerment,
through education and employment — and thereby
their economic inclusion — is to foster their resilience
and invest in building sustainable peace.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset I would like to acknowledge
the commitment of the United Arab Emirates to
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Sami Bahous, for her presence
and briefing, as well as the Managing Director of the
International Monetary Fund, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva,
and the civil society representative, Ms. Moussokoro
Coulibaly, for their powerful testimonies.
First of all, I would like to reiterate our condemnation
of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and express my
support and solidarity with the Ukrainian people, and
especially, on this 8 March, with Ukrainian women and
girls, who are already suffering the full consequences

The coronavirus disease pandemic has also
reminded us that the rights of women and girls are
never fully achieved. Its economic impact has been
particularly heavy for women, who are very present
in the sectors most affected by the crisis as well as in
informal and precarious employment. It is therefore
essential that our efforts to build back better are based
on the equal, full, substantial and effective participation
of women in the economy.

These examples and recent events remind us that a
rights-based approach cannot be overlooked. Respect
for rights remains the cornerstone of the women and
peace and security agenda. In this regard, we encourage
the holistic implementation of the pillars of the agenda,
combining rights and economic inclusion. Only such
a comprehensive approach can build a peace that is
sustainable, just and inclusive.
For its part, France will continue to promote an
ambitious and resolute feminist diplomacy and place
the participation and inclusion of women at the heart
of all its cooperation projects. Accordingly, during the
French presidency of the Group of Seven in 2019, we
supported women’s entrepreneurship in Africa through
the Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa
initiative, in association with the private sector. France
will also promote the follow-up of commitments made
during the Generation Equality Forum, co-organized
with Mexico, UN-Women and civil society.
We call on all stakeholders to commit to ensuring
the implementation of the Global Acceleration Plan
for Gender Equality and its $40 billion in financial
commitments, as well as the Compact on Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action, which has been
mentioned several times in my colleagues’ statements.

22-2803617/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

In the Security Council, we will also continue to
actively promote the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Mrs. Espeschit Maia (Brazil): I congratulate
Her Excellency Minister Mariam Almheiri and the
presidency of the United Arab Emirates for organizing
this very timely and pertinent debate. I also thank
the Managing Director of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, and
civil society representative, Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly,
for their insightful briefings.
As the world celebrates International Women´s
Day today, the Security Council must keep exploring
new ways to move forward in the implementation of all
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda.
Brazil has joined the Niger, Norway, the United Arab
Emirates and Albania in a shared commitment to
making women, peace and security a top priority
and to ensuring its implementation in concrete and
tangible ways.
We believe that public-private partnerships
can indeed play a very important role in boosting
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction, enabling and empowering women to act
as positive drivers of change. According to the World
Bank’s Pathways for Peace study, women´s economic
inclusion, particularly in the labour force, is a rational
and cost-effective conflict-prevention strategy.
Moreover, women’s grass-root efforts are an example
of how low-cost local intervention can fulfil important
roles, including conflict mediation. Women’s economic
inclusion is also critical in post-conflict reconstruction
and economic recovery, and it can be a major driver of
lasting peace.
Nonetheless, as mentioned by Ms. Georgieva,
labour markets across the world remain divided
along gender lines. Female labour-force participation
continues to be lower than male participation, genderwage gaps are high, and women are overrepresented
in the informal sector and among the poor. In many
countries, legal restrictions persist and constrain
women from developing their full economic potential.
Research also shows that, during conflicts, women
may increase their participation in labour markets and
improve overall household welfare. However, once the
conflict ends, they face pressure to put up with such
18/32

08/03/2022

household work as caring for injured male relatives or
orphaned children and to leave their paid work.
On different occasions, women briefers to the
Security Council have called for more financing for
women’s organizations on the ground to enable them
to exercise their unique potential in supporting women
and girls in remote conflict areas. UN-Women has
also reminded us that project planning and financing
often neglect the specific needs of women and that, for
decades, there has been chronic underinvestment in
women’s empowerment, which has hampered progress
in women’s rights and gender equality.
Brazil will continue to do its part by applying a
gender-sensitive approach to international humanitarian
assistance. We believe that international financing
should aim at promoting gender equality as a catalyst
for lasting peace, but also focus on financing initiatives
to ensure women’s long-term economic security and
well-being. In the Security Council, we can also work
through various complementary strategies, first, by
carefully drafting and revising peacekeeping mandates
so that they are more explicit in their role in promoting
women´s economic inclusion and empowerment, in line
with resolution 2242 (2015). Without targeted mandates,
it is very unlikely that United Nations operations
will contribute to women´s access to opportunities,
resources and markets on the ground.
Secondly, we must also ensure that women’s
voices are heard in the context of special political
missions. Women can be pivotal in proposing
peacebuilding activities that will result in the longlasting empowerment of local women and girls. In
that regard, Brazil would like to recognize the women
and peace and security policy of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and its Gender,
Peace and Security Unit in its effort to ensure gender
mainstreaming in all peacebuilding projects.
Thirdly, we must continue to support the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in its commendable
efforts to promote women’s economic inclusion and
participation. We praise the PBC’s expertise in that
regard, as well as its decision to allocate at least 25 per
cent of the Peacebuilding Fund’s resources to projects
aimed at empowering women and young people.
I recall that, during the 2020 review of the PBC
Gender Strategy, Brazil suggested that the Security
Council should receive and consider advice from the
PBC, including recommendations from local women
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

leaders, prior to every renewal of peacekeeping
operation mandates. Brazil also recommended that the
PBC monitor and report on the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. We are still
of the view that a strengthened relationship between
the Council and the PBC would greatly influence the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda as a whole.
More than 20 years after resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted, women still face the grave security and
humanitarian consequences of military actions decided
primarily, if not exclusively, in decision-making
processes in which they did not take part. Women and
girls must finally be systematically and meaningfully
included in the decisions that affect their daily lives.
Brazil hopes that the Security Council will continue
to discuss with partners, such as the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, in order to
assess how private partnerships can help bridge the
gap in promoting women’s economic inclusion and
participation in conflict-affected settings, including by
investment allocation and participation in peacebuilding
trust funds.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Madam,
for presiding over this meeting. I also express our
appreciation to the United Arab Emirates for organizing
this debate to shed a light on some integral parts of the
women and peace and security agenda that are often
overlooked, namely, relief, recovery and prevention.
We are happy to see a concrete realization of the
shared commitments on women and peace and security
that we have prioritized together with the United Arab
Emirates, Ireland, Norway and Brazil.
The date of today’s debate could not have been better
chosen. Let me join other speakers in wishing everyone
a happy International Women’s Day. Unfortunately, for
many women across the world, that day is anything but
happy. They suffer from conflict, hunger, economic
and social exclusion, displacement, violence, poverty
and health crises.
Today, our first thoughts and our hearts go out
to the women in Ukraine, who are suffering from an
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression, the
shelling and bombing of their homes and the presence
of hostile foreign soldiers and tanks in their streets.
Russia’s war of choice is ravaging a proud, independent
nation and causing a humanitarian crisis that needs
no description. Women in Ukraine are suffering and

S/PV. 8989

struggling, but they are also resisting and fighting for
their country and for their freedom. We pay tribute
to them.
As of yesterday, 1.7 million people had been forced
to leave Ukraine, most of them women and children,
as well as the elderly and people with disabilities.
Countless more have been displaced within the country.
Today, they number more than 2 million — all in just
two weeks.
We commend the work of United Nations entities,
women’s organizations and other civil society
organizations in supporting humanitarian efforts on
the ground, as well as to ensure, at best, a gendered
perspective to humanitarian aid. All of that could have
been and can still be avoided. We call on Russia to stop
the aggression, withdraw its troops from Ukraine and
go home.
We must redouble efforts to address gender
inequalities, women’s human rights violations, sexual
and gender-based violence and exclusion from peace
efforts and decision-making, wherever they may occur.
Women remain excluded from public life and education
in Afghanistan, where huge achievements are being
unravelled; women and children are suffering from
the never-ending wars in Yemen and Syria; women
are being sexually abused in Tigray and South Sudan;
women are being forcefully displaced in Ukraine and
Myanmar; and women are being jailed for their activism
in Belarus and the Sudan.
The empowerment of women, the strengthening
of gender equality and guarantees of women’s human
rights in fragile settings can help transform vicious
circles into virtuous ones by preventing conflict
and ensuring peace with inclusivity and through
development. Women must have their place at every
table in decision-making processes, whether peace
processes, peacebuilding activities, economic and
pandemic recovery, business enterprises or democratic
processes. How can we continue to contemplate that
the potential of half the world’s population remains
unexploited, when we know very well how much it
could bring?
Women’s economic inclusion and participation in
the context of conflict prevention and recovery from
crises have rarely been explored in the Council. We need
to start looking at the women and peace and security
agenda more broadly and find new and innovative ways

22-2803619/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

to fully implement it while also following a human
rights-based approach.

for women’s equality and empowerment. Albania stands
ready to share its experience.

Financing has come out as a core issue in moving
the women and peace and security agenda forward,
while all stakeholders must play their role. To close the
financing gaps and promote financial inclusion, I have
two proposals.

In November, together with the French Development
Agency and the World Bank, we began implementing
a major project to the tune of €51 million, aimed at
supporting and promoting more inclusive and equitable
growth by addressing the factors that deprive women of
economic opportunities equal to those of men.

First, we should build stronger partnerships with
international financial institutions, as we heard from
the International Monetary Fund this morning, and the
private sector. Partnerships are crucial to increasing
women’s equal access to quality financial services,
such as credit, savings, insurance and payment systems
through better regulation, technology and financial
literacy. At the same time, women-led enterprises
and small businesses can play a key role in improving
equality and access.
Secondly, we should support the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), industry associations and
corporations advocating for policies and programmatic
solutions that enable women’s economic participation
in conflict-affected areas. Access to funding needs
to be simplified, administrative barriers dismantled
and NGOs, women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders trained in how to apply for grants. Actors
at the grass-roots level can often make a big impact on the
ground and have a multiplier effect, but their capacities
to receive and absorb funding are often limited. That
needs to change. In that regard, we welcome the work
of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which
has already disbursed hundreds of funds to small
women’s organizations.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to say a few words about the situation in
my own country.
Albania has made significant progress in the
empowerment of women and achieving gender equality
at all levels. The World Economic Forum Global Gender
Gap Report 2021 ranks Albania twenty-fifth out of
156 countries, highlighting major progress in the area
of political empowerment and economic participation
and opportunity. One of the policies we are most
proud of is the integration of gender into all stages of
public budgeting at the central and local levels, making
Albania the first country in the region to include gender
budgeting as a tool to promote transformative financing
20/32

The economic and social empowerment of women
remains a major challenge for the economic development
of any country. It is enough to recall that, depending on
the country, between 20 and 50 per cent of the potential
gross domestic product is lost due to women’s limited
access to the labour market.
I would like to conclude by saying that it is high
time to finally go beyond words and commitments.
We can no longer afford to waste time in realizing the
potential of women as actors of peace and prosperity.
Security, peacebuilding, economic development and
progress for all are at stake.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome you, Madam President, and thank you for
presiding over today’s meeting. I also thank Executive
Director Sima Bahous, Managing Director Kristalina
Georgieva and Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly for
their briefings.
China applauds the initiative of the United
Arab Emirates to focus today’s meeting on women’s
economic inclusion and participation. Women’s
economic empowerment is an important part of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, a sine
qua non for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and a fundamental guarantee
of the steady and sustained advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda. Women’s economic
empowerment requires not only political commitment,
but also concrete actions.
In war-torn South Sudan, the burden of supporting
a family falls disproportionately on women. In the Wau
region of Western Bahr-el-Ghazal, traditional weaving
skills for making handicrafts have been passed down
from generation to generation. However, many local
women are hampered by the lack of sewing equipment.
Last month, the Chinese Embassy in South Sudan
donated 100 sewing machines to the local community.
Better-equipped women in Wau are now sewing
tirelessly, hoping that their hard work will bring food
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

to the table, pay for their children’s tuition and earn a
bright future for the country.

participation, increasing their employment and lifting
them out of poverty.

In 2017, Niyibaho Berthilde, a woman from
Rwanda, received training in China on juncao,
or fungus grass, technology, a method of circular
production involving plants, animals and mushrooms.
After returning to Rwanda, she started her own juncao
business and created more than 30 jobs. Furthermore,
she also organized juncao training courses for tens of
thousands of farmers, most of them women, including
single mothers, helping to lift more people of the local
community out of poverty.

We should also help women to overcome the
challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, increase the
availability and affordability of vaccines in conflict
areas and safeguard women’s rights to life and health.

In Kenya, a young woman named Concilia
Owire is one of the first female locomotive drivers
of the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway.
With a safe solo driving record of more than 140,000
kilometres under her belt, Concilia enjoys celebrity
status among Kenyans. She bears witness to how that
railway, built by China, has given young people like
her not only jobs, but also opportunities to learn skills.
She is proud of doing her part in modernizing Kenya’s
transportation sector.
The stories of Concilia, Niyibaho and women in Wau
have shown us the wisdom and the potential of women,
as well as the transformative impact of economic
empowerment on women and their families, as well as
their communities. They have also demonstrated the
enormous prospects for women’s participation in the
peace and development of all countries.
At the same time, we must recognize that the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
increased regional turbulence threaten to set back the
existing commitment and investment in development
issues. In addition, the gains of women’s economic
empowerment are at risk of being reversed and women
in conflict areas are facing greater challenges. The
international community should step up its efforts and
act in coordination in order to inject new impetus into
the global cause of women’s development.
First, we should invest more in development. The
international community should actively assist the
reconstruction of conflict areas, especially important
infrastructure that is vital to the national economy and
people’s livelihoods, such as roads, bridges, water and
electricity, so as to bolster the physical foundation for
women’s development. Greater earmarked investment
is needed in women’s and girls’ health, education and
training with a view to enabling women’s economic

Secondly, we need to build partnerships. Women’s
economic empowerment should be incorporated into
the overall framework of international development
cooperation through enhanced North-South, SouthSouth and triangular cooperation. We should promote
the flow of talents, funds and technology to developing
countries and to areas that contribute to women’s
development. To that end, the private sector should play
a greater role in order to create more opportunities for
women’s economic participation.
The International Monetary Fund and other relevant
organizations should, where appropriate, inject liquidity
into developing countries, including post-conflict
States, and encourage member countries to voluntarily
channel a share of their allocated special drawing rights
to fragile States in order to help stabilize the economies
of the recipients and improve the livelihoods of priority
groups, such as women.
In September last year, during the general debate
of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session,
President Xi Jinping proposed a global development
initiative, which seeks to accelerate the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and achieve stronger, greener and healthier global
development (see A/76/PV.3, annex VI). We are
confident that this initiative will be a major boost to
the achievement of gender, equality and women’s
economic empowerment.
Thirdly, we should maximize the role of the United
Nations. Development should remain a priority area of
the United Nations. We must bridge the development
gap faced by women in conflict zones and make
women-related goals and targets an early win of
the 2030 Agenda. The United Nations Development
Programme, UN-Women and other agencies should
focus on supporting women’s economic empowerment,
invest more in long-standing issues, such as poverty
eradication for women, and make a difference in
addressing new challenges, such as the gender digital
divide. When discussing women and peace and security
issues, the Security Council should balance the four
areas of prevention, protection, participation and relief

22-2803621/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

and recovery and address the chronic underinvestment
in reconstruction and recovery.

just concluded in Beijing. Beijing 2022 was the most
gender-equal Olympic Winter Games in history.

Just now, some colleagues mentioned the current
situation of Ukrainian women. We support the United
Nations in accelerating and coordinating humanitarian
operations to effectively ensure the security of the
lives and property of Ukrainian civilians, including
women and children, meet their basic needs and keep
humanitarian corridors safely open. We also call for the
further stepping up of diplomatic efforts so as to put an
early end to the conflict.

We are tasked with the noble mission to maintain
world peace. More than 1,000 female Chinese
peacekeepers have served in blue helmets and have
brought hope to people in conflict areas. As I speak,
we are exploring the universe, Wang Yaping, a female
Chinese astronauts, is orbiting Earth and fulfilling the
dream of hundreds of millions of women. As for me and
my colleagues, we will continue to further contribute
our voices, wisdom and proposals here at the United
Nations. In the great cause of promoting human peace
and development, the Council can always count on
Chinese women and China.

Today is International Women’s Day. It is of special
significance for the Security Council to hold an open
debate on women and peace and security on this day.
Allow me to extend my best wishes to all female
colleagues present here today and to all women in the
United Nations family. I wish them a happy holiday.
I would like to mention in particular that, in China’s
Foreign Service, all the female diplomats are highly
capable, fully dedicated and very active. I am proud
of them.
I would now like to cede the floor to Mrs. Gui Dan,
a young female diplomat of the Permanent Mission of
China to the United Nations, to complete this statement.
Mrs. Gui Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): Of late,
there has been a catch-phrase on Chinese social media,
which says that one can always count on Chinese women.
It is a tribute to China’s national women’s soccer team,
which won the Asian Football Confederation Asian Cup
last February. Moreover, it captures the role of Chinese
women, who hold up half the sky. In fact, in today’s
China, more and more women are becoming champions
in their respective sectors.
On the front line of the battle against the pandemic,
we work as medical professionals and safeguard
people’s lives and health. In the fight against poverty,
we are a pioneering force contributing women’s power
to China’s historic elimination of abject poverty and
the realization of sustainable development. We are
also active in political life. The active participation in
political deliberations of women of all ethnicities is one
of the most impressive features of the annual sessions
of the National People’s Conference and the Chinese
People’s Political Consultative Conference.
At the same time, China supports women from all
countries on their journey towards a better future. We
held high the torch of the Olympic Winter Games that
22/32

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to the United
Arab Emirates presidency of the Security Council
and you personally, Madam Minister, for organizing
today’s debate. We have listened with interest to the
statements by Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund; and
Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly.
We emphasize the relevance of discussing the role
of women in social and economic cooperation as a key
element of peacebuilding. Unfortunately, this area of
cooperation has often been unjustifiably silenced and
relegated to the background. The Russian Federation
calls for additional measures to strengthen the role of
women in the social and economic development of States.
Measures to strengthen women’s economic potential,
create the conditions necessary for developing women’s
entrepreneurship and increase their access to financial
and material resources, markets, modern technologies
and intellectual property are greatly needed.
The most important areas of international
cooperation must be overcoming poverty, women’s
development and expanding access to education and
decent work. The practice of applying coercive unilateral
measures against States is absolutely unacceptable. It
is clear that such actions primarily affect the interests
of women in the social and economic spheres. Those
issues must be the focus of the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations
bodies in consistently implementing the women and
peace and security agenda.
This year’s 8 March commemoration of
International Women’s Day is taking place against the
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

backdrop of pivotal events on the world stage. For eight
years, the so-called Western world has been indifferent
to the murder of women and children in Donetsk
and Luhansk by the Kyiv junta and their persecution
by Ukrainian radicals and neo-Nazis in the eastern
and south-eastern parts of Ukraine. It coyly looked
away so as to not notice the Ukrainian policy of the
total eradication of the Russian language, culture and
Russian-born Ukrainian citizens.
For some reason, none of them furrowed their brows
or spoke in a somber theatrical voice as women and
teenagers were burned alive at the trade union building
in Odesa, to the applause and cheers broadcast live
on Ukrainian television channels. For an entire eight
years, they showed their absolute indifference and total
detachment as cities and towns in Donbas were bombed
and shelled by aircraft, artillery, multiple rocket
launchers, while a complete blockade was imposed.
The Kyiv regime got away with everything, but that
could not go on indefinitely. Peace will be restored in
Ukraine for the sake of women, children and families.
More than 20 years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000). The conceptual
principles of the document, based on the four pillars of
prevention, protection, participation and strengthening
peace in situations of armed conflict are as relevant
today as ever. Our goal is not to undo the joint gains
made in women’s issues or eclipse the valuable political
cooperation on this agenda item with heated political
battles. Russia has been and remains ready to cooperate.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I want to thank the United
Arab Emirates Minister for Climate Change and
Environment for organizing today’s open debate. It is
indeed in line with our shared commitments to making
the women and peace and security agenda a priority
during our presidencies. And on this International
Women’s Day, let me recognize and express our full
support for the many women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders who continue the fight for women’s
rights in conflict and crisis. I also want to thank the
Executive Director of UN-Women, the Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund and
Ms. Moussokoro Coulibaly for providing important
contexts to our discussion today.
The implementation of the relief and recovery
pillar of the women and peace and security agenda can
be transformative and help connect our goals for peace
and gender equality. Ensuring women’s economic

S/PV. 8989

rights requires their participation in decision-making
processes, mechanisms and institutions, including
economic and financial ones, and access to and control
over resources on equal terms with men.
For a country in crisis or conflict, ensuring
women’s economic rights can be a means to achieving
development, stability and long-term peace. Yet it is
often in fragile and conflict-affected countries where
women face the most severe economic exclusion, as well
as where their participation is most critically needed.
We have seen that clearly, for example, in Afghanistan.
Women face unique and intersectional challenges
to economic inclusion and rights during conflict and
post-conflict recovery. According to the latest edition of
the global Women, Peace and Security Index, displaced
women and girls face a higher risk from all forms of
gender-based violence and economic marginalization,
including barriers to accessing jobs and livelihood
opportunities, resulting from intersecting factors
affecting their rights and agency. Forced and early
marriage and the absence of legal identification were
among the largest contributors to poverty in households
headed by displaced women. That perpetuates a
negative cycle, further underlining the need to consider
all efforts through a gender lens.
We are deeply concerned about the particular
impacts that the Russian aggression in Ukraine is
having on Ukrainian women and girls.
Let me share a few reflections on this debate’s
guiding questions.
First, conflict and crises can disrupt traditional
norms and create opportunities for women. It is
imperative that these opportunities be reflected in
the gender provisions of peace agreements, reforms
and new legislation. It is also why broad and inclusive
consultations with a diversity of women are vital to
both the design and implementation of peacebuilding,
demobilization, reintegration, recovery and economic
programmes at the national and community levels.
Secondly, participation remains key. The
Security Council, all United Nations presence in the
field, including United Nations peace operations,
and Member States should insist on women’s direct
influence in decisions that affect their lives and future.
Their economic needs and rights must be safeguarded.
This includes in the delivery of humanitarian assistance

22-2803623/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

and recovery efforts, as well as decisions about natural
resource management and gender-responsive budgeting.
Thirdly, partnerships with the private sector
offer underutilized opportunities. The private sector
provides jobs, including in war and crisis economies,
and can boost women’s participation in the labour
force. They are vital partners for bridging the digital
divide and bringing innovative solutions to complex
problems, such as payment solutions, or addressing
energy poverty, where there are ample opportunities
for gender-transformative approaches.
Conflict and crises do not lessen the need to
focus on women’s participation and rights, including
economic rights; quite to the contrary, economic, social,
cultural, civil and political rights are inextricably
linked. Inclusion requires both creativity and solid
commitment, and we are ready to work broadly with
all partners to implement all pillars of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate, which provides an opportunity to exchange
views and perspectives on the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda, especially on the
day we commemorate the International Women’s Day.
We also wish to express our appreciation to Ms. Sima
Bahous, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva and Ms. Moussokoro
Coulibaly for their briefings.
At the open debate on protecting the participation
of women in peace processes (see S/PV.8949), held
under the Norwegian presidency in January, Ghana
indicated that women involved in peacebuilding efforts
were drivers of the positive change we all desire and,
therefore, deserved to be protected by the Security
Council, the international community at large and the
Member States to which they belong. Today, as the
United Nations organ with the primary responsibility
for maintaining global peace and security, we are called
upon to exchange views on how the women who so
excellently support the work of peace in communities
far and wide can be protected, not only from reprisals
and harm, but also from economic exclusion and
marginalization, which tends to impede their capacity
to be fully effective as actors for peace.
The economic exclusion of women places severe
restrictions on their capacity to effectively participate
in peace and security initiatives as the institutional
and sociocultural obstacles women continue to
24/32

08/03/2022

face reinforce their marginalization. In conflict
situations and post-conflict environments, threats to
the meaningful economic empowerment of women
are intensified and become almost insurmountable.
It is therefore necessary that we focus policy actions
towards a reversal of this trend, as it will ultimately
lead to the ability of women to meaningfully contribute
to the advancement, progress and stability of their
communities and the strengthening of their leadership
roles and capacities in peacebuilding efforts.
Two decades since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2001), the collective agenda to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in peace and
security processes demands a renewed impetus and the
strengthened resolve of all stakeholders.
Ghana is delighted at the existence of multinational
and multi-stakeholder initiatives, such as the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
which seek, among others, to ensure women’s economic
security, as well as enhance their leadership roles
across peace, security and humanitarian sectors. The
existence of such broad and extensive platforms holds
enormous promise for fostering the active participation
of Governments, the United Nations, regional
organizations, the private sector and international
corporations in the economic empowerment of women
in peacebuilding. Such partnerships are indispensable
in the realization of the economic inclusion of women
in various aspects of peacebuilding.
Multilateral financing mechanisms, such as the
Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund and the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which continue
to dedicate significant portions of investments towards
gender equality and women’s empowerment all over
the world, are some examples of the strides we stand
to achieve when all relevant stakeholders in the women
and peace and security agenda pool their resources and
efforts for the greater good.
Organizations, such as the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), have ensured the incorporation of crucial
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda
into their strategic objectives. For example, Agenda
2063 of the African Union and ECOWAS Vision 2050
are examples of long-term regional and subregional
goals that have rightly identified the need to achieve
gender equality and women’s empowerment in all
spheres of public engagement, and therefore require
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

the support of the international community towards a
seamless implementation.

agencies, development partners, traditional authorities
and the media.

In addressing more specifically the focus of today’s
open debate, Ghana will make the following four points
on how the United Nations, the Security Council,
regional organizations and Member States can ensure
a more systematic cooperation and coordination geared
towards the economic inclusion of women as a key to
sustainable peace.

Finally, effective bilateral cooperation, as well
as collaboration across regional organizations on the
women and peace and security agenda is crucial for
accelerating the economic empowerment of women
in peace and security. As part of their development
cooperation efforts, countries and supranational
institutions with sufficient financial and technical
capabilities should enhance partnerships with their
less endowed counterparts, especially through funding
and the provision of technical support for women’s
empowerment initiatives. That is especially crucial
in regions facing threats from terrorism and violent
extremism, such as the Sahel and coastal West Africa,
where women’s economic empowerment is absolutely
central to building community resilience and preventing
radicalization and recruitment.

First of all, the Security Council should reinforce
its support for platforms, such as the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
which rallies together United Nations Member States,
regional organizations, civil society groups and the
private sector to foster women’s economic security and
leadership. Such partnerships should be harnessed by
the Security Council and the United Nations at large
as a means of enhancing public and private-sector
participation in financing peace and post-conflict
recovery. The private sector has the capacity to play
a bigger and useful role in peacebuilding by offering
logistical support, financial assistance, discounts and
pro bono support to women peacebuilders as part of
their corporate social responsibilities.
Secondly, it should be recalled that the SecretaryGeneral’s 2021 report on women and peace and
security (S/2021/827) called for the urgent reduction
in military spending and an increase in investment in
peacebuilding, education, health and other programmes.
A downward adjustment in the overall global military
expenditure would ultimately lead to the channelling of
much-needed funds into initiatives that are beneficial to
the women and peace and security cause. Regrettably,
the present global situation is likely to lead to countries
increasing their defence spending, with an adverse
impact on this objective. We must therefore recommit
ourselves to this objective, especially in many other
places of the world where this contribution would make
a positive difference.
Also, at the national level, it is incumbent on
Governments to develop and implement policies that
further enhance women’s economic empowerment and
continue to provide a clear framework for addressing
inequalities deeply rooted in their societies. It is
absolutely necessary to develop these national gender
policies, guided by key stakeholder inputs and with the
participation of both Government and non-governmental

If women have been able to achieve so much
with negligible or no resources, we can only imagine
what they will do with more. Therefore, ensuring the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in peacebuilding requires enhanced partnerships,
collective efforts and strategic approaches towards
their economic empowerment. As a representative of
Ghana once stated in the Council, we owe it to women
in peace and security all over the world to convert mere
rhetoric into concrete action.
The President: As we proceed, I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars
of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs of the Maldives.
Mr. Khaleel (Maldives): I would like to thank the
United Arab Emirates for convening this timely debate
on advancing the women and peace and security agenda
today, on International Women’s Day. I would also like
to thank our briefers for their invaluable insights.
Conflicts have deep and far-reaching consequences
for all of society. However, women in particular lose
access to employment opportunities, natural resources,
basic legal protections and essential needs, such as
food, water, health care and education. We are therefore
strongly encouraged by the commitment of the United

22-2803625/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

Arab Emirates presidency to advancing the women and
peace and security agenda.

informal sector and lacked formal contracts. However,
we know that more can be done.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the Council has adopted nine resolutions that reflect
significant collective advancement on the issue.
However, let us not become complacent. There remains
much to be done.

As we emerge from seemingly the worst of the
pandemic, we can redesign our recovery policies
to advance gender inclusivity. We should work to
strengthen partnerships with local stakeholders across
all levels, especially women’s groups, to more quickly
identify and better understand the challenges women
face on the ground and their underlying causes. We
should also work to find ways to better integrate
international partners and public and private partners
into those various settings so as to lay the foundation
for enduring peace and security. Some of the areas
where we believe partnerships can prove useful include
the timely and robust collection of data on women’s
economic participation in conflict settings. That will
help us to better understand the challenges women face.

The Maldives fully ascribes to the notion that
women’s inclusion and participation are fundamental
to our efforts to build a durable, peaceful society.
Furthermore, we recognize that when conflicts,
disasters and other crises strike, our responses in the
immediate aftermath and in the process of long-term
recovery must proceed in a manner that pays particular
attention to and places focus on the situation and needs
of women and their full and meaningful inclusion in
decision-making.
In a small country like ours, natural disasters can
wipe away decades of development gains in the blink of
an eye. The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami was devastating
for the Maldives and, in that awful experience, we
recognized that women were on the front lines, often
bearing the heaviest burden in its aftermath. Although
some extreme events are unpredictable, we know
that climate change will continue to increase our risk
of storms, flooding and water and food insecurity.
Those situations create environments in which women
are marginalized, but also where terrorism and other
threats to security can fester.
For that reason, the Maldives and other small
islands have been sounding the alarm about the fact that
addressing climate change is fundamental in building a
peaceful society. As Secretary-General Guterres rightly
stated last year, climate change is an aggravating factor
for instability, conflict and terrorism. Therefore, we
must take urgent action to address that threat multiplier
and driver of conflict.
It is not just in conflict situations where we must
better focus on women, but in all spheres. Over the past
two years, the coronavirus disease pandemic and other
humanitarian crises have exacerbated existing gender
gaps, often unravelling decades of progress made
towards gender equality. Clearly women have borne
the brunt of the economic fallout from the pandemic.
In response, the Maldives provided an income support
allowance to workers who lost their jobs, placing
particular emphasis on those women who worked in the
26/32

To ensure action on the ground that is responsive
to women, we need the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in leadership roles. Without the
adequate representation of women in decision-making
processes, we risk creating laws, policies, budgets and
conflict responses that fail to adequately respond to the
needs of almost half the world’s population. Research
demonstrates, and our experience has confirmed at firsthand, that women’s voices in political decision-making,
communities, parliaments and peace negotiations are
essential to supporting and sustaining prosperous and
peaceful societies.
The Maldives has always been committed to
promoting women’s empowerment. The Administration
of President Solih places high importance on having
women in decision-making and executive positions. We
have taken action to that end by adopting legislation to
allocate 33 per cent of council seats to women in local
elections. A third of the ministerial posts in the current
Cabinet are held by women. For the first time, we have
female Supreme Court justices and a woman leader for
both the Judicial Services Commission and the Human
Rights Commission. In a historic first, in April last
year we elected women to one-third of the local council
seats. Those changes will strengthen women’s voices in
our decision-making process and help us ensure more
responsive and inclusive Government policies.
We believe that empowered women empower
society. Only through the full and meaningful
participation of women in all facets of decision-making
and implementation can we ensure that we can build an
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989

enduring, peaceful society and advance the women and
peace and security agenda.

on how to enhance the contribution of African women
in peacebuilding operations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

To follow up on the implementation of the Aswan
Forum conclusions, the Cairo International Center for
Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding
in Africa has been organizing debates with international
and national partners in order to discuss how to promote
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in the light of the new realities imposed
by the pandemic by enhancing the leadership role of
women in conflict prevention and the achievement of
sustainable peace.

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, and all women present in the Council today
on the occasion of International Women’s Day. I
would also like to thank the United Arab Emirates for
organizing today’s open debate on women’s economic
inclusion and participation as a key to building peace.
I would like also to thank Ms. Sima Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her briefing, as
well as all other briefers.
Last October, under the Egyptian presidency of
the Peacebuilding Commission, an ambassador-level
meeting was held to discuss the role of women in
peacebuilding. The meeting focused on the pioneering
role of women in building peace and achieving lasting
peace. It is a role that is as important as carrying
weapons in an attempt to resolve conflicts. It is a role
that encourages caring for families and providing
sustainability in life. History has taught us that women
are our best bet in order to build peace, enhance societal
stability, achieve development and realize prosperity.
Last November, under the Egyptian chairmanship
of the African Peace and Security Council, the Council
held a meeting on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. In Africa,
we have had many successes with women mediators
and peacebuilders because we believe in their vital
role in achieving development and preventing wars and
conflicts while promoting coexistence.
Egypt is currently elaborating its first national plan
of action for the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Egypt is endeavouring to provide
the resources necessary to implement the plan and would
like to emphasize that ownership and national priorities
are at the base of the successful implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and
Development provides an important platform for
discussions among the various partners on how to
enhance the participation of women in peacemaking
and peacebuilding efforts. The Forum discusses the
various challenges and opportunities related to the
participation of women and makes recommendations

To conclude, Egypt reiterates that it will continue
to implement the women and peace and security agenda
and emphasizes that it will not recognize any outcomes
that are not consensual, fall outside the United Nations
framework or do not have a mandate from the main
United Nations organs, based on our belief that we must
safeguard the intergovernmental aspect of the United
Nations, enhance consensual values and build on the
common grounds of all Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking the
United Arab Emirates for having convened today’s
open debate. Malta aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union and of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
and would like to make a few additional remarks in its
national capacity.
At the outset, we express our full solidarity
with Ukraine and its people in these dark times and
condemn the loss of life and human suffering caused
by Russia’s unprovoked aggression, which is also
placing women and girls at increased risk of sexual
and gender-based violence. Malta welcomes the actions
being taken by women’s organizations and other civilsociety representatives in support of humanitarian
efforts and echoes the appeal made by the UN-Women
Executive Director to ensure women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in decision-making
processes and humanitarian responses, including civilsociety representatives.
International Women’s Day should not be a
symbolic day: it should be the way we live. Men and
women can do far more to stand up for women than
just celebrating this day. Malta firmly believes that
including women in peace and security processes

22-2803627/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

brings better outcomes. Having women at the peace
table strengthens accountability for implementation.
Women’s participation also makes peace more durable
and is essential to address the disproportionate impact
of conflicts on women and girls in all their diversity.
As is evident not just in Ukraine but also in
Afghanistan, Syria, Ethiopia and Myanmar, women
are also often the most impacted by crises resulting
from conflicts and pay a higher price for the
devastation, including multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination, increased gender discrimination
and violence. They remain largely excluded from
participating in peace processes despite overwhelming
evidence that women’s involvement in both
peacebuilding and mediation leads to more lasting and
positive peace.
Meanwhile, Malta acknowledges the critical role
that women have played and are playing in coronavirus
disease response efforts and the importance of inclusive
decision-making to sustainable and effective responses,
as well as the differentiated social and economic impact
of the pandemic on women. In that regard, we call for
increased emphasis to be put on providing women with
skills to become gainfully employed and participate
more actively in their societies. Amending laws in
communities that do not yet allow women to inherit and
own land would likewise be a step in the right direction.
Finally, we encourage efforts to enable women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation in all aspects
of peace processes and their implementation. That is a
key priority for Malta, which, as promoter of effective
multilateralism, places gender equality, women’s
empowerment and the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda at the centre of our
partnerships with multilateral and regional partners.
Important strides have been made since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and we continue to
stress that the four pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda should not be discussed in silos. Malta
reaffirms the important role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding and
stresses the importance of their equal participation and
full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco..
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the United Arab Emirates for having convened
28/32

08/03/2022

this important ministerial debate, which coincides with
International Women’s Day, on 8 March. I welcome the
presence of Ms. Almheiri, Minister of Climate Change
and the Environment of the United Arab Emirates.
As we celebrate International Women’s Day, I wish
to recall the primary role and the crucial contribution
that women make to peace, security and stability.
Indeed, women are and remain the nucleus and the very
core of our societies. Guaranteeing their full economic,
social and political inclusion and participation is vital.
At the same time, we must build their leadership
capacity. That is how we will guarantee resilience and
lasting peace.
Today’s debate is a timely one indeed, as we
mark the decade of action for the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals in difficult
circumstances owing to the coronavirus disease. As we
find ourselves halfway through that decade, we need
to correct course when it comes to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and make
more progress. We need to mobilize adequate resources
to ensure the effective economic participation and
empowerment of women. Doing so involves ensuring
balanced progress on the four pillars of the women and
peace and security agenda. As part of such efforts, the
Kingdom of Morocco has always staunchly defended
the economic empowerment of women to ensure lasting
peacebuilding efforts, particularly in Africa.
Morocco believes that while it is true that they can
be no peace without development and there cannot be
any development without peace, women, and this needs
to be underscored, are the main architects of peace.
Morocco firmly believes in the power of partnership
to guarantee adequate and effective financing for
peacebuilding at a global level. We also stress the need
to make use of all levers for international cooporation:
North-South cooperation, South-South cooperation and
triangular cooperation all are vital in that regard.
Our goal is to achieve win-win synergies while
at the same time ensuring full respect for the concept
of national ownership. We have partnerships with
the private sector, the young and civil societies,
which ensure lasting peacebuilding efforts because
such efforts fill critical gaps and foster post-conflict
recovery. The contribution of the private sector to
peacebuilding is vital, particularly in Africa. In Africa
there are young women and men who are dynamic
entrepreneurs, working hand in hand to promote peace
and making a lasting contribution to stability on their
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

continent. That reality is all the more important insofar
as local businesses are often managed by women across
several vital sectors that contribute to building peace on
a daily basis. In developing countries, the private sector
also generates 90 per cent of jobs, finances 60 per cent
of all investments and provides more than 80 per cent of
Government revenues, which indicates the central role
of women in the economic life of our societies.
Let me conclude with three observations. First,
more than 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) a status report on its implementation
should be prepared, with particular attention to the
current landscape of women’s economic inclusion
and participation.
Secondly, as part of such a review, clear and precise
markers should be established to assess the root causes
of gaps and chart progress in closing the gap in women’s
economic inclusion and participation in conflict and
post-conflict situations. These should be subject to a
periodic follow-up in the Secretary-General’s annual
reports, which could incorporate views shared by
Member States.

S/PV. 8989

And yet, women are actors, driving forces and
indispensable peacebuilders, and despite the fact that
they pay too high a price, they must not be confined to
the role of potential victims of conflict. In 2009, in its
resolution 1889 (2009), adopted under the presidency
of Viet Nam, the Security Council was visionary in
placing for the first time a decisive emphasis on the
role of women in reconstruction. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in emergency relief,
reconstruction and peacebuilding remains fundamental
to this day.
We thank the United Arab Emirates for organizing
today’s debate and the briefers for their very precious
contributions. Many times in my professional life, I
have had the opportunity to meet women entrepreneurs
who are impressive bridge builders — in Mozambique,
Egypt, Nepal, and in my own country. When I asked
them what the main obstacle to their full participation
in political and peacebuilding processes was, their
answers were as diverse as the women I met. Yet, on
many occasions, the answers were also surprisingly
short and clear: “poverty”.

Thirdly, in the current context of the abatement
of the coronavirus disease, it would be appropriate to
examine the best ways to use various existing United
Nations initiatives for the promotion and economic
participation of women in peacebuilding situations.

Is this surprising? It is not. Economic empowerment
is an important driver for increasing women’s
participation in peace processes. It is only through a
certain economic independence that we will be able to
fully realize our potential for creativity, efficiency and
networking for peace.

Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco believes that
the current global context is largely ripe for making a
significant difference, particularly by taking advantage
of the Secretary-General’s recent Our Common
Agenda. Indeed, being able to ensure the full inclusion
and economic participation of women to unleash their
full potential for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
necessarily, I would even say imperatively, creates the
right conditions for resilience and lasting peace.

Let me highlight three points. First, Switzerland’s
national
action
plan
emphasizes
economic
empowerment as an important factor for women’s
effective participation in political and peace processes.
We invite all countries to develop their national action
plans and to include a focus on economic empowerment.
This empowerment must be done with full respect for
human and fundamental rights, as they are universal,
indivisible and interdependent.

I again offer my warmest congratulations to all the
women of the world on their International Day.

Secondly, strengthening the socioeconomic
position of women is a key issue for Swiss cooperation.
For example, we support women running small- and
medium-sized businesses in many regions of the world.
Improving the socioeconomic position of women in
their communities broadens their scope for social and
political engagement.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
As we celebrate International Women’s Day today, I
deliver this statement with deep sorrow in my heart,
thinking of all the women who today are fleeing,
threatened by cold, hunger, war and violence, in
Afghanistan, Ukraine, Myanmar or elsewhere.

Thirdly, we welcome the priority the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) gives to funding
initiatives that promote the empowerment of women.
Switzerland has supported the PBF for many years. We

22-2803629/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

are also a signatory to the Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action Compact. This Compact,
which can also be joined by academic institutions and
the private sector, is a good example of modern and
effective multilateralism.
Alongside the national action plans, the role of
international cooperation and the work of the United
Nations, what is the role of the Security Council and
what can it actually do? In fact, it can do a great deal. To
improve partnerships — the topic of today’s debate — the
Council must promote networks, which it can do during
field visits by meeting with women peacebuilders. It
can also invite them to brief the Council. It can also
increase its cooperation with regional organizations,
international financial institutions and civil society.
Our commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda must at the same time be a commitment
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Synergies between the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
must be intensified.
Switzerland will continue and strengthen its
commitment to the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. As a candidate for the
Security Council, my country strives to continue to be
a plus for peace and a plus for development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my appreciation to the United Arab Emirates for
convening today’s important debate on women and
peace and security, with a focus on women’s economic
inclusion and participation. I thank Ms. Sima Bahous,
Ms. Kristalina Georgieva and the civil society
representative for their briefings.
First of all, I would like to express our grave
concern at the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in and around Ukraine, including the dire impacts on
women and girls, caused by the Russian aggression.
While hoping for a restoration of the status quo ante
bellum in Ukraine at the earliest, we must also keep in
mind that surviving a crisis is but the tip of the iceberg
of the vast women and peace and security agenda.
Women must be at the centre of all our efforts
to build peaceful and resilient societies, capable of
solving issues through peaceful means and free from
any temptation to change the status quo by force.
Participation of women is key to conflict prevention,
30/32

08/03/2022

which requires long-term, comprehensive, contextspecific measures, including empowerment and
proper institution-building under effective partnership
among stakeholders.
To better explain what I mean, I would like to
share a concrete example. Japan recently supported a
UN-Women-led project in the Lake Chad region aimed
at empowering women affected by violent conflict
prompted by Boko Haram. UN-Women partnered
with the Sasakawa Africa Association, a Japanese
civil society organization that has been supporting
smallholder farmers in Africa for over 30 years. In
this project, in collaboration with local authorities in
Cameroon and Nigeria, Sasakawa provided training
to women farmers in climate-smart agriculture and
in income-generating marketing skills to ensure that
they will be economically empowered. The success of
this project depended on combining the expertise and
support of UN-Women, civil society organizations and
local authorities.
Effective
partnership
requires
effective
complementarity, and the first step to realize such
complementary relationships is to enhance the sharing
of information and increasing the interactions among
various stakeholders — civil society organizations,
academic institutions, the private sector, and of course,
Governments and United Nations entities — particularly
in a conflict-affected environment. The Compact
on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, to which Japan is a signatory, could serve as
a useful platform for strengthening cooperation under
multi-stakeholder partnerships.
We urgently need tangible actions that different
public and private partners can undertake to support
gender-responsive, community-based approaches in a
sustainable manner. Japan is committed to playing its
part in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I am pleased to speak on behalf
of the 56 States members of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace, and Security.
On this International Women’s Day, we would like
to express our solidarity with all women peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and advocates for gender
equality who are tirelessly working to build peace,
defend rights and implement the women and peace and
security agenda. We hear them. We call on all Member
22-28036

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

States to protect and promote the rights of women and
girls rights everywhere. We also call on all Member
States and partners to ensure women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace, political and
security decision-making processes at all levels, in line
with resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
We express our full solidarity with all women
and girls in Ukraine and deplore the loss of life and
human suffering caused by the situation arising from
the aggression by the Russian Federation. We are
deeply concerned about the distinct impact of violence
on women and girls in Ukraine, many of whom have
been displaced or forced to seek refuge in neighbouring
countries — 2 million and counting. The current
situation places women and girls at increased risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. We must integrate
a gender perspective into the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and ensure that their needs are fully taken
into account and that all their rights safeguarded
and respected.
It is clear that women face persistent barriers to
economic empowerment and security, particularly
during times of crisis. This is a serious human rights
issue that impedes women’s participation in peace
processes and public life. In conflict-affected countries
such as Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen, there are
significant gender gaps in employment, with women
less likely to be in paid work and with limited access
to social protection systems and public services.
Women’s financial and digital inclusion is also
systematically lower in those settings. That has been
further exacerbated by the disproportionate impact of
the coronavirus disease pandemic on women.
We encourage Member States to increase their
support for human rights-based initiatives that advance
gender equality and women’s economic empowerment
and security. That includes support to civil society and
women-led organizations, as well as to Member States
to improve women and girls’ safe and equitable access
to quality education, training and capacity-building.
We encourage the Security Council to recognize,
as it addresses conflict and post-conflict situations,
the importance of women’s economic inclusion not
only for women themselves, but also for their families,
their communities and their countries’ economic
security and well-being. That is as an essential enabler
of meaningful participation, sustainable peace and
economic recovery in post-conflict settings. We also
encourage the Council to strengthen its cooperation

S/PV. 8989

with other United Nations entities, as well as regional
and subregional organizations, to better promote
women’s economic inclusion in fragile, conflict and
post-conflict settings.
We recognize the role that the private sector can
play in increasing women’s economic participation.
We encourage increased cooperation among all
partners and take note of a number of multi-stakeholder
initiatives, including the Generation Equality Forum
and its Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Assistance.
We must remind ourselves today and every day
of our responsibility to apply a human rights-based
approach and to fully implement the women and peace
and security agenda for women and girls around the
world. We must do our utmost to ensure their full, equal
and meaningful participation and to protect them at all
times from sexual and gender-based violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I wish everyone a happy
International Women’s Day.
This year, International Women’s Day is not a time
for celebration. The present situation in Ukraine presents
the gravest challenge to the rule of international law in
the twenty-first century. We must take this opportunity
to reaffirm our full support to Ukraine and its people.
Ukrainian women are showing resilience and courage.
Relief and recovery from conflict and conflictrelated violence have the transformative potential
to promote gender-equal economic inclusion and
participation. In that vein, the focus on the economic
empowerment of women in post-conflict reconstruction
not only prevents further conflict and violence, but also
paves the way to economic stability, growth and longlasting peace.
Nonetheless, the beneficial role of women postconflict economic relief and recovery is underestimated
due to persisting gender stereotypes, as well as
discriminatory norms and practices. At the same time,
serious threats, such as fragility, gender-based violence,
climate change and pandemics disproportionally affect
the security of women and girls in conflict affected
areas, affecting their equal inclusion and participation
in decision-making processes.
In that regard, the full implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and its four

22-2803631/32

S/PV.8989

Women and peace and security

pillars is of utmost importance, as it provides a for a
holistic and gender-responsive approach to conflict
prevention, relief and recovery. That process should
involve enhanced partnerships with the public sector,
civil society organizations, local women and human
rights defenders, including journalists and especially
women journalists. Accordingly, mainstreaming
gender equality and women’s empowerment in the work
of the United Nations on conflict prevention requires
gender-inclusive political and economic reforms aimed
at gender-equal participation in governance.
Greece focuses on enhancing women’s economic
inclusion and participation in order to foster their
overall empowerment and accelerate substantive gender
equality. That is well reflected my country’s national
action plans on gender equality and on women and
peace and security. Furthermore, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Compact on Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Assistance are
valuable tools in that regard.
Finally, I would like to stress that substantive
gender equality and women’s empowerment, including
economic empowerment, is definitely a human rights
issue. It should concern us all, as it is both a security
and development imperative in order to build peaceful,
resilient and inclusive societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): Today, we celebrate all
women and girls, their achievements, contributions and
spirit of steel with a determined will to make the world
a better place. I wish everyone a Happy International
Women’s Day.
I would like to congratulate the United Arab
Emirates on acceding to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for convening this timely
meeting to discuss the women and peace and security
agenda. Thanks are also due to the briefers for their
invaluable contributions to the debate.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 21 years
ago, women still face challenges that hinder their full,
active and meaningful participation in the economy.
Studies have shown that increasing women’s economic
empowerment leads to direct benefits for women
and their communities, thereby moving the wheel of
economic growth, and that low women’s participation
in the formal labour markets impedes economic growth
and the reduction of poverty.
32/32

08/03/2022

Women reportedly make up only 21 per cent of
the labour force and contribute with 18 per cent of the
overall gross domestic product of the Middle East and
North Africa region. A socioeconomic fallout of the
coronavirus disease is that women’s employment in the
Middle East and North Africa region has dropped by
4.1 per cent compared to 1.8 per cent for men.
Jordan, which is committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda and changing the
status quo, has adopted a five-year women’s economic
empowerment action plan, aimed at increasing women’s
participation in the labour force rate to 24 per cent by
2025. In addition, our commitments to the efficient
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has led to
introducing a series of amendments to Jordanian laws
and regulations, which are focused on enhancing and
increasing the participation of women in economic
decision-making, the labour market, eliminating wage
discrimination and promoting flexible work.
National action plans are critical tools in advancing
national responses. Through our national action plan
2018-2021 and our national women’s strategy 2020-2025,
we affirm our commitment to achieving the meaningful
participation of women. In addition, such plans promote
a community culture that recognizes gender needs,
the importance of gender equality, countering social
stigmas, providing an enabling environment specific
to women’s economic empowerment, providing
access to entrepreneurship and finance, with a focus
on technology-enabled services, and what may be
considered to attract more Jordanian women in rural
areas to engage in employment in the agricultural
sector. As a host country to one of the highest number
of Palestinian and Syrian refugees in the world, the
national action plan of Jordan encompasses women
refugees, who directly benefit from such a plan and the
related strategies.
Finally, distances shrink and differences fade when
it comes to women’s economic empowerment. It is time
to fight the good fight for our principles and values
to make them law and attain the full implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals, with women’s
empowerment at the centre of our efforts.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 12.25 p.m.
22-28036
