(;eneral Assembly-h,rty-second Scssion

228

are common practice rn lranian pnsons dunng interrogation and before and after the final verdict, and at the existence of extremely summary and informal proceedings,
unawareness on the part of the prisoners of specific accusations, lack of legal counsel and other irregularities with
respect to fair trial;
7. Shcres the opinion ofthe Special Representative that
the denial by the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran of the allegations of violations of human rights as a
whole, without details, is not sufficient for a sensible assessment ofthe situation on human rights in that country;
8. Endorses the conclusion of the Special Representa-tive that acts continue to occur in the Islamic Republic of
Iran that are inconsistent with the provisions of international instruments by which the Government ofthat country is bound, and that the persistence of certain facts continues to justify continuing international concern;
9. Urges the Government of thc Islamic Republic of
Iran, as a State party to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 11 to respect and ensure to ali individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction
the rights recognized in that Cmenanl,
10. Once again urge.~ the Government of lhe Islanm:
Republic of Iran to extend its full co-operation to the Special Representative of the Cornmission ,m Human Right~
and, in particular, to permit him to visit that country;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to g1ve ali necessary assistance to the Special Representative;
12. Decides to keep under considerat1011 the situation
ofhuman rights in the Islam1c Republic of Iran, including
the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is, during its forty-third session in order to re-examine this situation in the light of additional clements provided hy the
Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/137.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador

The General Assemb/y,
Guided by the principies of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 13
and the humanitarian rules laid down in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 151 and Additional Protocols 1
and II thereto, of J977, 157
Recalling that, in its resolut1ons 35/ 192 of 15 December
1980, 36/155 of 16 December 1981, 37/185 of 17 December 1982, 38/101 of 16 December 1983, 39/119 of
14 December 1984, 40/ 139 of 13 December 1985 and
41/157 of 4 December 1986, it expressed its deep concern
at the situation of human rights in El Salvador,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolutions 32 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 56 in which the
Commission decided to appoint a special representative on
the situation of human rights in El Salvador, 1982/28 of
11 March 1982, 57 1983/29 of 8 March 1983, 58 1984/52 of
14 March 1984, 59 1985/35 of 13 March 1985,60 and
1986/39 of 12 March 1986, 61 as well as Commission resolution 1987/51 of 11 March 1987, 26 whereby it extended
the mandate of the Special Representative for another
year and requested him to repnrt tu the Cil'neral Assembly
15 7 A/32/144, a1111excs

I and 11

al its forty-second session and to the Commission at 1ts
forty-fourth session,
Considering that there is an armed conflict of a 11011mternational character in El Salvador in which the parties
mvolved are under an obligation to apply the mínimum
standards of protection ofhuman rights and humanitarian
treatment provided for in article 3 common to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and in Additional Protocol 11
thereto, of 1977,
Notinf!. that the Special Representative points out in bis
report 158 that the question of respect for human rights
continues to be an important element of the current policy
of the Government of El Salvador, which, within the process of democratic normalization, is achieving increasingly significan! and commendable results,
Con cerned, however, because violations of human rights
are continuing in El Salvador, particularly through the
non-compliance with the humanitarian rules of war,
Recalling that on 7 August 1987 at Guatemala City the
Central American Governments signed the agreement on
the "Procedures for the establishment ofa firm and lasting
peace in Central America", 116 thus manifesting the political will and good faith to fulfil its provisions in order to
achieve peace and stability in the region,
Convinced that the strict fulfilment of the commitments
assumed by the Government of El Salvador in the agreement signed at Guatemala City will contribute to the promotion, respect and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms in that country,
Recognizing that the resumption of the dialogue between
the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo
Martí para la Liberación Nacional-Frente Democrático
Revolucionario in the context of the agreement signed at
Guatemala City is one of the best ways of achieving a solut1on that will help to improve the situation of human
rights of the Salvadorian people,
Aware that the negotiated política! solution of the Salvadorian conflict can be cut short if externa! forces do not
support the resumption of the dialogue but instead seek in
different ways to spur the prolongation or intensification
of the war, with ensuing grave effects on the situation of
human rights and the possibilities of economic recovery in
El Salvador,
l. Commends the Special Representative for his report
on the situation of human rights in El Salvador;
2. Notes with interest and emphasizes that it is important that the Special Representative indicated in his report
that the question ofrespect for human rights is an importan! part of the policy of the Government of El Salvador,
which is achieving increasingly significant and commendable results;
3. Expresses, nevertheless, its concern at the fact that
violations of human rights are continuing in El Salvador
because, in ter alia, of the non-observance of the
humanitarian rules of war;
4. Trusts that the fulfilment of the undertaking assumed in the agreement on the "Procedures for the establishment of a firm and Iasting peace in Central America",
will lead to an improvement of the situation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador;
5. Expresses its consternation at the assassination ofthe
Co-ordinator of the Commission of Human Rights of El
Salvador (non-governmental) and trusts that the authori-

118 A/421641. anne~.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
--

ties of El Salvador will continue mvestigations leading to
the punishment of those responsihle:
6. Recognizes the efforts made by the Government of
El Salvador related to the result ofthe most recent investigations designed to determine the responsibility of the instigators of the assassination of Monsignor Romero and
also recognizes the importance of the return to El Salvador of the political leaders of the Frente Democrático
Revolucionario;
7. Expresses its satisfaction at the fact that, with the intention of humanizing the conflict, the Government of El
Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional agreed this year that future evacuations of
the war-wounded and war-injured for medica! attention
would not be made contingent on further prisoner exchanges and negotiations;
8. Urges the Government of El Salvador and the
Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación NacionalFrente Democrático Revolucionario to continue the dialogue, within the framework of the agreement, signed at
Guatemala City, until the achievement of a global political
solution that will end the armed conflict and promote the
broadening and strengthening of a pluralistic and participatory democratic process that will involve the promotion of social justice, respect for human rights and t he foil
exercise of the right of the Salvadorian people to determine freely and without externa! interference of any kind
its economic, political and social system;
9. Requests the competent bodies of the United Nations system to provide any advice and assistance that thc
Government of El Salvador may require in order to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights ami
fundamental freedoms;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the situation of human
rights in El Salvador and the manda te of its Special Representative, taking into account the evolution of the situation ofhuman rights in El Salvador and the developments
linked to the fulfilrnent of the agreement ,igned at
Guatemala City:
11. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-third session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador in order to re-examine
this situation in the light of the information provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic ami
Social Council.
93rd plenary meeting
7 f)l'Cemher 1987
42/138.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assemh/y,
Recal/ing its resolution 41 / 136 of 4 December 1986, in
which it, inter afia, requested the Secretary-General, in
co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implementan effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report ofthe High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to ·,tudn1t refugee-; from
South Africa and Narnibia, 1'"
159 A/4'.'/496

229

-

I\foti11g with appreciation that sorne of the projects
recommended in the report on assistance to student refugee~ in '"uthern Africa , untinue to be successfully implemented,
Noling with concern that the discriminatory and repressive policies that continue to be applied in South Africa
and Namibia cause a continued and increasing influx of
student refugees into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zamh1a.
Conscwus of the burden placed on the limited financia!,
material and administra! ive resources of the host count ries hy the increasing numher of student refugees,
Apprecialing the etforts ofthe host countries to deal with
their ,tudent refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
\
lakes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Un1ted Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Expre~ses its appreciation to the Governments of
Bots\\ana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure that
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in the1r countries;
A /so exprcsses it~ appreciation to the Governments
or Bot~wana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation that they have extended to the High Commis-;ione1 on matters concerning the welfare of the refugees;
4. Notes with appreciatiun the financial and material
support provided for the ~tudent refugees by Member
Sta te-,, t he Office of the U nited Nations High Commis,ione1 for Refugees, other hodies of the United Nations
systern and intergovernmental and non-governmental organi1ations:
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General. to continue to organize and
implernent an etfective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
South A.frica and Namibia who have been granted asylum
in Bohwana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6.
Urges ali Member States and intergovernmental and
11011-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financial support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, that were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in A.frica. held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July
1Q84 lHl

7 A/so urge\ ali Mernber States and ali intergovernrnenlal and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
thern to conti11ue to discharge their humanitarian obligatirn1, towards refugees;
8. Appea/s to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programrne and ali other competent United Nations
hodies, as well as other international and nongovernmental orga1111ations, to continue providing
humanitarian a11d dt",clopment assistance so as to facilitatc a11d expedite the settlement of student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum
111 llnhwana. l ,e-;ntlw Swaziland and Zambia;
q
( 'ali\ 11pon agerwies and programmes of the United
l\;;it11•11, w~tcm In co11tmue c'O operating with the Secre-
