S/2015/620

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 August 2015
Original: English

Thirtieth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2190 (2014), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) until 30 September 2015 and
requested me to keep it informed of the situation on the ground and the
implementation of the mandate of UNMIL. The present report provides an update
on major developments since my report of 23 April 2015 ( S/2015/275) and
recommendations for the extension of the mandate of and further adjustments t o the
Mission.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
During the reporting period, political discourse was focused on the expectation
that the Government would fully assume its complete security responsibilities from
UNMIL by 30 June 2016, which led to increased scrutiny of the performance and
accountability of the State security agencies. Public perceptions of widespread
corruption and the proposal, made in the context of the constitutional review
process, that Liberia should be declared a Christian nation also captured public
attention.
3.
Legislative engagement in security sector reform intensified amid concerns
about police misconduct. In April, the involvement of the Deputy Director for
Operations of the Liberia National Police in a road incident that fuelled existing
tensions between the police and commercial motorcyclists was discussed in the
House of Representatives. On 30 April, the Minister of Justice and the Inspector
General of Police provided a briefing to the House on a confrontation that had
occurred between the police and commercial motorcyclists in the Paynesville area
of Monrovia and proposed initiatives to minimize tensions and prevent the
reoccurrence of violence. The following day, the President, Ellen Johnson -Sirleaf,
dismissed three senior police officials: the Deputy Director for Operatio ns, the
Assistant Director for Administration and the Assistant Director for Intelligence.
The Senate defence committee, while not disagreeing with the dismissals, expressed
the view that the President’s actions had undermined efforts by the Legislature to

15-13127 (E)

180815

*1513127*

S/2015/620

resolve tensions between the police and commercial
recommended a national dialogue on security sector reform.

motorcyclists

and

4.
The Legislature debated challenges to the implementation of the Government ’s
UNMIL transition plan. Lawmakers highlighted the capacity shortcomings of the
national security agencies and the inadequacy of the $15 million initially allocated
in the draft national budget for 2015/16 to support the implementation of the plan.
Some legislators called upon UNMIL to delay its drawdown. The Legislature
reviewed the justice and security sector budget performance reports in order to
inform decisions on current budget allocations and directed the Minister of Justice
to present a realistic budget plan to strengthen security in identified hi gh-threat
areas. The Senate recommended that the Government should seek support from
international partners to complement funding for the security transition. On 17 June,
my Special Representative for Liberia, Karin Landgren, met the legislative leaders
to encourage them to support the security sector by leading public confidence
initiatives and providing the necessary resources and effective oversight. On 22 July,
the House endorsed the national budget, increasing to $20 million the allocations for
the security transition, subject to the realization of a contingency revenue target of
$10 million; the Senate concurred on 6 August.
5.
Speculation about financial difficulties in the oil sector contributed to public
concern that future revenue collection might be at risk. On 16 June, the Senate
discussed a preliminary report in which the serious financial challenges facing the
National Oil Company of Liberia were highlighted. It emphasized that various
factors, including the fall in oil prices, the departure of some companies from
Liberia and management deficiencies, such as an unnecessarily large staff and
excessive benefits for staff and board members, might undermine the oil
programme. On 23 June, the President annulled resolutions of the National Oil
Company of Liberia and the National Port Authority that provided considerable
benefits for departing senior managers and board members.
6.
On 25 June, the Minister of Education announced that the 2015 academic year
would end on 31 July without testing and with limited opportunities for promoting
pupils. Pupils staged protests in Monrovia and several counties, and the House of
Representatives, which had directed the Minister to keep the schools open, sought to
summon the President, the Minister of Education and the Minister of Information,
Cultural Affairs and Tourism.
7.
Changes were made to the Cabinet. On 28 May, the Senate confirmed George
Werner, whose earlier nomination for Minister of Health and Social Welfare had
been rejected, as the Minister of Education. In June, it confirmed the nominations of
the new Minister and Deputy Minister of Health and Social Welfare,
notwithstanding initial debate on whether to suspend the confirmation hearings
pending a review of the compliance audit by the General Auditing Co mmission of
the incident management system of the National Ebola Task Force, in which the two
officials were cited.
8.
On 21 April, the River Cess County by-election was held to fill a seat in the
House of Representatives left vacant by the previous incumb ent’s victory in the
senatorial elections of December 2014. The election, which was won by the
candidate from the Movement for Progressive Change, was conducted peacefully,
with a turnout of 42 per cent. Litigation relating to the December elections
continued, however. Some 20 complaints were resolved by the National Elections

2/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

Commission and 10 by the Supreme Court. One case remained pending before the
Court, regarding Maryland County. In addition, a decision of the Court to order a
partial recount of the senatorial elections in Lofa County resulted in a third case
pending before the Commission. On 7 August, the Court ordered that polls should
be conducted again in three precincts in Bong County.
9.
Political actors were focused on the presidential elections to be held in 2017,
viewed by some as representing a viable opportunity for all candidates because
there will be no incumbent candidate. Recognizing that no single political party is
likely to win without a run-off, parties, including the opposition Congress for
Democratic Change and the Liberty Party, have already begun to seek alliances.
Several candidates have been petitioned by their constituencies to contest the
election, including the Vice-President, Joseph Boakai, Senator George Weah of the
Congress for Democratic Change and Charles Brumskine of the Liberty Party.

B.

National reconciliation, political reforms and governance
10. Some progress was made towards developing a methodology and operational
guidelines for the Palava Hut mediation and dialogue programme. The reporting
period was dominated, however, by the constitutional review process, in particular
reactions to the proposed amendment to declare Liberia a Christian nation, which
caused divisions along religious lines. Muslim organizations challenged the legality
of the proposal, whereas some Christian organizations advocated holding a
referendum on it. The President and the President of the Senate pro tempore
appealed for national unity and religious tolerance, whereas senators such as Jew el
Howard Taylor and Prince Yormie Johnson campaigned in favour of the proposal.
On 19 May, some 200 Muslims protested at the Legislature and submitted a petition
against the proposal. The Liberia Council of Churches is consulting its members,
given the diverse views within the Christian community. Although the Constitution
Review Committee has submitted the final report on the review process to the
President, no amendment proposals have yet been submitted to the Legislature.
11. On 5 May, the Women of Liberia Constitutional Review Task Force finalized a
strategic framework for advocacy on women’s issues and engagement in the
constitutional review process. Discussions were also conducted in the House of
Representatives committee on gender equity and child d evelopment with women
leaders to discuss the harmonization of draft gender parity proposals introduced in
the Legislature in August 2013 and proposals made during the constitutional review
process to advance gender equality.
12. Other governance initiatives also moved forward during the reporting period.
Following the launch of a national deconcentration platform in February, the first
county service centre was opened in Grand Bassa County on 30 June. Training of
county-based civil servants began in June with a workshop for 60 public officials.
Draft policies on land dispute resolution and land administration were presented to
the executive branch in April. The former provided guidelines and mechanisms for
the resolution of land disputes and the latter defined the administrative framework
on land management to support the Liberia land authority once it is established. On
14 June, the Government released $1 million to the reconfigured National Benefit sharing Trust Board for distribution as part of the Government’s debt of $2 million
in unpaid benefits to communities affected by forestry concession operations.

15-13127

3/21

S/2015/620

13. As noted in my previous report, on 7 April the General Auditing Commission
submitted to the Senate its compliance audit on Ebola Task Force disbursem ents
from some bank accounts. On 13 May, the Task Force submitted a defence of the
financial irregularities noted in the Commission’s audit, in which it acknowledged
non-compliance with the required public financial management and procurement
laws while also asserting that the auditors had applied “unrealistic and unreasonable
requirements”. It argued that it should not be held responsible for financial
irregularities emanating from transactions carried out under instructions from
various ministries. On 20 May, the Commission issued a statement in defence of the
audit in which it declared its commitment to fulfilling its legal mandate
notwithstanding the threats and intimidation that had followed the publication of the
audit.
14. Limited progress was made with regard to tackling corruption, which
dominated public attention. The General Auditing Commission published several
reports, including on the administration of infrastructure projects by the Ministry of
Public Works, in which it detailed irregularities and internal control deficiencies. On
22 April, the President suspended with pay the Managing Director and Comptroller of
the National Port Authority on the basis of the findings of the Liberia Anti -Corruption
Commission and, on 20 July, the Ministry of Justice filed an indictment in the case.
No indictments were issued in cases that the Commission had forwarded to the
Ministry for prosecution in 2014.
15. Transparency and accountability improved in the extractive sector and in
public revenue-generating entities. The National Bureau of Concessions developed a
concessions monitoring template and is establishing a national concessions cadastre,
which is a specialized automated property rights registry for overseeing the granting
and managing of exploration and exploitation licences for natural resources. A new
steering committee of the Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative was
constituted following the expiration of the mandate of its former members; focal
points were appointed in each county to enhance transparency and accountability in
extractive resources governance. On 15 June, the Legislature ’s joint public accounts
committee began 12 investigations of revenue -generating entities on the basis of
previous reports by the General Auditing Commission, which included the Liberia
Revenue Authority and the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning in their
handling of iron ore sales. In addition, the trial of former senior officials of the
Forestry Development Authority on charges of illegal issua nce of logging licences,
which allegedly caused a loss in revenue of $6 million, continued. On 25 June, the
President announced a series of government transparency targets as part of the Open
Government Partnership, focusing on citizen participation, accou ntability and
integrity, as well as technology and innovation.

C.

Security situation
16. The security situation remained stable but fragile. Insecurity was characterized
by incidents of public discontent that resulted in violence, including tensions
between commercial motorcyclists and security personnel and between
concessionaires and affected communities, as well as protests for post -Ebola care
and compensation.

4/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

17. On 14 April, an off-duty soldier allegedly killed a commercial motorcyclist in
the Paynesville area of Monrovia. Following an investigation, it was recommended
that four individuals should be charged for their alleged involvement in the death.
On 16 April, eight police officers were injured and six police stations damaged in
the same area of Monrovia during a confrontation between the police and more than
1,000 community members and commercial motorcyclists. The violence erupted
after a motorcyclist was killed while being apprehended by the police, following an
unsuccessful attempt to avoid arrest for a traffic violation. Charges were brought
against 30 motorcyclists for offences committed during the incident and a police
officer was charged with murder for the death of the motorcyclist.
18. On 7 May, some 40 workers of the Golden Veroleum Liberia palm oil
concession in Sinoe County who were seeking salary increases staged a violent
protest during which they temporarily detained senior company officials. On 26 May,
more than 200 young people protesting at another Golden Veroleum Liberia fac ility
in Sinoe County against the alleged failure to conduct sufficient consultations with
affected communities and obtain their free and informed consent before signing
concession agreements became violent after being denied access to a senior
company official, looting and destroying property and injuring government and
company officials. In both incidents, UNMIL military and police units were
deployed to support the national police in restoring stability. Communities and civil
society organizations stepped up their calls for a review of the legal framework
governing concessions to accommodate their interests.
19. On 2 June, residents of the Gardnersville area of Monrovia staged a peaceful
demonstration against government plans to proceed with mass evictio ns following
the designation of the area as industrial land. The Government temporarily
suspended the evictions. UNMIL actively encouraged all stakeholders to seek a
peaceful resolution of the matter.
20. Public discontent over post-Ebola recovery measures resulted in
demonstrations by Ebola survivors, demanding medical care, and by health -care
workers, demanding payment of moneys and other benefits for their work during the
epidemic.

D.

Regional issues
21. The situation in the area bordering Côte d’Ivoire remained generally stable,
notwithstanding the incidents detailed in my report of 7 May 2015 on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2015/320). In addition, Ivorians
reportedly engaged in incidents of looting and abductions, as well as illegal farming
and logging, in Liberia. On 27 April, six Ivorians suspected of illegal farming were
arrested and deported. On 9 July, 2,000 rounds of sho tgun ammunition were seized
from a Guinean who was crossing into Liberia.
22. On 25 June, community representatives, local and national government
officials and security personnel from Liberia and Côte d ’Ivoire met for the first time
since the closure of the border as a result of the Ebola epidemic in 2014. At the
meeting, facilitated by the Danish Refugee Council, the participants discussed
tensions resulting from security incidents that had triggered the displacement of
Ivorians into Liberia and reports of incidents of shooting at Liberians on the Cavalla
River by Ivorian forces, including a fatal shooting on 30 March. In addition, efforts

15-13127

5/21

S/2015/620

were made to revitalize the Mano River Union cross -border security strategy, which
has been incorporated into the post-Ebola recovery strategy. The Governments of
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire postponed the second session of the joint council of chiefs
and elders scheduled for May until after the elections in Côte d ’Ivoire, to be held in
October.

E.

Humanitarian situation
23. On 9 May, Liberia was declared free of Ebola by the World Health
Organization, following 42 days since the last laboratory-confirmed victim was
buried. On 29 June, however, Ebola resurfaced with a new death, followed by five
infected persons linked to that index case, one of whom also died. The Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare swiftly reacted and galvanized support for the response
from the United Nations and other humanitarian partners. On 20 July, four Ebola
survivors were released from a treatment centre in Monrovia. Humanitarian partners
adjusted their support to focus on the recovery of the health -care system and
building resilience for future shocks, and essential health -care services and
immunization campaigns resumed. On 12 May, the President released a plan for
building a resilient health-care system, which included priority areas for investment,
namely the health-care workforce, health-care infrastructure, and epidemic
preparedness, surveillance and response. The Office of the United Nat ions High
Commissioner for Human Rights continued to lead the protection cluster that
monitored human rights-related Ebola recovery issues and advocated against
stigmatization of and discrimination against vulnerable groups, including survivors
of and children orphaned by Ebola.
24. As at 1 August, Liberia was hosting 38,480 registered Ivorian refugees, with
29,719 in camps and 8,761 in host communities. More than 8,000 have expressed
interest in returning to Côte d’Ivoire. Facilitated voluntary repatriation remained
suspended, however, and the Ivorian borders remained closed as at 1 August.
Notwithstanding the agreement reached between the Governments of Côte d ’Ivoire
and Liberia and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in March, the process was subsequently suspended indefinitely by the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire.
25. The Legislature continued to consider a bill submitted on 24 February that
would establish a national disaster management agency.

F.

Human rights situation
26. During the reporting period, long-standing human rights issues such as
harmful traditional practices, including female genital mutilation and forced
initiation into secret societies, remained of concern. The incidence of sexual and
gender-based violence, including rape, remained high and, notwithstanding the
existence of national programmes to tackle child sexual abuse, rape of minors
continued to account for most reported cases. The Government, with United Nations
support, organized community dialogues in 10 counties, focusing on strategies for
community engagement and ownership in combating sexual and gender -based
violence, which resulted in the elaboration of a joint programme strategic
framework that was validated by stakeholders on 1 July.

6/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

27. In May, with UNMIL technical support, Liberia participated in the second
cycle of the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council, during which
concern was expressed about the failure to implement some recommendations made
during the first cycle, in 2010, including in areas such as implementing the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, combating sexual
and gender-based violence and discrimination against women, eliminating female
genital mutilation and other harmful traditional pr actices, abolishing the death
penalty, strengthening the justice and security sector and ratifying outstanding
human rights treaties. Liberia was commended, however, for the progress made in
other areas, including launching a national human rights action p lan, ratifying the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, adopting the Children ’s Law,
which furthers children’s rights in line with international standards, and introducing
a road map for national healing, peacebuilding and reconciliation.
28. The steering committee of the national human rights action plan continued to
engage with State and civil society stakeholders in developing strategies to support
and monitor the implementation of the plan and worked to establish human rights
focal points in ministries and other relevant institutions, a priority for effective
coordination and reporting. In June, UNMIL organized a training session on
mainstreaming human rights and gender for 25 officers in government agencies,
civil society organizations and the Independent National Commission on Human
Rights.
29. The effectiveness of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights
continued to be undermined by internal weaknesses and inadequate governance
procedures. The contracts of human rights mo nitors deployed in eight counties that
were initially funded through the Peacebuilding Fund ended in June and could not
be extended through the government budget, raising concerns about the ability of
the Commission to sustain its presence in the counties, as required for handling
public complaints. Following advocacy by the United Nations and civil society, in
May the Commission appointed 10 monitors on the Government ’s payroll, who are
deployed to four counties.

G.

Economic situation
30. Owing to the Ebola crisis, economic growth for 2014 fell from a projected
5.9 per cent to between 0.7 and 0.9 per cent, a rate projected to continue in 2015.
The cumulative loss of output was equivalent to 7.7 per cent of the gross domestic
product, given that most sectors experienced contraction and investment, while
expansion in the extractive and agricultural sectors was suspended. Mining output
fell from 4.4 to 1.0 per cent and the World Bank forecast for agricultural output
growth fell from 3.5 to 1.3 per cent in 2014. Tax revenue also declined by 20.5 per
cent from the pre-crisis projections for 2014.
31. On 2 June, the President submitted to the Legislature a draft national budget for
2015/16 totalling $604 million, a decrease of 4.9 per cent from the previous b udget. It
included support for the Agenda for Transformation, the post-Ebola Economic
Stabilization and Recovery Plan and the UNMIL transition plan. Allocations included
$186.8 million (31 per cent) for public administration and $90.4 million (15 per cent)
for the rule of law and security sectors, including $15 million for activities relating to
the security transition. Major expenditure included $252.1 million for salaries

15-13127

7/21

S/2015/620

(41.7 per cent), $79.4 million for education sector support, $73.0 million for the
health sector and $23.2 million for the Social Development Fund. Domestic revenue
of $465.61 million is expected to support the budget, with the remaining funds to be
provided by grants and budget support programmes ($66.23 million), loans
($58.6 million) and the surplus from the 2014/15 fiscal year ($13.58 million). On
22 July, the House of Representatives approved a budget of $622.74 million, which
was followed by Senate concurrence on 6 August.
32. Consumer price inflation declined to 7.3 per cent in Ma rch 2015 from 13.5 per
cent in September 2014. In an effort to expand the fiscal space and meet the
post-Ebola recovery needs, the Government began a joint review of the portfolios of
internal financial institutions and other development partners to repro gramme
existing funds. On 10 July, I hosted an international Ebola recovery conference that
led to the three most affected countries receiving pledges of more than $5 billion, of
which Liberia received pledges of $812 million towards the implementation of the
Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan for recovery and resilience projects from
2015 to 2017, in addition to the disbursement of $1.6 billion in funds committed by
partners before the crisis.

III. Development of national security and justice capacity
A.

Security transition
33. The Government increased its focus on developing capacity to fully assume
complete security responsibilities from UNMIL by 30 June 2016, in line with its
transition plan. The capability of security sector institutio ns to effectively manage
the implementation of their respective components of the plan, however, remained
of concern. The joint implementation group, comprising senior representatives of
the Government, UNMIL and the donor community, is responsible for mon itoring
the implementation of the plan. It held its first meeting on 3 June, during which the
need for additional funding for the security sector was highlighted. Subsequently, a
detailed breakdown of transition-related costs was developed to facilitate donor
support. The Ministry of Justice assessed that $37 million was needed in 2015/16, of
which $20 million has been allocated to date, as indicated in paragraph 4 above. To
ensure effective coordination, the United Nations developed a plan outlining suppor t
to the transition-related activities of the Government.
34. UNMIL engaged with national counterparts throughout the security sector to
encourage a structured and prioritized approach to the implementation of the
transition plan. Gradual improvements have been realized, including regular
meetings of the joint security committee convened by the Minister of Justice and of
a joint transition task force comprising government agencies and the United
Nations. UNMIL also supported the national authorities in rea ching out to
communities affected by the Mission’s drawdown, hosting radio programmes and
disseminating information to allay public anxiety.
35. The joint transition task force has identified and accorded priority to the
security responsibilities of UNMIL, including the destruction of explosives, security
at corrections facilities and airfield maintenance, as tasks that form an essential part
of the security transition process. As at 1 August, the Government had assumed
responsibility for cash escorts, security for the Office of the President and additional
guard duties.

8/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

B.

National security strategy and architecture
36. Progress was made, with UNMIL support, in finalizing the draft police and
immigration acts, which are aimed at professionalizing the police and the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization, bringing them into line with democratic principles.
Following consultations and a public validation exercise, the acts were expected to
be submitted to the President for review and onward submission to the Legislature.
Although three workshops in relation to the draft firearms and ammunition control
act have been held for the Legislature to date, the proposed legislation has remained
pending before a Senate committee since November 2014.
37. New county security councils were established in Maryland and Sinoe
counties, bringing their number to 10. County and district security councils have
been designed to play a prominent role in community security and are expected to
be established in all counties by 30 June 2016. Following joint training for security
sector agencies on weapons marking in March, 97 per cent of the military ’s weapons
had been marked and recorded by mid-July.

C.

National police
38. As at 1 August, there were 4,886 national police officers, of whom 17.6 per
cent were women. To achieve the target of an additional 1,600 officers by June
2016, the police training academy reduced the length of the basic curriculum from
nine to six months, including two months of field -based training. Furthermore, with
the support of UNMIL, the academy launched mobile training courses on
managerial competencies for 376 officers, including 60 women, throughout the
country.
39. Deployment remained limited beyond Montserrado County, where nearly
80 per cent of police officers are serving. A committee was established within the
police to make proposals on decentralization and to address structural and c ommand
issues. UNMIL had advocated the deployment of the 291 recruits who graduated in
May 2014 to counties where the police presence remained inadequate.
40. As indicated in paragraph 3 above, the President dismissed three senior police
officials in May, amid concerns expressed by the public and the Legislature about
abuse of power, misconduct and poor performance. Officers from within the police
ranks replaced the dismissed officials.
41. The professional standards division, with UNMIL support, dissemina ted to
police officers information on conduct and discipline and held community outreach
campaigns about citizens’ rights and mechanisms to report police misconduct, abuse
and corruption. Free telephone hotlines for reporting such cases were launched in
June.
42. In April, a strategic development framework detailing the substantive areas of
intervention necessary to enable the successful assumption of security
responsibilities from UNMIL was submitted to the police leadership for approval.
Priorities included reviewing the organizational structure and systems and
enhancing institutional integrity and oversight.
43. The incidents in Monrovia and Sinoe County detailed in paragraphs 17 and 18
above highlighted shortcomings with regard to police operational prep aredness and

15-13127

9/21

S/2015/620

response capability in addressing public disorder or crisis situations, as well as
weak command and control structures, resulting in uncoordinated responses at the
strategic, operational and tactical levels. The police demonstrated improved ca pacity
during the celebrations to mark Independence Day on 27 July, when enhanced
planning, deployment and coordination ensured that security and public order were
maintained effectively and proactively, the prior concession -related tensions in
Grand Kru and Sinoe counties notwithstanding. UNMIL, with donor support, sought
to increase targeted capacity-building aimed at enhancing command and control and
supported the operational coordination capacity of the police national operations
centre.
44. The Liberian transnational crime unit conducted several operations, including
investigations into drug trafficking, money-laundering and wildlife smuggling,
achievements that could be built upon with additional guidance from the unit ’s
executive management board.

D.

Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
45. As at 1 August, the strength of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
stood at 2,097 personnel, of whom 31.3 per cent were women. To achieve the
targeted strength of 3,000 officers by 2017, the Bureau is fast-tracking the training
of new recruits. On 7 June, training began for 254 recruits, for the first time
conducted by the Bureau’s training department at the former UNMIL camp in Sinje.
Renovation of the Bureau’s training facility in Foya remained in progress, given
that, absent of donor support, it depends entirely on government funding.
46. In April, the Bureau finalized its development framework, which accorded
priority to a review of its organizational structure and systems, institutional i ntegrity
and oversight, and the need to retrench officers deemed unfit for service.

E.

Judicial, legal and corrections institutions
47. Prolonged pretrial detention and the resulting overcrowding of prisons, and the
associated human rights and due process issues, remained intractable concerns. As
at 1 August, persons held in pretrial detention accounted for 68 per cent of the
prison population nationwide and as much as 82 per cent of the population of the
Monrovia Central Prison. Training was held for court inspectors and judicial
instructors on court administration and for police officers and prosecutors on
effective investigation and prosecution. Under the guidance of the task force on
pretrial detention, supported by UNMIL and bilateral partners, a case tracking
initiative for serious crimes resulted in indictments being filed in more than
100 cases. Challenges remained, however, in terms of the capacity of the criminal
justice system to bring those cases to trial in a timely manner.
48. UNMIL continued to call for efforts to address systemic problems in the
justice system, including the limited public defence capacity and the absence of a
national policy for legal aid. It also continued to engage with national partners in
finalizing the national law reform policy and supported the police in a pilot project
aimed at increasing focus on upholding human rights and reducing prolonged
detention. In July, it launched a project to support government efforts to establish a

10/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

witness protection programme, which was needed to strengthen national capacity to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, including corruption.
49. The Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection trained its staff
throughout the country on data collection and coordination of cases of sexual and
gender-based violence to strengthen information coordination and targeted
intervention. A database to track cases of such violence was established in June at
the Ministry of Justice, facilitating an increase in the number of indictments.
50. In June, the Justice and Security Board, co-chaired by representatives of the
Ministry of Justice, the judiciary and UNMIL, agreed to refocus the priorities at the
justice and security hubs in Zwedru and Harper, moving from infrastructure to the
priority services identified in the security transition plan. The Board also
highlighted the need for improved coordination and timely provision of information
on the use of government funds before external sources of funding were allocated to
support the transition.
51. As at 1 August, the prison population stood at 1,888 prisoners, an increase of
8.8 per cent since 15 April. UNMIL continued to augment the capacity of the Bureau
of Corrections and Rehabilitation with regard to prison management, including
through advocacy, training and co-location. With support from the Government of
Sweden, capacity-building on prison security and the use of non-lethal force
contributed to a decrease of 26 per cent in the number of prison escapes. On 26 May,
a national prison strategic plan was submitted to the Ministry of Justice, aimed at
professionalizing the Bureau by strengthening prison oversight, in coordination with
the Independent National Commission on Human Rights, and advancing partnerships
with the United Nations country team. The lack of political will to move away from
the use of incarceration, together with insufficient budgeting, has, however, impeded
progress.

F.

Armed forces
52. As at 1 August, 1,915 personnel, including 76 women, were serving in the
armed forces. Liberia continued to contribute a platoon to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The army received
predeployment training by the Government of the United States of America through
its Operation Onward Liberty.

IV. Deployment of the Mission
53. By its resolution 2215 (2015), the Security Council authorized the resumption
of the drawdown of UNMIL after determining, consistent with resolution 2190
(2014), that Liberia had made significant progress in combating the Ebola outbreak
that had posed a threat to the country’s peace and stability. The drawdown would
bring the authorized military and police strengths of the Mission to 3,590 and 1,515
personnel, respectively, by September 2015. In addition, the Council requested me to
continue to streamline the activities of UNMIL across its civilian, police and military
components, taking into account the downsizing of the military and police
components, as well as the narrowing of the Mission’s mandate pursuant to resolution
2190 (2014), with a view to consolidating the civilian, military and police presence of

15-13127

11/21

S/2015/620

UNMIL in line with the expectation of the Council that the Government would fully
assume its security responsibilities from the Mission no later than 30 June 201 6.

A.

Military component
54. As indicated in my previous reports, UNMIL has been progressively drawing
down since 2006, bringing the Mission from its peak authorized strength of 15,250
to the current authorized strength of 4,811. As at 1 August, the UNMIL military
strength stood at 3,753 personnel, including 144 women. The military component
included a force headquarters in Monrovia and three infantry battalions deployed in
Monrovia and along the country’s borders with Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea.
55. Pursuant to resolution 2215 (2015), UNMIL withdrew 892 troops by 1 August,
including those from its quick reaction force (650 troops) and engineering
(170 personnel) and aviation (43 personnel) units, nine staff officers and 20 military
observers. In August, further reductions will be effected in the medical
(60 personnel), transport (58 personnel) and engineering (191 personnel) units, in
addition to 20 staff officers and eight military observers, bringing the force within
the new authorized ceiling of 3,590 by September.
56. Given that infantry are no longer present in 7 of the 15 counties, the force is
focused on high-risk areas and has shifted to a more mobile posture, in order to
project military effect. In accordance with resolution 2190 (2014), UNMI L
continues to protect the population within its capabilities and areas of deployment,
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the Liberian authorities.
57. In view of the expectation of the Security Council that the Government will
fully assume its security responsibilities from UNMIL by 30 June 2016, further
reductions of the force are possible. From 1 July 2016, at which point the Liberian
authorities would have fully assumed routine security and stability tasks, including
deterrence and the protection of civilians, it is envisaged that the Mission would
consolidate one battalion in Monrovia with the related enablers, in particular
aviation, for the purpose of providing a rapid response capability for the national
security agencies should the security situation seriously deteriorate. Retaining that
capacity for an appropriate period to assess and test the capacity of the Liberian
security agencies to maintain security and stability independently of the
peacekeeping operation would allow the Mission to remain in a position to respond,
if required, to any incident that could risk a strategic reversal. The quick reaction
force established within UNOCI in accordance with resolution 2162 (2014) would
provide over-the-horizon support to UNMIL in the event of a serious deterioration
in the security situation in Liberia, without prejudice to its primary responsibility
for providing security in Côte d’Ivoire.
58. Specifically, it is proposed that, by 1 July 2016, the UNMIL force comprise
1,240 military personnel, including a battalion (700 troops), a support company
(55 troops), a force headquarters (40 personnel), six military utility helicopters
(174 personnel), a level II hospital (87 personnel), transport (44 personnel) and
engineering (80 personnel) units, as well as 50 military observers and 10 military
police officers, which would remain in Liberia until the withdrawal of the Mission.
Recommendations in that regard would be provided in a future report, after the
conclusion of the security transition, taking into account the performance of
national security agencies and the situation on the ground.

12/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

B.

Police component
59. As at 1 August, the police strength of UNMIL stood at 1,389 personnel,
including 239 women, of an authorized strength of 1,79 5 personnel, with 498 police
and immigration advisers and 1,017 officers in eight formed police units. Three
units were deployed in Monrovia and one each in Gbarnga, Greenville,
Tubmanburg, Voinjama and Zwedru. There were also 29 corrections advisers.
60. Pursuant to resolution 2190 (2014), by which UNMIL was instructed to put
renewed focus on supporting the Government to achieve a successful transition by
helping to expedite its readiness to assume security responsibilities throughout
Liberia, the UNMIL police component adopted a county-based capacity-building
model in support of the national police and immigration authorities, with a focus on
improving management and leadership, including delegation of command and
control. It concentrated its technical and logistical resources at the county level,
supported by a specialist base in Monrovia focused on strategic and mid -level
management mentoring of the police, the immigration authorities, the transnational
crime unit and the police training academy. In addition, UNMIL is employing
strategies aimed at ensuring the deployment and retention of police advisers with
the requisite experience and specialist skills. Taking into account the reduction of
UNMIL field offices detailed in paragraph 63 below, it is propos ed that the number
of police and immigration advisers be gradually reduced, primarily through attrition,
reaching 226 by 1 July 2016.
61. Given the expectation of the Security Council that the security transition will
be concluded by 30 June 2016, additional reductions in the number of formed police
units are possible. Specifically, between January and June 2016, it is recommended
that five units be gradually withdrawn, leaving three, totalling some 400 personnel,
in Liberia by 1 July 2016, with one each deployed in Gbarnga, Monrovia and
Zwedru. They would have the primary task of securing the United Nations
personnel and installations that would remain in Liberia until the withdrawal of the
Mission. Recommendations in that regard would be provided after the conclusion of
the security transition, taking into account the performance of the national security
agencies and the situation on the ground.

C.

Civilian component
62. Adjustments continued to be made to the civilian component with a view to
enhancing the implementation of the streamlined substantive mandate accorded to it
under resolution 2190 (2014), specifically with regard to good offices and provision
of political support to critical political and institutional reform processes, as well as
in the development of Liberia and the deconcentration of the national security,
justice and human rights sectors, as required for a successful security transition
process.
63. Taking into account the request by the Security Council in resolution 2215
(2015) that the civilian presence of UNMIL streamline its activities and consolidate,
the number of sites occupied by members of the UNMIL military, police or civilian
component will be reduced from the current 73 to 52 by 30 June 2016 and include
five regional offices in Bomi, Bong, Grand Gedeh, Maryland and Montserrado
counties, in addition to UNMIL headquarters. The regional offices represent a

15-13127

13/21

S/2015/620

reduction from field offices in each of the 15 counties and will continue to advance
mandate implementation, in particular with regard to the security transition and
human rights, as well as good offices and political support for governance reform
processes, and support the Government in discharging its responsibility to protect
civilians. The regional offices will be consolidated in population and transportation
centres, selected on the basis of an integrated planning process. As at 1 August, field
offices had been closed in Montserrado and River Cess counties and their
responsibilities transferred to offices in Margibi and Grand Bassa counties,
respectively.
64. As at 1 August, 1,342 civilian personnel, including United Nations Volunteers,
were serving with UNMIL, of a budgeted total of 1,455. In total, 22.8 per cent of the
civilian personnel were women, including some 26 per cent of the 508 substantive
staff and 21 per cent of the 834 administrative staff.

D.

Support considerations
65. The rainy season, from May to October, presents unique challenges because
the limited road network cannot sustain major logistics movements and flight
operations are significantly reduced. There are no in-country commercial
alternatives to the UNMIL military and transport units that keep supply lines open
and there are also serious shortcomings in the national medical system. To sust ain
the deployment beyond Monrovia of civilian and police personnel, and to facilitate
the deployment in extremis of military personnel, including from UNOCI, UNMIL
will continue to require some level of critical enabling capability, including heavy lift ground transportation, air capability, sea transportation, engineering capacity
and medical facilities. Where feasible, UNMIL will seek to employ commercial
alternatives for the provision of enabling capability, including through pooled
common services with the United Nations country team. As part of a responsible
and well-managed drawdown, UNMIL will continue environmental clean-up
activities as military and other mission sites are closed and United Nations -owned
equipment is written off and disposed of, where appropriate.

E.

Conduct and discipline
66. UNMIL continued to raise awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse,
reaching out to young people and community members, including religious and
community leaders. During the reporting period, six allegat ions of serious
misconduct were recorded, including two of sexual exploitation and abuse.

F.

Security and safety of United Nations personnel
67. No major security incidents against United Nations personnel were recorded
during the reporting period, although three weapons-related crimes resulting in the
injury of two staff members, as well as 10 non-weapons-related crimes, were
committed. In addition, three staff members were injured in road traffic accidents.
There were 87 road traffic accidents involving United Nations personnel and two
reports of vandalism to United Nations property. Nine incidents of arrest and
detention of United Nations personnel were recorded.

14/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

V. Financial implications
68. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/259 B, appr opriated the amount of
$344.7 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of UNMIL
beyond 30 September 2015, the cost of maintaining the Mission until 30 June 2016
would be limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
69. As at 7 August, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNMIL amounted to $136.3 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,771.2 million.
70. As at 30 June, the amounts owed to troop and formed police contributors
totalled some $42.5 million. Reimbursement of troop/formed police costs had been
made up for the period up to 31 March, while partial reimbursement of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment had been made for the period up to 31 March, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
71. In less than a year, the Government of Liberia will assume all its security
responsibilities from UNMIL, marking a historic moment in post -conflict Liberia
when the fate of the country and the protection of its citizens will, for the first time
in more than a decade, be completely in the hands of the national authorities. It will
be an important milestone, a demonstration of confidence that the country has
turned the corner from conflict, disorder and dependence to a future of sustained
peace, unity and independence.
72. I welcome the important progress made to date by the Government, with
support from UNMIL and other partners. At the same time, challenges remain that
will require additional assistance on all fronts in order to complete the transition by
30 June 2016 in line with the expectation of the Security Council. All stakeholders
must sustain their focus on implementing the ambitious transition plan developed by
the Government and also on the national reconciliation and continuing political
reforms that are essential for consolidating peace. In addition, successfully
implementing the transition plan will require appropriate -level engagement within
ministries and security agencies, so that timely decisions may be taken and the
necessary change effected. I therefore call upon the leaders of State institutions to
remain proactive in directing and overseeing the implementation of the transition
plan.
73. The increased engagement of the members of the Legislature in security sector
reform is most welcome, especially given their crucial oversight role and statutory
responsibility as the representatives of the people of Liberia. I welcome the
legislators’ interest in conducting a national dialogue on security sector reform that
could potentially lead to a social compact between the security actors and the
public. All citizens — community members and leaders, traditional authorities and
civil society — must have meaningful opportunities to share their vision of how
Liberian security agencies should protect civilians, given that a good relationship
and trust between security actors and the public are essential for stability. I urge that
the draft police and immigration services acts be submitted in a timely fashion to
the Office of the President and trust that the y would thereafter be submitted for the

15-13127

15/21

S/2015/620

urgent action of the Legislature and receive prompt attention, given that they are
critical to the success of the security transition. I remain concerned that important
legislation, such as the draft firearms and ammunition control act, has been pending
with the Legislature for more than half a year.
74. Important efforts have been made to professionalize the national security and
defence institutions and to enhance their accountability. The establishment of a
change management committee within the national police could help to develop
management capacity, which is required to transform the agency. Strengthened
management and leadership capacity remains an important priority throughout the
security sector. The operational mandate of the transnational crime unit needs to be
strengthened and the support provided by national, regional and international
stakeholders should be enhanced and delivered in a more coordinated and
systematic way in order for the unit to achieve its mandate of preventing the spread
of organized crime in Liberia, especially as UNMIL draws down. I have long
expressed concern about the failure to hold individual security officers accountable
for abuses under the law and am therefore encouraged by the recent action taken by
the Government to further accountability for such abuses.
75. A successful security transition also requires strengthened justice, human
rights and corrections institutions. I am concerned by the reversal of the gains
realized during the Ebola outbreak in reducing pretrial detention, as well as by the
persistently poor conditions in corrections institutions. I urge the Government and
its partners to pay renewed attention to tackling those persistent challenges.
76. I am also concerned about a recent surge in violent public disturbances, which
underscores deficiencies in the response capacity of the police. There remains an
urgent need to deploy police officers and other security actors, with the necessary
logistical support, beyond Monrovia and to increase their understanding and
application of human rights standards.
77. The undercurrent of public discontent and alienation expressed through violent
disturbances emphasizes the urgency of taking forward a meaningful national
reconciliation process in order to heal social cleavages that leave many feeling
excluded from opportunities. Addressing feelings of marginalization will require
increased transparency in the public sector, stronger commitment to combating
corruption and active promotion of dialogue on decentralization and concession
processes. Six years ago, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission released its final
report, which contained important recommendations for advancing reconciliation
and addressing fundamental aspects of accountability, which are essential for lasting
peace. Many of those recommendations have yet to be implemented. I once again
urge the people and Government of Liberia to engage in a meaningful dialogue
about how to take the critical reconciliation process forward.
78. The persistently high incidence of sexual and gender -based violence, including
rape, especially of minors, is of serious concern, although I recognize that renewed
efforts have been made to tackle that scourge, including community engagement and
effective tracking. While I welcome the deployment of human rights monitors by
the Independent National Commission on Human Rights, I remain concerned about
the Commission’s ability to plan and budget effectively. The Government should
redouble its efforts to provide the Commission with resources adequate for it to
carry out its duties fully. I also recall the responsibility of the Government to submit
its outstanding reports to the treaty bodies and to implement the pending

16/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

recommendations made during the universal periodic review process, including with
regard to outlawing female genital mutilation and abolishing the death penalty.
79. After more than a year of national tragedy amid an Ebola outbreak that had an
impact on nearly all aspects of the State and society, I am profoundly relieved that
Liberia was declared free of Ebola on 9 May. There remains, however, a need for
vigilance, given the continued presence of the disease in the subregion and unknown
factors about its transmission. Indeed, on 29 June, Liberia registered an Ebolarelated death, to which five additional cases were subsequently linked. While
regretting that the disease has reappeared in Liberia, I welcome the determination of
the people and Government to respond swiftly and decisivel y to prevent a reversal
in the gains made in efforts to combat the spread of the virus, as demonstrated by,
among others, the protection of survivors against stigmatization and discrimination
and the provision of effective treatment that allowed four newly infected persons to
be released, cured, from the treatment centre.
80. An important lesson to be drawn from the Ebola epidemic is the importance of
strong regional and bilateral cooperation mechanisms. I therefore call upon the
States members of the Mano River Union to continue their efforts aimed at
establishing effective cross-border coordination mechanisms, which would help to
address risks that cannot be contained within borders, including security threats and
health crises. Furthermore, I strongly encourage the Governments of Liberia and
Côte d’Ivoire to maintain the momentum of their bilateral cooperation, including
within the framework of the quadripartite meetings with UNMIL and UNOCI. I
reiterate my expectation that the two Governments will take a ction to investigate
and bring to justice the murderers of the UNOCI peacekeepers in 2012.
81. Taking into account the crucial tasks that must be completed to achieve a
successful transition of the security responsibilities of UNMIL to the Liberian
authorities, in a responsible manner that mitigates, to the extent possible, the risk of
reversing the hard-won gains made since the end of the civil war, I recommend that
the mandate of UNMIL be extended for a year, until 30 September 2016. Given that
the Government will become fully responsible for security and stability tasks,
including protection of civilians, upon the conclusion of the security transition on
30 June 2016, I also recommend a drawdown of UNMIL uniformed personnel, as
detailed in paragraphs 58, 60 and 61 above, resulting in an authorized strength of
1,240 military personnel and 606 police personnel by 1 July 2016. UNMIL military
and formed police units would focus primarily on protecting United Nations
personnel and installations and would be available as a rapid response capability for
the Liberian security agencies in the event of a serious deterioration in the security
situation, until the withdrawal of the Mission. In addition, the quick reaction force
established within UNOCI in accordance with resolution 2162 (2014) would
provide support, if required, without prejudice to its primary responsibility of
fulfilling the Operation’s mandate. Meanwhile, the civilian presence of UNMIL will
continue to be consolidated, as detailed in paragraph 63.
82. The conclusion of the security transition should trigger a reimagining of United
Nations engagement in Liberia. I therefore intend to provide, in a report after the
conclusion of the transition, recommendations on the future of UNMIL and possible
successor options, taking into account the performance of the Liberian security
agencies and the situation in the country. As I advised in my report of 15 August
2014 (S/2014/598), however, Liberia will require long-term support in

15-13127

17/21

S/2015/620

professionalizing and sustaining its institutions and developing its infrastructure and
should urgently explore options for bilateral or regional partnerships in preparation
for the withdrawal of UNMIL.
83. I wish to express my appreciation to Karin Landgren for her service as my
Special Representative for Liberia and to Antonio Vigilante, who has served as the
Officer-in-Charge of UNMIL since her departure. I also wish to thank all United
Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace in Liberia,
in addition to troop- and police-contributing countries, the African Union, ECOWAS,
the Mano River Union and other regional organizations, multilateral and bilateral
partners, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental
organizations and other partners for their sustained support in consolidating peace in
Liberia.

18/21

15-13127

S/2015/620

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police
strength as at 1 August 2015
Military component
Country

15-13127

Military
observers Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Police officers

Argentina

–

–

–

–

9

Bangladesh

9

8

508

525

20

Benin

2

1

–

3

–

Bhutan

–

–

–

–

6

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

2

1

–

3

–

Bosnia and Herzegovina

–

–

–

–

7

Brazil

2

2

–

4

–

Bulgaria

2

–

–

2

–

China

2

6

558

566

Denmark

3

2

–

5

–

Ecuador

2

1

–

3

–

Egypt

8

–

–

8

4

Ethiopia

11

6

–

17

–

Fiji

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

–

1

–

1

–

France

–

1

–

1

–

Gambia

2

–

–

2

8

Germany

2

–

–

2

5

Ghana

13

8

814

835

30

India

–

–

–

–

244

12

Jordan

–

–

–

–

232

16

Kenya

–

–

–

–

25

Kyrgyzstan

3

–

–

3

3

Lithuania

–

–

–

–

1

Malaysia

6

1

–

7

–

Namibia

1

3

–

4

9

Nepal

2

3

15

20

Niger

2

–

–

2

Nigeria

10

7

1 372

1 389

Norway

–

–

–

–

20

Pakistan

9

9

121

139

–

Paraguay

1

1

–

2

–

Poland

2

–

–

2

3

Republic of Korea

1

1

–

2

3

140

4

259

26

120

35

–

19/21

S/2015/620

Military component
Country

20/21

Military
observers Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Police officers

Republic of Moldova

1

–

–

1

–

Romania

2

–

–

2

2

Russian Federation

3

–

–

3

5

Rwanda

–

–

–

–

3

Serbia

5

–

–

5

2

Sri Lanka

–

–

–

–

19

Sweden

–

–

–

–

14

Switzerland

–

–

–

–

1

Thailand

–

–

–

–

2

Togo

2

1

–

3

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

9

Uganda

–

–

–

–

9

Ukraine

2

2

174

178

18

United States of America

4

4

–

8

2

Uruguay

–

–

–

–

–

Yemen

–

1

–

1

10

Zambia

2

–

–

2

22

Zimbabwe

3

–

–

3

30

Total

121

70

3 562

3 753

995

393

15-13127

S/2015/620

15-13127

21/21
