A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/47/233
14 September 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 31
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/47/L.64)]
47/233.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2837 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 33/138 of
19 December 1978, 39/88 of 13 December 1984, 45/45 of 28 November 1990, 46/77
of 12 December 1991, 46/140 of 17 December 1991 and 46/220 of 20 December
1991,
Conscious of the increasingly important role of the United Nations in
fulfilling the purposes set forth in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling that the Organization is based on the principle of the
sovereign equality of all its Members,
Recognizing in this regard that the General Assembly is the only
principal organ of the United Nations consisting of all the Members of the
United Nations in which each Member State has equal opportunity to participate
in the decision-making process,
Emphasizing the importance of the functions and powers of the General
Assembly in any questions or any matters within the scope of the charter, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter,
Desiring to undertake efforts to enhance the capacity of the General
Assembly to fulfil the role envisaged for it under the Charter and increase
its effectiveness in the interest of strengthening the overall work of the
Organization,
Underlining that the revitalization of the General Assembly should be
addressed in a comprehensive manner,

I . ..
93-50052

A/RES/47/233
Page 2

Recognizing in this regard the need, as a first step, to rationalize the
Committee structure of the General Assembly to respond better to the
requirements of the new phase of international relations,
Recognizing also the importance of the reports of the Security Council
and other principal organs of the United Nations to the General Assembly and
of their substantive and in-depth consideration by the Assembly,
1.

Decides that the Main Committees of the General Assembly shall be

as follows:
(~)
Disarmament and International Security Committee (First
Committee);
(£)

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee);

(Q)

Economic and Financial Committee (Second Committee);

(g)

Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee (Third Committee);

(g)

Administrative and Budgetary Committee (Fifth Committee);

(i)

Legal Committee (Sixth Committee);

2.
Also decides to amend the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly as set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
3.
Further decides that, as an interim measure and pending a decision
on the pattern of election of the six Chairmen of the Main Committees, the six
Chairmen of the Main Committees at the forty-eighth session shall be elected
as follows:
Two representatives from African States;
One representative from an Asian State;
One representative from an Eastern European State;
One representative from a Latin American or Caribbean State;
One representative from a Western European or other State;
4.
Recommends that, pending further consideration of the
revitalization process, the agenda items at present allocated to the Special
Political Committee and to the Fourth Committee be allocated at the fortyeighth session to the new Special Political and Decolonization Committee;
5.
Encourages Member States to participate actively in a substantive
and in-depth discussion on, and consideration of, the reports of the Security
Council and other principal organs of the United Nations, in order to fulfil
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
6.
Decides to continue consideration of the revitalization process of
the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session in a comprehensive manner in
an informal open-ended working group, which will make proposals as appropriate
on questions relating to, inter alia, the rationalization of the agenda, the

I . ..

A/RES/47/233
Page 3

reports of the other principal organs of the United Nations in accordance with
the Charter and the reports requested of the Secretary-General;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-eighth
session the item entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly".
109th plenary meeting
17 August 1993

ANNEX
Rule 31 shall read as follows:
"The General Assembly shall elect a President and twenty-one
Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until the close of the session at
which they are elected. The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the
election of the Chairmen of the six Main Committees referred to in
rule 98, in such a way as to ensure the representative character of the
General Committee."
The first sentence of rule 38 shall read as follows:
"The General Committee shall comprise the President of the General
Assembly, who shall preside, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the
Chairmen of the six Main Committees."
Rule 98 is amended according to paragraph 1 of the present resolution.
