S/PV.7081

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7081st meeting

Thursday, 12 December 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

13-61575 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1361575*

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. The
representative of the African Union, Mr.Téte António,
will present the point of view of the continent on all of
these elements.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General and other eminent
representatives participating in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jim Yong
Kim, President of the World Bank, to participate in this
meeting. I welcome Mr. Kim, who will participate via
video-teleconference.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
persons to to participate in this meeting: Mr. Romano
Prodi, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel; Ambassador Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
Mr. Michel Reveyrand-de Menthon, European Union
Special Representative for the Sahel.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
express my deepest thanks to you, Mr. President, for
having organized the present meeting. We are gathered
here to uphold our commitment to the population of the
Sahel at a time when the needs are immense.
This meeting of the Security Council follows my
visit to Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad last month
with the President of the African Union Commission,
the President of the World Bank, the President of
the African Development Bank and the European
Commissioner for Development. We visited those
countries to demonstrate our solidarity, underscore
the links between peace and development, and make a
commitment to continue our support.
During that visit, the World Bank and the European
Union pledged to provide more than $8.2 billion to the
region. We will hear in some detail today how those
funds will be disbursed. In addition, we will hear a
briefing by my Special Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, on
the progress we have made in the implementation of the

2/25

12/12/2013

At every stop during the visit, I had in-depth
exchanges with national leaders, who are working to
meet the challenges and find solutions.
(spoke in English)
We took an important first step in Mali at the regional
meeting. African ministers as well as regional and
international organizations and financial institutions
came together to improve coordination and address
the Sahel’s fragility. They welcomed the African
Development Bank’s establishment of an action fund,
which will help jump-start underfunded projects and
contribute to longer-term development. Going forward,
the ministers will meet twice a year to calibrate
responses to the Sahel’s challenges.
I also had a very moving visit to Timbuktu. People
there are struggling to recover from human rights
abuses and upheaval. I was given an opportunity to
view the cultural treasures that had been damaged in
the attacks. This was a terrible loss for Mali and for
our common global heritage, but with UNESCO’s help,
we are moving to safeguard that heritage. I condemn
all attacks against places of worship and call for
reconciliation and accountability.
We must continue to strengthen the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. Mali has made progress toward re-establishing
constitutional order. The first round of legislative
elections was conducted in an orderly manner. But the
political process between the Government and armed
groups has been delayed. I remain concerned about the
security situation in the north.
Across the region, terrorist acts, the trafficking of
arms, drugs and people and other transnational forms
of organized crime, are threatening security. We must
do more to address the food crises that plague the
Sahel. We also have to improve conditions in migrants’
communities of origin while also generating more
legal opportunities for migrants to work abroad. The
Sahel’s vast size and long, porous borders mean that
such challenges can be addressed successfully only if
the countries of the region work together. The United
Nations will continue its efforts to promote security,
good governance and resilience.

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

I came back from the visit with a clear sense that
we need to do much more to fight poverty, empower
women, provide employment opportunities for young
people and ensure that all the people of the Sahel have
what they need to build a better future. I look forward
to hearing the views of Council members on how we
can achieve that, and I count on all partners to live up
to their promises so that this important vision can break
the cycle of poverty and insecurity and usher in an era
of prosperity and stability for all.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jim Yong Kim.
Mr. Jim Yong Kim: It is a pleasure and a privilege
to take part in this briefing, and I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation.
As the Secretary-General noted, the joint trip to the
Sahel was a historic opportunity to bring international
attention to an often neglected region. We are all so
grateful to the Secretary-General for his leadership
in bringing together the United Nations, the African
Union, the African Development Bank, the European
Union and the World Bank Group on this trip, showing
a unified front of support for the Sahel.
All of us should also express our deep gratitude to
the Government of France and President Hollande for
their courageous decision to send French troops to help
stabilize much of the Sahel. Without those troops, our
joint mission, led by the Secretary-General, likely never
could have happened. We are also very grateful for the
good work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which we
witnessed directly on the trip.
Our message today should be unequivocal. The
world will support the Sahel. Our joint visit last month
gave us all a better idea of the challenges facing the
people and the leaders of the Sahel. It made me even
more convinced that if we work together, we can offer
sustainable and potentially transformative solutions to
the problems of the region. I left the Sahel full of hope
and optimism. One of the conclusions we drew from
our visit is that there is a need for a coordinated and
regional approach to tackling the major development
challenges of the region. The recent formation of the
coordination platform is exactly what that region needs.
Foreign ministers from the Sahel countries will meet
every six months to decide common priorities, and we

S/PV.7081

welcome Mali’s leadership in chairing the coordination
platform for its first two years.
During the trip, the World Bank Group committed
$1.5 billion to new regional investments over the next
two years. That is in addition to significant existing
country programmes. Those new funds will support
major regional development priorities, such as social
safety nets to help families withstand the worst
effects of economic adversity and disasters. They
will also support the private sector by encouraging
entrepreneurship and an improved investment climate.
I am very happy to say that exactly one week ago, our
Board approved the first part of the package — the
$228-million Senegal River Basin Multi-purpose Water
Resources Development Project. The Project will
benefit such countries as Senegal, Mauritania and Mali
by improving water availability for agriculture and
food production.
It is critically important that our work support
the social and economic empowerment of women. We
need to harness the energies of all citizens, especially
women, to build a secure and prosperous future for the
region. During the trip, together with the President of
Niger, we issued a collective call to action on women’s
empowerment and demographics in the Sahel. As part of
our new investments, we have committed $200 million
to address those issues. The World Bank Group can
provide that new level of support to the Sahel because
of the commitment of our donors that support our
fund for the poorest — the International Development
Association (IDA). We very much appreciate donors’
contributions to IDA because that funding translates
into programmes that create jobs that empower and
that build infrastructure, such as roads and irrigation
systems, especially for fragile countries and regions.
The people of the Sahel have struggled for far
too long with too little economic growth. They have
endured a harsh climate in a period of famine. They have
suffered the intricately linked curses of high fertility
rates and the world’s highest number of maternal and
child deaths. There is nothing natural or preordained
about this unfortunate state of affairs. For too long, we
have failed the Sahel. Our low aspirations reflect our
inability to see past what are very real challenges. But
let me be clear. The people of the Sahel do not have
low aspirations for themselves. They have very high
aspirations, and we must respond appropriately.
When I was in Timbuktu, a diverse group of people
all had the same message. They want just what all of us

13-615753/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

want: a good job, a good education, access to quality
health care, and hope for a better life for their children.
In Burkina Faso, business leaders told us that they are
ready to invest more but that they need better access to
affordable energy. Today, people in Burkina Faso pay
74 cents per kilowatt-hour for their electricity, which is
almost seven times more than we pay in Washington,
D.C. Still, Burkina Faso is expected to grow at 6 per
cent this year and next. We can only imagine what
Burkina Faso’s growth rate would be if it had affordable
energy.
All of us must raise our aspirations for the Sahel so
they are as high and as ambitious as those of its people.
We must demonstrate our solidarity with them through
effective, pragmatic support. The lives of the people
of the Sahel can be transformed. All they need is our
sustained commitment to their vision for a better life.
I look forward to working with all Council members to
make it happen.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jim
Yong Kim for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Prodi.
Mr. Prodi: This is probably my last formal
briefing to the Security Council as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, as I shall complete
my mandate on 31 January 2014, although I shall be
completely at the Secretary-General’s disposal after
that. I would therefore like to begin by expressing my
profound gratitude for the support extended to me by the
Security Council and for the confidence shown in me
by the Secretary-General by allowing me to undertake
this challenging assignment.
I have been mandated by the Secretary-General to
develop a strategy for the region that would synergize
the ongoing efforts and at the same time put in place
measures that could help the Governments of the region
to sustain peace and security in the long run. The report
of the Secretary-General on the Sahel (S/2013/354),
issued in June, represented the culmination of the
strategy-formulation phase of the process and the
commencement of the implementation stage. Many
factors will continue to impact our efforts in the
Sahel and must be taken into account when we are
implementing the strategy.
First, the region will have to compete for attention
with other, equally serious crises around the world
and will struggle to maintain international attention to
itself. I say this because that attention is decreasing.
4/25

12/12/2013

Secondly, the current global economic climate limits
traditional funding mechanisms and donors. Thirdly,
security and governance are intertwined, and making
progress on one will be extremely difficult without
making progress on the other. Efforts to fight extremists
and separatists cannot succeed without meaningful
progress on good governance. Finally, without a
reasonably stable security situation, development and
humanitarian activities cannot exert their impact. Peace
and development are related.
Keeping these factors in mind, I have endeavoured
to raise the profile of the challenges facing the Sahel as
widely as I could. I have visited many Heads of State
throughout the world to raise awareness of the Sahel
as a major global problem. In the effort to empower
local people at the deepest possible level, my efforts
have included visits to the region and interaction
with respective Heads of State, consultations with the
senior Government officials of key Member States, and
participation in several multilateral forums convened to
discuss the situation in the Sahel. I have also decided to
involve, as much as possible, local experts from Sahel
universities, research institutions and Governments in
the identification of the sectors and projects that would
be key to starting a strong development process.
The strategy for development identified five
priorities:
agriculture,
renewable
energy
for
electrification, infrastructure, education and health.
These ideas were then widely shared and discussed it
with the relevant stakeholders, including Governments
of the region. Thus the strategy was the result of a
process empowering Sahelians, and implementation
should occur in a similar manner.
The recent visit by the Secretary-General to the
region, along with the other principals, was another
important step in that regard and will go a long way in
bringing attention to the situation in the Sahel region.
However, simply maintaining attention to the Sahel
would not be sufficient, and considerable resources are
needed to help the peoples of the region. But I believe
that the most important innovation we can offer is that
of starting actions that can respond to the need for
urgency and efficacy. Therefore, we must put in place
a mechanism that can sustain the utilization of the
mobilized resources, multilateral and bilateral, both in
money and in kind.
In that regard, the African Development Bank is in
the process of formalizing the hosting of an innovative
fund called the Sahel Action Fund. Its particularity is
13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

that, as a start, it would use the money share of the Fund
as a booster to finalize the design of projects approved
by the Governments of the region and implement pilot
installations. Turn-key development projects by donors
as in-kind donations would quickly follow as part of
an overall Sahel strategy. The same Fund will have a
secretariat supported, of course, by the United Nations.
Priorities for those efforts would be set by the Sahel
Coordination Forum, led by the five core Sahelian
Governments, as decided during the first meeting at
the top ministerial level, which has already taken place
in Mali, during the visit of the Secretary-General to
the region. The innovation brought by the new Fund
is substantial and addresses the issues of urgency and
efficiency of action. The strategy will be facilitated
by replicating the pilot projects from the local to the
regional level.
To give examples of where we stand in that process,
I am pleased to announce that a pilot project to provide
solar-powered water purification equipment to hundreds
of families in the Sahel will commence shortly. The
resources to supply, at the pilot stage, equipment
manufactured by a private European company has
been pledged by the Italian Government. That is my
vision of a private-sector actor acting with the support
of Government to help the people of the Sahel, free of
cost and any conditions. In any case, that effort will be
managed by the African Development Bank as part of
the overall Sahel strategy.
A similar effort in the provision of electricity
through solar energy in off-grid areas, in cooperation
with the Campaign for the Earth Foundation, is in the
pipeline as part of the Millennium Development Goal
targets set for the region. Scaling up the existing pilot
project in Mali is the final objective. On agriculture,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations has proposed a detailed capacity-building
project related to animal health. We are in the process
of mobilizing resources for it. Similarly, work on
identifying pilot projects for the infrastructure and
education pilot projects is ongoing.
In addition to that, as the Council heard a few
minutes ago, strategic efforts are needed from important
multilateral institutions to support the development
of the Sahel. It will be extremely important that the
Sahel Coordination Forum assume the responsibility
of enhancing synergies and avoiding duplication and
wastage of resources.

S/PV.7081

I am well aware that the approach I have proposed
is new and challenges the current norms of multilateral
assistance. However, I believe that it is an innovative
way to fill the gap between the ongoing activities on
the ground and the long-term development goals set for
the region, which will take some time to materialize.
I also believe that, given the precarious situation of
the peoples of the Sahel, that approach must be given
a chance to proceed and should be assessed on the
results achieved. At the same time, we must also focus
on introducing new and innovative technologies to the
Sahel region, as they have the capacity to push and
catalyse developmental efforts.
As mentioned earlier, security, governance and
development are linked. The situation in Mali was a
cause for serious concern for all of us and remains
symptomatic for the entire region. The progress made
since the French intervention is encouraging and
deserves commendation. But it is very clear that when
we talk about security, the problems have no border and
thus the solutions should have no borders.
As was openly and loudly requested at the
ministerial meeting in Bamako on the occasion of the
Secretary-General’s visit, when security is at stake,
the coordination platform should be broadened to
surrounding countries. The surrounding countries are
Algeria, Morocco, Libya and Senegal, but the case of
Libya is especially critical.
Therefore, I would urge the Security Council that
all its decisions dealing with terrorism and conflicts
in the Sahel take into account the need for governance
reforms in the region. Furthermore, Libya, while not
part of the Sahel, has a profound impact on the entire
region. I would urge that the situations of the Sahel and
Libya be dealt with in coordination with each other, so
as to achieve the optimal effect.
As requested by the Council, the United Nations
system in the region has set up an internal coordination
mechanism, chaired by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa, Mr. Djinnit, with
the participation of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator, as well
as the regional development teams and the resident
coordinators of the Sahel countries.
In the area of governance, we have been focusing
on the implementation of activities that involve a

13-615755/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

combination of, first, capacity-building measures aimed
at improving the delivery of essential services, and
second, political inclusion aimed at promoting broad
consensus among the population over the country’s
priorities.
With regard to capacity-building, we have identified
two strategic priority areas for intervention: first,
support to electoral processes and, second, support
to judicial reform and access to justice. We have also
initiated a consultation process with civil society to
ensure its participation in the implementation of the
strategy, especially in activities that aim to promote
community security and fight violent extremism,
particularly in the border areas.
With regard to the second objective, to strengthen
national and regional security mechanisms we
have begun to implement activities in the areas of
border management and the prevention of violent
ideology. Given the vastness of the Sahel region
and the length and porosity of many of the borders,
we have been focusing on strengthening border
management through a combination of capacitybuilding and confidence-building measures among
States. For example, under the Integrated Assistance
for Countering Terrorism Initiative, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate have
been supporting the development of national counterterrorism strategies and the establishment of internal
coordination and information-sharing mechanisms for
integrated border management in Burkina Faso. We are
planning to expand that experience in more countries in
the Sahel region.
The collaborative management of borders is not
only about constraining the activities of criminals
and terrorists, but also about giving opportunities
for legitimate economic activity. That is why, in
implementing the third objective of the strategy, we
have been focusing on fostering better integration
between humanitarian and development interventions,
and supporting the design of innovative projects
and tools for resilience, including by developing
shared infrastructure. We have mapped ongoing
resilience-friendly intervention in the countries of the
Sahel as validated by the United Nations country teams
across the regions, and have planned regional strategic
invention on resilience by the United Nations system
across the Sahel.

6/25

12/12/2013

A regional food reserve has already been developed
under the auspice of the Economic Community of
West African States, and the World Food Programme
will provide technical advice. In addition, the World
Bank has contributed $100 million to support a number
of activities in the Sahel region identified under
the resilience pillar of the United Nations strategy,
in partnership with the United Nations Population
Fund. Gaps in the current resilience operation have
been identified in the areas of urban livelihoods,
micro-insurance, community empowerment and
pastoral populations.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate two messages.
First, we must not forget the Sahel, even with so many
other problems on the Council’s agenda. Secondly,
I appeal to the international community to be very
generous to the people of the Sahel in terms of both
financial and in-kind assistance, as they remain in dire
and urgent need.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Prodi
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to apologize for the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
who would have wished to participate in this meeting,
as she did in the joint visit mentioned by previous
speakers. For reasons beyond her control, she was
not able to do so. Allow me therefore, on behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
to thank France for having placed the situation of the
Sahel on its programme of work for the month and for
having invited us to this meeting. That reflects the
Council’s ongoing interest in the challenges posed by
the Sahel region.
In that regard, I welcome the close cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations
concerning the situation in Mali and in the Sahel as
a whole. We recall that our two organizations led a
joint assessment mission in the Sahelo-Saharan region
in December 2011, in implementation of the relevant
provisions of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. More recently,
as mentioned by previous speakers, we also conducted
the joint visit to the Sahel. I take this opportunity to
express the full appreciation of the African Union to
the Secretary-General, the President of the World Bank,
the European Union and the African Development Bank

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7081

for that joint initiative, which has set an example for the
other situations we will face, as it has indeed already
done in the Congo.

the heads of intelligence and security services, as well
as of relevant ministers, to exchange information and
agree on shared or coordinated forms of action.

With respect to Mali, I welcome the important
strides that have been made in stabilizing the situation
there with the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which facilitated the peaceful and
successful holding of presidential elections and the first
round of legislative elections on 24 November, with a
second round scheduled for 15 December.

The Nouakchott Process has proven to be a crucial
tool in efforts of the countries of the region to collectively
take up the transnational security challenges they face.
In the final analysis, for the countries of the SaheloSaharan region, it is a matter of building a collective
security system within the framework of the African
peace and security architecture. In the coming weeks,
we expect to consider a number of separate initiatives
designed to further strengthen the Nouakchott Process.

The African Union reiterates its appeal to
the Malian stakeholders, with the support of the
appropriate regional and international actors, to
redouble their efforts to overcome the obstacles to
the effective implementation of the Ouagadougou
Preliminary Agreement of 18 June and the promotion
of an inclusive national reconciliation process that
respects the territorial integrity of Mali. The African
Union attaches great importance to the immediate
restoration of the authority of the Malian State over its
full territory. From that perspective, the issue of Kidal
must be resolved without delay, because there must not
be any lawless zone on Malian territory. The African
Union, through me, reaffirms its support for the Malian
authorities in their endeavour to promote reconciliation
among the different groups that constitute the Malian
people.
With respect to the overall situation in the region
of the Sahel, I reaffirm the importance that the
African Union attaches to an integrated approach to
the international community’s activities in the Sahel.
In that regard, we welcome the Council’s adoption of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
which encompasses a holistic view of the challenges,
the security issues, the humanitarian aspects and the
development of the region. Likewise, we reaffirm the
crucial importance of stronger security cooperation
among the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region, with
the support of international partners, and we stress the
importance of regional, interregional and international
coordination in the fight against the threats that persist
in the region.
For its part, given the challenges and threats in the
Sahel region, the African Union is continuing its efforts
to strengthen security cooperation among the countries
of the Sahelo-Saharan region through the Nouakchott
Process. Launched in March by the Commission, the
Process is based on the holding of regular meetings of

We cannot overemphasize the crucial importance
of long-term socioeconomic development to efforts to
create lasting stability in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
As we said at the outset, the African Union welcomes
the joint visit to the region, from 4 to 9 November,
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
President of the World Bank, the President of the
African Development Bank, and the Commissioner
for Development of the European Union. For the
African Union, that visit reflected the commitment
of the international community to addressing the
multidimensional challenges facing the Sahel within
the framework of close collaboration among all the
relevant stakeholders. It also highlighted the need for
close coordination among all the different initiatives
for the Sahel.
In that context, the African Union reaffirms
its readiness to work for the establishment of a joint
secretariat, as provided for in the communiqué issued
by the ministerial meeting held Bamako on 4 November
on the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
I take this opportunity to thank the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for his proposals to that end.
With respect to strengthening its presence in
the region, the African Union has established the
Mission for Mali and the Sahel (MISAHEL), under
the leadership of the High Representative, in order
to actively contribute to the process underway in
Mali, as well as to international efforts to support the
Sahel region. On 19 and 20 October, MISAHEL held
a workshop with all of the specialized institutions and
liaison officers of the African Union in the region so
as to draw up its plan of action. The African Union
Commission will soon organize a high-level meeting
of the African Union specialized institutions with a

13-615757/25

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7081

12/12/2013

view to establishing a holistic approach so as to better
coordinate action already under way in the Sahel from
a political, security, economic and sociocultural point
of view.

to scale up those efforts so as to help the countries
in the region tackle a crisis that is affecting them all,
especially the lack of security and terrorism, and tackle
their root causes.

We welcome the partners, whose valuable assistance
will make it possible to take up the challenges on the
continent. We launch an appeal to them to strengthen
their support to countries in the region and to provide
support for common initiatives to be carried out as part
of their collective efforts. The constraints of history
and the geography of the Sahel, as well as present-day
political facts, oblige us to adopt a coordinated approach,
a united approach, in the face of the challenges before
us.

We all welcomed the highly relevant United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, whose priorities are
governance, humanitarian and human rights activities
and bolstering security, with a clear definition of
the roles of each at the national and regional levels.
Those priorities are shared by everyone. The mission
also stressed everyone’s intention to work using a
comprehensive approach based on the interactions
between security and development. It is now broadly
acknowledged that there can be no lasting security
without inclusive development, and that security is a
sine qua non for sustainable development. The European
Union based its Sahel strategy, adopted almost three
years ago, on that idea and has mobilized its various
tools along that same line in order best to meet the
requirements of that cohesive strategy.

To conclude, allow me to reaffirm the determination
and availability of the African Union, in close
cooperation with countries in the region and with
international partners, first and foremost the United
Nations, to play its proper role in supporting individual
and collective efforts to promote peace, stability and
security initiated by the States in the Sahel-Saharan
region.
The President (spoke
Mr. António for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Reveyrand de Menthon.
Mr. Reveyrand de Menthon (spoke in French):
On behalf of the European Union (EU), I would like to
thank the French Presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important debate today. I would also like
to very warmly thank the Secretary-General for closely
associating the European Union in all international
efforts regarding the Sahelian region. That includes his
visit some weeks ago, as well as his constant follow-up
to the very important activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
The Sahel countries face a number of serious
and interlinked challenges. The crisis in Mali and
the security vacuum after the Libyan revolution have
underscored the political, economic and humanitarian
vulnerabilities that have been long-standing in the
region. The joint high-level visit of the SecretaryGeneral with the President of the World Bank, the
President of the African Union Commission, the
President of the African Development Bank and the
European Commission for Development demonstrated
the international community’s intention to continue

8/25

What I also took away from the Secretary-General’s
visit is the constant desire for the heads of State of
the region to work for peace and take more fully into
account the needs of the people, including the youth of
the Sahel. In that regard, I think that we should try more
often to deepen our knowledge of the local situations by
better including African researchers and intellectuals.
Unfortunately, those players are often insufficiently
recognized, whereas they are essential to completing a
process of genuine ownership.
The European Union enjoys close cooperation with
all its partners and stands ready to enhance its efforts
diplomatically in the framework of reconciliation and
inclusive dialogue. We also stand ready to enhance
our efforts in the operational, developmental and
humanitarian spheres through the preparation of peace
dividends.
The crisis that Mali experienced from 2012 and
2013, and which that country is struggling to overcome
little by little with determination, is yet another
illustration of the security and development crisis that
is afflicting the Sahel-Saharan region at a time when
the terrorist risk remains ever present. The European
Union has provided its utmost support to Mali. During
his visit to the European Parliament in Brussels
last Monday and Tuesday, the new President of Mali
reiterated his intention to quickly tackle the immense
security challenges, so as to bring lasting stability to

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

his country, reconcile the Malian people and build a
new political governance model by drawing on all of
the lessons from the past.
The efforts of the international community must
not fail. The multifaceted MINUSMA has an essential
role to play in supporting the Malian authorities so
that they can fully reinstate sovereignty and the rule of
law across the country and manage to restore dialogue
and reconciliation, which have been so long awaited,
in particular in the framework of the peace process
opened with the Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement
of 18 June. A strong commitment in the north of the
country is important, because the future of the Sahel
region as a whole today is largely being played out in
the north of the country.
The EU, in close relationship with all its partners,
stands ready to scale up its efforts diplomatically, in
the framework of reconciliation and inclusive dialogue,
to which it is committed. We also stand ready on the
operational and development front, as well as with
regard to humanitarian activities, so as to prepare the
dividends of peace. The high-level Donor Conference
for Development in Mali, organized in Brussels on
15 May, was very important. The EU is fully playing
its role and fully upholding all its promises with the
512 million Euros it has pledged and the €238 million
that will be disbursed in 2013.
Efforts to reinstate peace and security in Mali will
be in vain if the threat shifts and if other countries of
the Sahelo-Saharan region in the wider sense fall victim
to the same crisis, the full effects of which we saw both
in Mali and in Libya.
Today, the European Union is determined to deepen
its implementation of the EU External Action Service
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel:
in order to better interlink security and development,
including by using a preventative approach for the most
fragile environments. The EU also intends to expand
the implementation of its strategy to all the countries
that are most exposed to the risks of destabilization,
and to better involve all concerned countries without
whose participation no permanent stability is possible,
particularly countries from north Africa directly
concerned, and of course, those that are also longstanding EU partners.
Moreover, when we look towards the Sahel from
Europe, we find a huge space, so that geography creates
an inevitable permanent solidarity. We look at that

S/PV.7081

space and see it initially as an area of ​​risk, but it is
also actually a space for cooperation of multiple types,
including cultural and environmental cooperation. It
is also a space for economic development, again the
only solution for creating business and jobs, which will
reduce the current tensions. That could be achieved
with the assistance of all social actors, enterprises and
civil society.
All of that requires a scaled-up commitment.
During the joint visit, Commissioner Piebalgs
announced that the European Union would provide
€5 billion for its action in the Sahel region for the
next seven years. In a rapidly changing environment,
our collective efforts must respond to requirements of
flexibility and effectiveness. To do that, the close and
constant coordination of our efforts is essential, both
globally and on the ground. There must also be greater
ownership of the policies undertaken.
Bolstering
cooperation
and
interregional
cooperation between Sahel countries, the countries of
West Africa and the countries of the Maghreb is crucial
in order to develop inclusive and effective strategies to
combat terrorist activities and transborder organized
crime in a comprehensive and global manner. Many
States of the region have committed to developing
bilateral or trilateral coordination mechanisms, or to
working in subregional and continental frameworks, as
regards both development and security. The European
Union fully supports those initiatives. It stands ready
to back them, in particular efforts to strengthen the
administration of the Saharan areas, in particular
border areas, and to work more strongly to increase
resilience.
More broadly, the European Union wishes to attain
the closest cooperation possible with all partners who
have developed strategic approaches for the Sahel. in
the greatest respect for the sovereignty and leadership
of Sahel-Saharan States and subregional organizations.
The Bamako Declaration adopted on 5 November, in
the framework of the high-level joint visit, paves the
way for stronger international cooperation, bringing
together all countries and stakeholders concerned. The
European Union will help with setting it up, which
should take place as soon as possible.
Developments in the Sahel this year have given us
an idea of the scope of the regional crisis. We must act
together in a sustainable manner to combat terrorism
and crime. We must tackle the root causes of the
situation: poverty, inequalities, inadequate institutions

13-615759/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

and crime, with, as we well know, a strong constraint
arising in the demographic context. The determination
of the peoples of the Sahel, linked with the mobilization
of the international community, also demonstrates that
the worst is not inescapable and that the crisis can be
overcome if we are patient and resolute. That is indeed
the spirit that animates the international community
today. It is grounds for great hope for tomorrow.
The President (spoke in French): The Council has
before it the text of a statement by the President on
behalf of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting.
In accordance with the understanding reached among
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the statement. The
statement will be issued as a document to the Security
Council, S/PRST/2013/20.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate under
the French presidency on the situation in the Sahel,
a situation which is at the heart of the agenda of the
Security Council. We welcome the participation of
Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the President of
the World Bank, Mr Jim Yong Kim, and Mr. Romano
Prodi, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, as well as representatives of the African Union
and the European Union.
It was almost exactly a year ago that, in December
2012, my country devoted the main debate of the
Moroccan presidency to this same issue, the Sahel (see
S/PV.6882). Since then a United Nations integrated
strategy has been drawn up and its implementation
begun. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the
efforts that they have made in developing this integrated
strategy and their plea for its diligent and coordinated
implementation.
Given our immediate proximity to the States of the
Sahel, some years before the events in northern Mali my
country had a premonition of the dangers threatening
the Sahel region and tried to draw the attention of the
international community to it and to generate some
action. Our concern stemmed from an awareness of the
connections we saw between terrorism and trafficking
in drugs, weapons and people, as well as the kidnapping
of innocent tourists, humanitarian workers and even
United Nations officials. Therefore, my country called

10/25

12/12/2013

for concerted action by States of the Sahel and the
Magreb in order to take preventive action and to stem
the harmful effects of those activities, which were
already noticeable.
The tragic events in northern Mali and the serious
attack on its territorial integrity have shown that the
threat to stability was not a distant hypothesis but an
immediate reality, with incalculable consequences
for the entire region and beyond. In calling on the
international community to act quickly and resolutely
in Mali, Morocco has always sought to place the
settlement of the crisis in that country in its natural
regional environment. Today, we are reassured to
see Mali recovering, with the help of France, Africa
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and bilateral partners,
taking significant steps on the path towards stabilization
and national reconciliation.
Beyond Mali, we were very pleased to see the United
Nations begin a preventive approach in drawing up the
integrated strategy for the entire region. Implementing
that strategy requires requires each of the States in the
region to take ownership of it, as well as the necessary
and consistent support of the international community.
The visit by the Secretary-General and the President of
the World Bank, with the participation of regional and
international organizations, as well as international and
regional donors, reveals the willingness to fully apply
the different dimensions of the strategy.
Through the ministerial meeting of Bamako on
5 November, the States of the Sahel and the Magreb
showed their determination to change the facts on the
ground by identifying common priorities in security,
governance, resilience and sustainable development,
around which the United Nations integral strategy
should be articulated. The meeting urged countries
of the region, international, regional and subregional
organizations — including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Sahelo-Saharan States and the Arab Maghreb
Union — as well as the financial institutions of bilateral
partners to contribute to the success of the strategy
for the Sahel. In Bamako they came to important
conclusions of an institutional nature to implement the
strategy, in particular with the setting up of a platform
to be chaired by Mali for the next two years.
After that meeting, my country organized on
14 November 2013, in Rabat, a ministerial conference
designed to strenghten cooperation in matters of border
13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

security among the countries of the Magreb and the
Sahel. That meeting led to the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration, which advocated for specific measures
to improve security along the common borders in the
region. That cooperation is a necessary step for any
strategy to fight terrorism and extremism, the major
challenges in the entire region.
The pioneering action in the Sahel inaugurated by
the United Nations and its partners, including the World
Bank and regional and subregional organizations, will
be judged according to its impact and its repercussions
for the entire people of the Sahel region. That impact of
course depends on the commitment by the international
community to fight terrorism and separatism and
to relieve the humanitarian crisis that is affecting
that region. Moreover, in acknowledging that reality,
Morocco took the initiative on 20 September to devote
the main debate of its chairmanship of the CounterTerrorism Committee to the challenge of terrorism in
the Sahel region.
We agree with Mr. Prodi when he states that
“[t]he collaborative management of borders is not
only about constraining the activities of criminals
and terrorists, but also about giving opportunities
for legitimate economic activity”.
History has amply demonstrated that the creation of
common economic projects and the complementary
infrastructure along the common borders has made it
possible not only to overcome conflicts and disputes
but also to set up good-neighbourly, stable and fruitful
relations and to promote development projects that
create jobs and offer prospects to young people.
The serious humanitarian situation that affects
hundreds of thousands of human beings in the Sahel
forces them to risk their lives and those of their children
in order to escape the advance of the desert and its
cortege of famine and epidemics. The 150 million
inhabitants of the Sahel have reached the limits of their
capacity to resist the harmful effects of climate change
and the decline in agricultural and pastoral products.
They cannot resist the temptation to emigrate if they
are not given any tangible opportunity to improve their
socioeconomic conditions in place. That improvement
cannot happen without international assistance in
proportion to the pressing needs of that vulnerable
population.
In that context, we welcome the setting up of an
action fund for the Sahel to finance the projects agreed

S/PV.7081

to by Governments of the region, the launch of pilot
projects to provide drinking water to hundreds of families
and electricity from solar power, the construction
of shared infrastructure and the establishment of a
regional food reserve under ECOWAS and the World
Food Programme. While limited, those actions reflect
the many dimensions of the United Nations integrated
strategy. We hope to find in the Secretary-General’s
next report, to be issued in June 2014, an indication of
more substantial progress in its implementation. We
are, of course, just beginning, but the strategy’s success
will be measured by the relevance, scope and impact of
the initial actions.
For its part, Morocco is linked to the Sahel through
age-old multifaceted relations and is determined to
contribute, with the Council, to the success of the
integrated strategy for the Sahel. That commitment was
confirmed by His Majesty the King on 19 September
on his trip to Mali for the inauguration of the Malian
President, and renewed recently in the royal message
addressed to the Elysée Summit for Peace and Security
in Africa. It is a commitment that brings together
human development, the preservation of cultural and
religious identity, and safeguarding the territorial
integrity of the States of the Sahel through inclusive,
open and sustained cooperation on security.
The presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20) that
we have just adopted reflects our common commitment
to the people of the Sahel region. My delegation would
like to express its gratitude for the spirit of cooperation
shown by all Council members, which has facilitated
the preparation and adoption of the statement.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy
Romano Prodi, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim
and the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union for their statements this morning. We
welcome the continued international focus on the Sahel
region and appreciate the Secretary-General’s personal
commitment and leadership in convening the high-level
meeting on the situation in the Sahel on the sidelines
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly in
September.
The Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank, during their joint visit in November, drew
attention to the economic and security plight of that
vulnerable region and heard from the Sahelian leaders
about how the international community can assist them
in turning around the dire economic situation there. The

13-6157511/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

participation of the leaders and representatives of the
African Union, the European Union, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the African Development
Bank made this a truly international effort. This
is synergy in action. It has raised international
consciousness about the problems in the Sahel region
and helped mobilize political and economic support
to address them. We also appreciate the determined
efforts made by the Special Envoy this year.
The Sahel region continues to face diverse
challenges, including weak governance, youth
unemployment, a worsening humanitarian situation,
food insecurity and the adverse impact of climate
change. The speed and gravity with which the crisis
in Mali unfolded last year was a stark reminder of the
vulnerabilities and marginalization of the entire region.
The institutional weaknesses, capacity deficits and lack
of resources faced by the countries of the region further
accentuate those problems.
Pakistan has supported the efforts of the Council
to take effective measures to counter the grave threats
posed by the rise of terrorism, transnational organized
crime, and illicit drugs and weapons trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel. Tackling those threats requires
greater regional cooperation in border management,
as well as in the justice and law enforcement sectors.
Moreover, the international community must continue
to work with the relevant countries and regional
organizations to strengthen State institutions. In
that regard, the principles of national ownership and
close consultation with concerned countries must be
respected.
The wider regional ramifications of the Libyan and
Malian conflicts required a strategy that went beyond
the conventional security, political and peacekeeping
responses. The region needed a new paradigm.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General,
working together, have crafted and launched the new
paradigm, which encompasses security, governance,
humanitarian, human rights and development aspects,
and applies to all phases of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in the countries affected by conflict.
A similar approach has been adopted for the Great
Lakes region in the form of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which is already paying
dividends on the ground.
The social instability and economic volatility in
the Sahel region are a direct consequence of poverty,
12/25

12/12/2013

marginalization and deprivation. No security or political
strategy would succeed without strong national and
international interventions for economic development.
We therefore welcome the newfound partnership
between the World Bank and the United Nations in the
Sahel region, and hope that it will continue to become
stronger in the years to come.
The real challenge lies in implementing the strategy
to produce tangible results. That is not an easy task. It
requires strong and persistent support and commitment
on the part of the national, regional and international
actors. The international community must continue to
mobilize resources for the successful implementation of
the Sahel strategy. At the same time, the regional States
will have to demonstrate political will to fulfil their
commitments and take advantage of the opportunity to
translate that strategy into tangible dividends for their
people.
For its part, Pakistan will continue to provide full
political support to the United Nations strategy and play
its role both within and outside the Security Council for
long-term peace and stability in the Sahel region.
Finally, we thank Morocco for its effective
coordination in producing the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/20), which we fully support and endorse.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the President, Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, World
Bank President Kim, Special Envoy Prodi, Ambassador
António and Special Representative Reveyrand De
Menthon for their briefings and for calling the Council’s
attention to the challenges and opportunities we face in
the Sahel.
My Government welcomes the United Nations
and the World Bank’s joint commitment to acting as
partners in the region, as they are also doing in the
Great Lakes. We hope that the partnership will succeed
in mobilizing both internal and international efforts to
achieve political and economic progress.
As the briefings make clear, countries in the Sahel
continue to be plagued by cross-cutting challenges that
fuel cycles of violence and impede economic progress.
Porous borders and ungoverned and undergoverned
spaces across the vast region facilitate the flow of
illicit arms and narcotics, while also providing terrorist
groups with safe havens within which they can train
and plan future attacks. Civil strife and other social
disruptions contribute to widespread food insecurity.

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

The result is chronic suffering, giving way at regular
intervals to large-scale humanitarian crises.
The visit of the Secretary-General last month to the
region — joined by Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, European Union
Commissioner Piebalgs and African Development
Bank President Kaberuka — underscored the area’s
importance and the need to build on prior initiatives
that respond to its many overlapping problems.
Accordingly, we commend the European Union and
World Bank pledge of $8 billion in new assistance
over the next five years to advance the strategic goals
laid out in the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. We urge partners and Governments to lend
additional backing to that and associated measures.
I would also like to recognize the efforts of Special
Envoy Prodi to emphasize how critical it is that regional
Governments take the lead in identifying and designing
solutions to the diverse and interrelated dilemmas that
they confront. We encourage the entire United Nations
system to embrace those efforts and to push ahead
vigorously in implementing the integrated strategy. To
that end, the United States has been and will remain
an active partner in trying to advance the three goals
of the strategy: to strengthen governance, to improve
regional security capabilities and to develop long-term
plans for resilience.
In many respects, better governance is the starting
point for progress in every other arena, including
economic development, public safety and the peaceful
resolution of debilitating conflicts. Recognizing that,
the United States is currently examining ways to step
up its efforts across the Sahel-Maghreb region to bolster
democratic institutions. We believe that in the Sahel,
as elsewhere, an open and inclusive political system
can provide a foundation for problem-solving, while
simultaneously reducing the appeal of violent extremist
groups.
Building security capacity, especially in States
where the political institutions are fragile is difficult,
but essential. Working through the Trans-Sahara
Counterterrorism Partnership, the United States is
helping to enhance the ability of 10 countries in the
Sahel and the Maghreb to combat terrorism, strengthen
regional security cooperation, discredit radical
ideologies and assist communities that are most at risk.
The Partnership is an ongoing effort that is informed by
local experience and supported by many leaders in the

S/PV.7081

region. It recognizes the value of development aid in
responding to the political grievances and day-to-day
needs of people who might otherwise be tempted, in
their desperation, to join or support extremist groups.
Strategies to improve security and extend the rule of
law are more likely to achieve their goals where citizens
have reason to hope and are integrated into communities
that are becoming stronger and more cohesive. In a
parallel effort, the United States is also working closely
with Germany, the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, and other allies and
partners to prevent illegal trafficking in ammunition
and arms.
Through the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative in the Sahel, my Government is engaged with
States in the region, the World Bank, the United Nations
and other stakeholders in a vital initiative to reduce what
has become a chronic need for emergency assistance.
By coordinating our efforts to build resilience, we
are enhancing the capacities of individuals, families,
communities and entire countries to prevent, adapt
to and recover from civil strife, natural disasters and
similarly disruptive events. To the extent that those
initiatives succeed, people in the region will be less
vulnerable to stress of all kinds and better equipped to
achieve sustainable and inclusive growth.
The United States commends the United Nations for
making resilience a core pillar of its regional strategy,
and the World Bank for its recent investment pledges
aimed at improving infrastructure and supporting
economic development in rural areas, where the most
vulnerable populations live.
Although the challenges facing the Sahel remain
daunting, we are seeing progress. Many African
countries are deeply engaged in combating terrorism,
brokering peace and fostering their critical economic
and social gains. Looking ahead, we must continue to
respect the leadership, ownership and entrepreneurship
of our African partners. We are hopeful for the
future because we know that the goals of improved
governance, greater security and more resilience
that we seek respond to a yearning that exists among
people throughout the Sahel region, for a chance to
live in larger freedom, with greater prosperity, greater
security and more peace.
With those goals in mind, let us move ahead to
implement our integrated strategy in full cooperation
with one another.

13-6157513/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the President of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong
Kim; and other representatives for their participation in
and presentations at today’s meeting.
The Sahel region continues to face security,
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges.
Those include terrorism, transnational crimes such as
drug trafficking, and political instability arising from
weak governance. The humanitarian situation remains
dire with hundreds of thousands of displaced people
and millions facing the threat of hunger.
Against that backdrop, my country fully supports
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
A comprehensive and coordinated approach is indeed
critical in tackling that multifaceted crisis. In that
context, the high-level meeting on the situation in
the Sahel, held in September, provided a valuable
opportunity to raise awareness of the challenges and
to reaffirm the importance of the United Nations
integrated strategy to the region.
The Republic of Korea also highly commends
the joint initiative of the Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank to visit the region together
last month in spearheading the implementation of the
strategy. The visit included the participation of the
African Union, the European Union and the African
Development Bank, and clearly demonstrated the
importance of an integrated approach to effectively
addressing the underlying causes of the Sahel crisis.
We believe that the pledges of over $8 billion will be
instrumental in helping the Sahel region to realize its
potential.
Allow me to highlight a few areas that my delegation
considers to be essential to the effective implementation
of the integrated strategy. First, the political will of
the Governments concerned and their national and
regional ownership are crucial. The regional nature of
the integrated strategy calls for strengthened efforts
towards building trust and confidence among all
Governments of the region. In that regard, we welcome
the holding in Bamako of the ministerial meeting on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, and of
the regional conference on border security between the
Sahel and Maghreb regions, held in Rabat last month.
Secondly, another element required for success is
ensuring overall coherence and complementarity to

14/25

12/12/2013

maximize the effectiveness of assistance and avoid
duplication. That applies not only to coordination
among international and regional organizations, but
also to donors, regional Governments and United
Nations agencies as a whole.
Thirdly, to ensure tangible progress, it is important
to set clear short-term and long-term priorities and to
establish well-defined benchmarks. The priorities and
benchmarks need to be developed in close coordination
with the Governments of the region.
Finally, we appreciate the role of Morocco in working
out the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20), which
we support.
It is essential that the international community
maintain its engagement and commitment to the Sahel.
The Republic of Korea continues to support the efforts
to promote peace and development in the region.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes
today’s briefing on the Sahel and the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General, Special Envoy
Prodi and the other speakers, including World Bank
President Kim and the representatives of the African
Union and the European Union. I must say, as a general
comment in starting, that the partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank, in particular, has
the potential to be a genuinely transformative one, and
I know that the global community wants to see it grow.
We know that the Sahel region has been struggling
for far too long with chronic humanitarian, security and
governance crises. Possibly nowhere is the developmentsecurity nexus as pronounced. The region illustrates
the deep connection between security challenges, such
as terrorism and transnational crime, and development
challenges, such as food security and the generation of
economic opportunities. As Mr. Prodi has reminded us,
those challenges transcend borders and so, obviously,
must the solutions. He has previously warned us, and
did so again today, that we must not forget the Sahel or
we risk more crises like the one in Mali.
We welcome the visit led by the Secretary-General
and World Bank President. It highlighted the centrality
of addressing economic challenges as part of the path
to peace, building on their partnership in the Great
Lakes region. The $8 billion mobilized will reinforce
the dividends of peace.
Progress towards peace and stability requires
genuine United Nations, intergovernmental and regional

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

cooperation and coordinated engagement. Australia
considers that the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel region provides a solid framework, and
we strongly support its three strategic objectives. It
is obvious that the key element now is to move ahead
with implementation by identifying priorities for action
and the comparative advantage and added value of the
United Nations itself.
Within that context, I would like to address three
specific issues: first, national ownership and regional
cooperation; secondly, terrorism and transnational
crime; and thirdly, resilience. First, Governments of
the region must own and lead efforts in the Sahel; they
must in turn be accountable to their populations. We
therefore welcome the 5 November ministerial meeting
held in Bamako. The launch of the coordination
platform at the meeting was an important milestone,
and we look forward to hearing more about its work and
how the Council can support it.
Increasing
cooperation
between
national
Governments and regional and international
organizations will be vital to the success of the strategy.
That is particularly true of efforts to combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime, my second area of
focus. The threat must be tackled through capacitybuilding, prevention and coordination. Border
management and building law-based criminal justice
should be important focuses of our capacity-building
efforts. In that regard, we welcome the recent progress
made on transborder security at the November regional
ministerial conference in Morocco.
We know that a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy must include efforts to prevent terrorism and
extremism from emerging, arming and recruiting.
We therefore particularly welcomes the strategy’s
recommendations on countering violent extremism,
including through regional dialogue among traditional,
community and faith-based leaders and organizations.
I should note that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime has
significant potential to help Sahel States to turn the
tide against Al-Qaida affiliates in the region, but it can
realize that only if the regime is genuinely accessible to
States and is integrated into their responses. We have to
place the sanctions regime in the hands of the affected
countries and regions, both to ensure that the sanctions
list accurately reflects the dynamic and evolving nature
of the threat and to enhance its implementation.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning

S/PV.7081

Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
Australia is committed to seeing the Committee
working collaboratively with the region to identify
the individuals and entities we should be applying
the sanctions against — the Al Qaida affiliates, their
leaders and, most importantly, their enablers, those
who provide the arms, funds and recruits. To that end,
on 3 December we convened a special meeting with
Member States of the Sahel and Maghreb to discuss the
threat posed by Al-Qaida, the first in a series of steps in
improving regional awareness and engagement.
Finally, as others have said, building resilience
in the Sahel will be essential to breaking the cycle of
humanitarian crises and protecting the most vulnerable
from persistent shocks. We must also target the
underlying drivers of conflict — inequality, social
exclusion and ethnic tensions. To date, my own country
has provided $50 million in assistance to the region over
the past two years to meet immediate needs, and has also
supported communities in the region in building longterm resilience to disasters and addressing the causes
of food insecurity, including support for agricultural
research.
To conclude, we have seen the impact of concerted
national, regional and international efforts in Mali. We
are confident that the Sahel strategy can be a valuable
tool for the United Nations, the region and international
partners in achieving a coordinated response to the
challenges of the broader Sahel region. Much of the
effort will have to be innovative. We know that it is
overdue, and it is, of course, necessary.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
President Jim Yong Kim, Special Envoy Romano Prodi
and the observers of the African Union and European
Union for their briefings and information.
There is no doubt that the most significant event
of recent months concerning the Sahel region was
the joint visit to several countries by the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the World Bank, along
with representatives of other key partners, such as the
African Development Bank, the African Union and
the European Union. Its significance derives from the
high priority the international community has accorded
to dealing with the many challenges afflicting the
region, and to doing that in a coordinated, integrated
way, taking advantage of the synergies offered by
joint action. In this way, we can move forward while
simultaneously addressing issues of stability and

13-6157515/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

democratic governance as well as of development
and the humanitarian attention that the people of this
troubled part of the continent require.
We commend the central theme of the SecretaryGeneral’s message, which is that peace and development
must go hand in hand, and that its implementation
requires a broad coalition of international actors in
support of the countries in the region. We are also
encouraged by the good will and commitment shown
by the national authorities and members of civil
society who participated in the various meetings held
during the visit. The Secretary-General and President
Jim Yong Kim spoke today about their reactions to
those interesting interactions. We hope that all the
stakeholders will follow through on the roles that
they must play in dealing with the various complex
challenges the region is facing.
Since this is the second joint visit to Africa by
the Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank this year, we encourage each of them to continue
their work in their respective areas to ensure that both
institutions give reciprocal support to the region to the
benefit of its member countries. We acknowledge how
vital it is for the Sahel region to break the vicious cycle of
challenges that afflict it, including fragile institutions,
precarious
governance
systems,
unacceptable
socioeconomic indicators, political instability and
civic insecurity, along with the consequences of
climate disasters and their impact on food security.
Almost all of these are cross-border phenomena, and
thus one country’s problems tend to spread to others
very quickly; at the same time, individual countries’
achievements also have the potential to spill over to the
benefit of the rest. That is why we support the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Like others, we stress the importance of national
and regional ownership of the strategy, whose
implementation is primarily up to the member States of
the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb. Of course, the
regional approach should be adapted to each country’s
specifics, so that the final outcome will be something
more than the sum of individual situations. We welcome
the decision of the leaders of the region to establish
a follow-up mechanism, the so-called coordination
platform, in order to monitor implementation of the
commitments to be undertaken.
Lastly, we would like to thank our colleagues
in the Moroccan delegation for promoting today’s

16/25

12/12/2013

presidential statement, whose content we fully support
(S/PRST/2013/20).
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is grateful for the President’s efforts in convening
today’s meeting, and for the briefings and presence of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy Prodi
and Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the World Bank.
We also listened with great interest to the statements
made by the representatives of the African Union and
the European Union.
At present, the situation generally in Africa is
characterized by stability, development and peace.
In most countries, the political situation remains
stable, and tensions have been mitigated in certain
flashpoint areas. The African Union and other regional
organizations and African countries are committed to
maintaining peace and stability, promoting the African
collective security mechanism and seeking African
solutions to African problems.
The African economy has maintained rapid
growth. The integration process is pressing ahead.
The international influence of the African continent
has been rising steadily. The international community
is paying more attention to Africa. The launch of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
and the presidential statement adopted moments ago
(S/PRST/2013/20) fully demonstrate the priority that
has been given by the international community to peace
and security in Africa, including the Sahel region.
The security and humanitarian situation in the
Sahel has witnessed some improvement recently.
However, the region remains fragile, for which China
expresses its concern. We appreciate the recent joint
visit to the Sahel region by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, President Jim Yong Kim
of the World Bank, and President Kaberuka of the
African Development Bank. We welcome and applaud
the positive results of the joint visit. We also appreciate
the hard work of Special Envoy Prodi in implementing
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We
welcome the establishment of the coordination platform
for the strategy and of the secretariat for technical
coordination. We hope that that relevant mechanism
will play a positive role in improving the situation in
the Sahel.
The problems in the Sahel are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. Swift and comprehensive

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

improvement of the situation in the region requires
integrated policies. China suggests that the international
community work concertedly in the following three
areas.
First of all, the international community must
continue to support the efforts of the countries of the
region in maintaining peace and stability. Significant
progress has been achieved in the situation in Mali,
as demonstrated by the successful legislative election,
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is making steady headway
in deployment. However, we should be mindful that the
Sahel is still facing various threats, including the spread
of terrorism and extremism, weapons proliferation and
transnational organized crime. Mali and other countries
of the region are still facing a long and winding road
in their quest for long-term stability. The international
community should therefore give greater attention to
the situation in the region and actively assist countries
of the region to consolidate peace and maintain stability.
Secondly, the international community must
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries of the region and listen carefully to their
specific proposals and ideas concerning development
and counter-terrorism. In the process of implementing
specific projects, the international community must
fully respect the opinions of the host countries so
that the assistance can be more effective. The efforts
to counter and combat terrorism and organized
crime in the region involve many countries and are
transboundary in nature. Countries of the region must
strengthen dialogue, reinforce mutual trust and actively
cooperate with one another to address those challenges.
The international community and, in particular, the
United Nations, can play a constructive role in that
regard.
Thirdly, the root cause of the problems in the Sahel
is poverty and underdevelopment. The international
community must give priority to helping countries of
the region achieve development by increasing assistance
and investment in the Sahel so as to help those countries
build capacity and infrastructure, expand their capacity
for independent development, and ensure food security
and the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. China welcomes the pledges of the World
Bank and the African Development Bank to provide
$1.5 billion and $4 billion, respectively, to the Sahel
region. We hope that the relevant pledges will be paid in

S/PV.7081

full as soon as possible so as to enable an early launch
of relevant projects and benefit the local population.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to China-Africa relations. China has
provided long-standing support to African countries
in exploring viable development paths based on their
national realities as well as assistance to the best
of its ability to those countries as they pursue unity,
strength, independent development and finding their
own solutions to regional issues, including the situation
in the Sahel.
Last week, the first Chinese contingent,
consisting of 135 peacekeepers, arrived in Mali and
reported for duty. In the future, China stands ready
to further exchange and enhance its cooperation with
international and regional organizations, including the
United Nations, so as to make a greater contribution
to achieving an early and comprehensive settlement of
problems that the Sahel is facing and to promoting the
peace, development and stability of Africa.
In closing, I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Morocco for its efforts in drafing the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20). China fully
supports the text of the statement.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the French delegation for convening
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the World Bank,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, the Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations and the European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel. I thank each of them for
their briefings.
On the many occasions in which we have dealt
with particularly conflicts in the region, such as in
Mali, Argentina has reiterated the importance of
maintaining our full focus on the regional issues in the
Sahel, and underscored the need and the urgency of
having a United Nations integrated strategy that would
encompass security, governance, development, human
rights, humanitarian issues and economic growth. Our
insistence arises from and is nourished by a very concrete
reality and need. Our is not just a strategic vision; it is
also a question of effectiveness and transparency, and
resulted in a whole series of overlapping, cross-cutting
national, regional and international programmes that,
despite their good intentions, have not had the expected
results.

13-6157517/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

I say that because the Sahel still presents one of
the lowest human development indices in the world.
There are 11.4 million people suffering from food
insecurity and about 5 million children under the age
of five threatened with acute malnutrition. Despite all
of the efforts in terms of assistance, the Sahel is still
experiencing very serious and recurrent outbreaks of
infectious diseases, chronic investment shortages in the
energy and agricultural sectors, and ineffective social
protection systems, with unequal access to basic social
services, a worsening of the environment and a great
deal of discrimination.
Obviously, as revealed by the conflicts in the Sudan,
Libya and Mali, the various programmes have not been
able to address the root causes of the conflicts or the
numerous illegal networks of and threats posed by the
different extremist and terrorist groups that operate
in the region. For that reason, in raising awareness of,
sharing and supporting the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, we have demonstrated our belief
in its proper implementation and our trust that it can
resolve the root causes of the conflict. That would be
the best response that we could make for peace and
security in the Sahel.
Since our meeting in June, when we were presented
with the integrated strategy (S/PV.6988), a great deal of
progress has been made, thanks to the impetus given to
it by the Secretary-General and Mr. Prodi. We welcome
the meetings that took place at Headquarters, the
special meeting on enhancing cooperation and technical
assistance in the global fight against terrorism, and
the high-level meeting in September, as well as the
meetings that took place recently in Bamako and Rabat.
Obviously, we also highlight the importance of the joint
visit made by the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank. Furthermore, we would like to
thank the delegation of Morocco for having placed and
kept this topic among the priorities on our agenda and
for drafting important documents such as that we have
just adopted (S/PRST/2013/20).
During his mandate as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Prodi has not only highlighted
the complex reality of the Sahel region; he has
also educated the international community and the
Security Council by conveying his understanding
of a complex situation and by listening to the voices
of the different communities, understanding their
cultures and respecting their priorities. However,
we must acknowledge that it is crucial that this

18/25

12/12/2013

awareness — which has forced the international
community to look comprehensively at the situation
in the Sahel region — not prevent us from considering
whatever may be required.
Very briefly, I would like to recall that the main
responsibilty for peace, security and development in
the Sahel falls to the countries of the region, which
must address the root causes of their problems and
conflicts. However, we believe in the importance of
the support that must be provided by the international
community and the United Nations, taking into account
in particular the challenges that arise as a result of
climate change and the economic and financial crisis
that originated in the richest countries.
Secondly, I underscore the fact that many of the
problems that we see, in our opinion, are the results of
root causes that must be dealt with through substantive
change and not with palliative measures. For example,
given the challenging and necessary changes that are
needed to address the crisis, Argentina highlights
the importance of focusing on and changing the
modalities and structures of the work of the World
Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund
and the international financial system so that they can
be instruments for sustainable development and not
the reverse. Only a global economic system based on
cooperation and equity will be able to respond to the
root causes of conflicts related to poverty, hunger and
inequality.
Thirdly and to conclude, I welcome the substantial
progress that has been made in the countries of
the region and the continent based on the conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, development,
human rights, democracy and rule of law initiatives
of regional and subregional organizations. Argentina
firmly believes that this is the path that the countries
of the region and the African continent in general must
take.
The Minister of the Interior of Morocco, at the second
regional ministerial conference on border security in
North Africa and the Sahel, held last month in Rabat,
said that a mechanism for the exchange of information
must be created, an early warning system set up, and
our legal border control instruments harmonized. He
stressed that borders are areas of human, commercial
and cultural exchange, and that they cannot be seen
as areas of distrust, closure or exclusion. Argentina,
along with the countries of Latin America that share
this vision of the Minister of Morocco, hopes that the
13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel will
lead to the establishment of a homeland in the Sahel.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for scheduling this important
discussion. I would like to particularly thank the
Secretary-General for his continued engagement
and leadership on the issue of the Sahel region,
demonstrated most recently by his extensive visit to
the region in November, together with the President of
the World Bank and other leaders of key institutions
and organizations. I thank him, President Jim Yong
Kim, Special Envoy Prodi and the representatives of
the European Union and the African Union for their
important contributions to the debate this morning. The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/20, which establishes a strong
and united Security Council position on peace and
security in the Sahel.
The Sahel region is at an important moment in
its progress towards greater security, prosperity,
democratic governance and the rule of law. In recent
weeks, Mali has successfully elected a new President,
completed the first round of legislative elections and
initiated investigations by the Malian judiciary into
alleged human rights violations following the 2012
coup. Mauritania has also held parliamentary elections,
which is a positive step that we hope will help the
country return to a normal electoral cycle.
But while we have recently seen positive steps,
many challenges remain. Organized crime and drug
trafficking, the proliferation of weapons, environmental
issues and humanitarian crises continue to impede
progress in the region. Despite the successes of the
French-led international intervention in Mali, the threat
from Islamist extremists remains in many parts of the
country, and corruption among elites and institutions
prevents State structures from acting effectively to
address challenges.
That is why the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel is so important. It should be implemented
as soon as possible. The integrated strategy sets out an
organizing framework to address those challenges. It
is a useful framework not just for the United Nations,
but also for a wider set of international partners. If
the implementation of the integrated strategy is to be
effective, we must prioritize work on areas where a
tangible and lasting impact can be made. I would like
to highlight three areas in particular that the United
Kingdom perceives as critical.

S/PV.7081

First, on security, we must disrupt terrorist activity
and tackle organized crime by building regional capacity
and regional cooperation. The United Kingdom has
proposed a draft resolution tackling one aspect of that
menace — ransom payments for kidnapping that fund
terrorist activity in the Sahel region. We must develop a
clear analysis of and approach to all such cross-border
threats.
Secondly, we must focus on State-building. We
should offer long-term support for political settlements,
including local-level reconciliation initiatives and the
integration of armed groups. To ensure the provision
of basic public services, such as education and access
to justice, particularly outside urban areas, we should
embed transparent and accountable systems for service
delivery with closer tracking of progress made.
Lastly, we must focus on resilience. Regional
bodies should lead in economic cooperation and food
security initiatives, ensuring their implementation
at the country and local levels with the help of
non-governmental organizations. Alongside that local
and regional ownership, international partners should
support Governments in developing and delivering
well-targeted safety net schemes as a means of guarding
against recurrent environmental and food shocks.
In October, the United Kingdom’s Minister for
Africa, Mark Simmonds, visited Timbuktu — the first
British minister to do so for many years. During the
visit, he noted the rich cultural heritage of the Sahel and
its great potential to succeed. He saw for himself how
much the region needs the international community
to help it to unlock that potential. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel can do just that. It is
time now to move it from the theoretical to the practical
and unlock that potential. That requires commitment
and resources, and we hope that the United Nations
assets in the region, particularly the regional office in
Dakar, can now be mobilized to begin the work that
needs to be done in implementation.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
first to congratulate the French presidency on having
organizing this important meeting on peace and
security in Africa, focused on the Sahel region and the
prospects for the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy. Today’s meeting amply reflects
the special attention that the Security Council and the
Secretary-General attach to that issue, and manifests
once again the international community’s awareness of
the inextricable link between peace and security, on the

13-6157519/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

one hand, and economic and social development on the
other.
I thank the briefers, including the SecretaryGeneral himself, the President of the World Bank, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
and the representatives of the African Union and
European Union, for their statements.
A little more than a year ago, while the Council was
seeking ways to put an end to the tragedy unfolding
in northern Mali, the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council through resolution 2056 (2012), had
the vision to make the drawing up of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel an urgent and essential
issue given the complex and many problems facing the
region. That initiative, in itself, is a challenge given
that it involves bringing together, in a comprehensive
approach, the multidimensional challenges of the
humanitarian, governance, security, socioeconomic
development and human rights issues that the Sahel
region faces.
Today, the strategy, which we believe to be a
thorough document, has become a reality. While
its drafting was promising, its implementation is
challenging given the objectives that it aims to achieve,
the various interventions required for it to become a
reality and the many factors involved in achieving
the desired results. Increased mobilization by all and
coordinated activities are therefore key requirements,
all the more so given the realities on the ground.
Those realities require a multitude of considerations,
including awareness of those whom it is aimed at and
their ownership of the essence of the strategy that I
have mentioned above.
From that perspective, we welcome the joint visit
of the Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank, with the participation of the World Bank and the
European Union, to the Sahel region on 7 November.
That joint visit to the four countries primarily concerned
by the strategy, namely, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso and
Chad, is a symbol of great interest to see the partners
acting together to tackle the challenge as well as an
expression of solidarity for the populations concerned.
That visit is therefore an important step towards
mobilizing the populations and the States of the region
for the effective implementation of the strategy.
In that regard, we can only welcome the positive
response of those affected by the strategy, which
is demonstrated by the support of the States of

20/25

12/12/2013

the region for the strategy through their decision,
adopted at the 5 November meeting in Bamako, to
establish a coordination platform that will meet every
six months with a flexible technical secretariat to
support the coordination efforts in the region. Those
are praiseworthy initiatives given that harmonizing
projects initiated by various bodies under their own
strategies remains a decisive factor in effective support.
The firm commitment of the international
community should make it possible more easily to
overcome another challenge, namely, of putting people
at the heart of projects and programmes and allowing
them to take ownership of them, while reconciling their
expectations and the constraints of available resources.
It also meets the requirement that the reality on the
ground demands action. For an appropriate definition
of priorities, that requires partners to be in contact
with the populations in order to better understand their
expectations.
Here, there is another clearly major challenge, that
is funding the strategy. It is important that financial
and other support take into account the constraints of
the area, the risks and the time for the population to
acquire the capacity for strengthened resilience. Togo
therefore welcomes the funding pledges made by the
World Bank and the European Union during the visit
to the Sahel and calls on other donors to provide their
crucial support in order to meet the expectations of the
States and peoples of the region.
At a time when the international community is
mobilizing for the entire Sahel region, it is clear that
Mali remains the focus of the threats and challenges
facing the region. We must therefore bear in mind
that, with the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and as Togo has previously underscored, Mali
remains a pilot project in terms of implementing the
strategic goals of the integrated strategy for the Sahel
in terms of peace, security, stability, resilience and
socioeconomic development for the Sahel.
However, the volatile security situation in northern
Mali is complicated by an equally difficult one in the
region of Kidal, The continuing terrorist threats, which
could go as far as the heinous killing of journalists,
reminds us that security and stability remain the
most pressing concerns. That requires us to settle
grievances, to reconcile as soon as possible the interests
of the actors of the States in the Sahel region, while
fully upholding their sovereignty, in order to ensure
13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

conditions conducive to the calibrated implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Coordination and cooperation among the States
of the region, on the one hand, and among subregional
organizations, on the other, are crucial in order to
counter all kinds of threats, in particular, the activities
of terrorist groups, arms proliferation and transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking. Such
coordination and cooperation is an indication of the
effectiveness of the results expected of the implemented
strategy. In that regard, we are pleased with the holding
in Rabat, Morocco, on 13 and 14 November of the
second regional conference on border security among
the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel brings great hope for the peoples of the Sahel
region, clearly given that it is taking place in the wake
of the Malian crisis and because the international
community has acknowledged that if we do not take
action against poverty, in particular in the context of
a difficult environment that undermines the resilience
of populations, threats to peace and stability, such as
transnational organized crime and terrorism, will
certainly find fertile ground in the most vulnerable
regions.
It is therefore important to continue the momentum
that has allowed for progress in the case of Mali. That is
another reason that must be the engine for mobilization,
in particular in terms of financial resources, to ensure
that the objectives of the strategy are achieved.
Finally, Togo welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement on the issue under consideration
(S/PRST/2013/20) and thanks the Moroccan delegation
for having led the process that led to that adoption.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important debate on peace and security in Africa,
which focuses on the Sahel region. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his commitment and his
briefing. Also, I welcome Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President
of the World Bank; Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel; and Mr. Michel
Reveyrand de Menthon, Special Representative of the
European Union for the Sahel, and thank them for their
respective presentations.
The delegation of Rwanda would like to endorse
the statement of Ambassador Téte António, Permanent

S/PV.7081

Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
whom I welcome. I will add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Rwanda welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement on the Sahel (S/PRST/2013/20), initiated by
Morocco. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the unwavering commitment of Morocco to supporting
the issue of the Sahel in the past two years as a member
of the Security Council. We have had the open debate
organized last December, presided over by the Foreign
Minister of Morocco (S/PV.6882) and sanctioned by a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/26); a briefing of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee in September on the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel, under Morocco’s
chairmanship; and the presidential statement that the
Council has just adopted.
As the presidential statement just adopted
underscores, the problem of the Sahel is
multidimensional faceted. There are aspects related
to governance, security, humanitarian, human rights
and development issues. Rwanda therefore supports a
coordinated, comprehensive and integrated approach
that places priority on the pursuit of lasting solutions to
the root causes of the crisis, which are primarily linked
to governance and development.
Since the Libyan revolution and the subsequent
proliferation of weapons throughout the region,
terrorism and insecurity have become ongoing threats
to the countries of the Sahel. I take this opportunity to
commend the African and Malian forces that, with the
decisive support of French troops of Operation Serval,
were able to free Mali from the terrorists from the
North. We also welcome the significant efforts made
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
Despite the progress that has been achieved, the
Sahelo-Saharan region continues to face security
challenges, in particular from the regrouped terrorist
movements in northern Mali and the disturbing situation
in Kidal. These groups, whose operations are not limited
to a single country, pose an ongoing threat to Mali
and the Sahel as a whole. The countries of the region
must therefore strengthen their security cooperation,
particularly cross-border security, in order to combat
terrorism, transnational crime, and the proliferation
and illicit trafficking of weapons and drugs in the
region in a more effective and coordinated manner. In
that regard, the regional good-neighbourly relations

13-6157521/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

and the exchange of information and communications,
including in the framework of the Nouakchott Process,
are important to achieving significant progress.
The fight against terrorism also requires the States
of the region to build their capacities to effectively
control their own territories and borders and to fight
criminal and terrorist networks. In that regard, we
welcome the convening in Rabat on 13 and 14 November
of the second regional conference on border security
between the Sahel and the Maghreb. Such cooperative
mechanisms between the countries of the Sahel and the
Maghreb are of critical importance to the effective and
coordinated fight against the terrorist groups that sow
destruction in the region.
As I said earlier, development issues are at the heart of
the crisis in the Sahel. Education, infrastructure, energy,
agriculture and development projects — especially
quick-impact projects and those that create jobs for
young people — are important to fighting terrorism and
organized crime. In that framework, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel is an ideal vehicle to
address the multidimensional problems of the region,
above all development. In that context, we welcome the
joint visit to the region made by the Secretary-General,
the President of the World Bank and Donald Kaberuka,
President of the African Development Bank, with the
participation of the African Union and other partners.
We believe that the international community’s evident
readiness to support the region’s struggle for peace and
development is an important dynamic that will surely
be fruitful.
In that respect, we encourage improved coordination
of the activities of regional and international partners
in Mali and the Sahel. Similarly, Rwanda hopes that
the ministerial meeting on the integrated strategy, held
in Bamako on 5 November, gave renewed impetus for
improved coordination of the implementation of the
strategy and provided the region with an opportunity
to assume ownership of that instrument, which must
be wielded in coordination with the States of the Sahel,
West Africa and the Maghreb, and with the assistance
of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
In conclusion, we underscore once again the
need for the countries of the Sahel, with the support
of bilateral and multilateral partners, to address the
root causes of the crisis in their region, in particular
governance and development. We also hope that those
countries will assume ownership of the United Nations
integrated strategy so as to ensure its rapid and coherent
22/25

12/12/2013

implementation. To that end, capacity-building and
cross-border cooperation and information exchange
are critical in dealing with the scourges of that region,
including drug and arms trafficking and terrorism.
We are convinced that the deployment of the
African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel, in
synergy with the United Nations and other partners,
will greatly contribute to improving the situation in the
region.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank France for giving the Sahel pride of place during
its presidency of the Security Council. My thanks also
go to the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel, the Permanent Observer of the African Union
and the Special Representative of the European Union
for their briefings, which have shown the extent to
which the whole international community is mobilizing
for security and development in the Sahel region.
During the past year, attention has focused on
resolving the multifaceted crisis in Mali. Reducing
the terrorist threat, the restoration of the territorial
integrity of Mali and the return to constitutional order
in Bamako have been major advances. However, we all
know that this crisis is the most acute and most recent
manifestation of a recurrent cycle od insecurity in the
Sahel.
While the causes of that insecurity are often local,
its ramifications are transnational. In response, we
need an integrated regional approach. In this regard,
we strongly welcome the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a joint visit to the region with the
President of the World Bank and with the participation
of the African Union, the European Union and the
African Development Bank. The visit helped to initiate
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and to unify the efforts of the
international community. It resulted in particular in
the establishment of a coordination platform that will
be initially chaired by Mali. We now have a unique
opportunity to strengthen the partnership between the
international community and the countries of the Sahel
region and to review how we cooperate.
In the context of the close, long-standing partnership
of Luxembourg with several countries of the region,
including Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, we
have always stressed the intrinsic link between security
and development and the promotion and protection of

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

human rights. We welcome the recognition of this link
in the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
With a view to the implementation of the strategy, we
wish to focus on three elements.
First, in order to sustainably stabilize the Sahel, the
countries of the region will be invited to pursue their
efforts at regional and interregional cooperation in
addressing their common security challenges. Action is
needed in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime, controlling the flow of weapons and
the management of border areas.
Meanwhile, we must address the root causes of
instability. In most countries of the Sahel, the lack of
development, inequality and poverty are the source of
much tension. Thus, the creation of viable economic
alternatives for the millions of young people currently
without prospects is of fundamental importance. We
must focus on food security, productive capacitybuilding and support for local entrepreneurship that
creates jobs, as well as on further economic integration,
particularly in terms of energy and infrastructure. For
us, particular attention must be paid to strengthening
State institutions. They must be held accountable,
promote local governance and provide basic services to
all citizens, while helping to ease internal tensions and
strengthen social cohesion. The participation of women,
who are too often excluded from decision-making,
should be encouraged.
Only concerted, sustained and proactive action
on the part of the States of the region — action that
revolves around national priorities while integrating
the dimension of regional cooperation — will stabilize
the region and promote its socioeconomic development.
However, no country in the Sahel is able to face alone
the challenges faced by the region. Joint efforts are
required. Within the framework of their support for the
region, the United Nations system and all multilateral
and bilateral partners should strengthen and coordinate
their efforts, taking into account national and regional
initiatives and the concerns linked to appropriation.
Humanitarian assistance must also be stepped up
in order to help the Sahelian populations to strengthen
their resilience. We already know that 16 million people
are at risk of malnutrition next year in the Sahel. Only
59 per cent of the humanitarian appeal this year has
been covered. More needs to be done. Luxembourg
will continue to take an active part in efforts made
under the impetus of the Office for the Coordination

S/PV.7081

of Humanitarian Affairs and its Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Sahel.
I will conclude by thanking the delegation of
Morocco for having prepared and facilitated the
presidential statement that the Council has just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/20). The strategy for the Sahel is in
place. The Security Council has endorsed it, and now it
is time to fully implement it.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral must rightly give priority to the humanitarian
situation in the Sahel region. That is the very reason we
welcomed the appointment of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Sahel, who is a man of politics
of world renown, Mr. Romano Prodi. We are grateful to
Mr. Prodi for his significant work in carrying out his
mandate.
The region of the Sahel suffers from instability
and serious socioeconomic challenges. The processes
ongoing there are difficult and multifaceted and have
the most heterogenous root causes. It is clear that
the disjointed measures to stem crises are a priori
ineffective. In the Sahel, indeed, there are clear links
between security and development.
In those conditions, resolving the problems of the
region can only be done in a comprehensive manner.
Steps taken by the States of the region should be
buoyed by a wide range of measures undertaken by the
international community, for a swift settlement to the
troubled situation in this vast region of Africa is in all
of our interests.
We note that this is the very foundation of the
approach for drawing up, under Mr. Prodi’s leadership,
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
and we reiterate our support for that strategy. Its
consistent implementation should play an important
role in bolstering security and stability in the region,
establishing sustainable socioeconomic development
and countering new threats and challenges. We hope
that set objectives will be achieved. We intend to
provide assistance in that process.
It is our conviction that in carrying out the
strategy, national priorities must be taken into account,
in particular, those of State recipients of aid. We are
pleased that the countries of the region are actively
stating their support for the strategy and are seeking
to implement it and are engaging in productive joint
cooperation.

13-6157523/25

S/PV.7081

Peace and security in Africa

Today, it is clear that the contradictory processes
in a number of North African and Middle Eastern
countries were a strong catalyst for an escalation of the
terrorist risk, the spread of extremist ideologies and the
uncontrolled spread of weapons. Those went hand in
hand, in some cases, with the interference of outside
forces, with significant destabilizing consequences.
We are very concerned about the continuing threat
of the Sahel region turning into a haven for the activities
of terrorists and criminal structures, including the
illegal spread of weapons and drug trafficking. We
must note that at present in the Saharan-Sahel region,
there are mutually beneficial cooperation arrangements
among large terrorist structures ,as well as the danger
of sleeping cells and even armed groups that engage in
plundering and rivalry with one another for control of
drug trafficking routes.
The crisis in Mali was a serious challenge for the
States of the Sahel, which speaks to the complex and
intertwined nature of the problem. It was a true threat
to the security of the region and far beyond it. We hope
that with the support of the international community,
the Malian authorities will successfully reinstate
constitutional order, and order in general, across
the country, ensuring sustainable and progressive
socioeconomic development.
In conclusion, we should like to thank the delegation
of Morocco for the preparation of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/20), which we supported.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
expressing our gratitude to the French presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this important
meeting to review the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and other briefers for their
comprehensive briefings. We welcome the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/20) made earlier today, which
once again demonstrated the Security Council’s
determination to address the complex security and
political challenges and advance peace, stability and
development in the Sahel region.
A coherent, comprehensive, and coordinated
approach and consistent engagement from regional and
international actors remain vitally important. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy
for the Sahel, the Special Representatives for West and
Central Africa and the relevant United Nations missions
and entities operating on the ground for their support

24/25

12/12/2013

for the countries of the region and their contribution
to ensuring progress towards the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Azerbaijan also commends the efforts of
the countries of the Sahel and relevant regional
organizations, including those aimed at enhancing
interregional cooperation and coordination. In that
regard, we welcome the recent ministerial meeting
on the integrated strategy, held in Bamako under the
chairmanship of Mali. We take positive note of the
decision taken at the meeting to set a coordination
platform of the Sahel strategy and the announcement
regarding the establishment of a flexible technical
secretariat to support coordination efforts in the region.
National capacity-building, strong early warning
mechanisms and harmonized approaches are necessary
for effectively addressing cross-border threats facing
the region. We are encouraged by the determination
of the States of the Sahelo-Saharan region to intensify
cooperation and coordination with a view to developing
inclusive interregional border security and collective
anti-terrorism strategies. The recent second regional
conference on border security between the Sahel and
Maghreb States, hosted by Morocco in Rabat, was a
timely and important forum to that end.
Further promotion of national reconciliation and
intercommunal dialogue is another essential task.
In that context, we support the ongoing national,
international, regional and subregional efforts to
promote the ongoing political processes in Mali and
welcome the commitment of the Malian Government
to address the root causes of the multifaceted crisis in
that country.
The continued international support for national
Governments in the region is required, with a view to
enabling them to address the most pressing needs of the
affected populations and to implement resilience-based
approaches to sustainable development. We welcome
the recent joint visit to the region by the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the World Bank and
the announcements of planned funding in support of
national and regional efforts.
In conclusion, I would like once again to underscore
the importance of the continued strong commitment
of the international community to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
the countries of the Sahel region.

13-61575

12/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

The President (spoke in French): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity. Naturally, I would
like to thank the speakers for their presentations on the
challenges in the Sahel and their proposals to respond
to them.
The countries of the Sahel are facing transnational
complex challenges in all areas — governance, security,
the humanitarian situation and the serious challenges of
development. As the speakers stated, those phenomena
know no borders and thus call for a common approach.
It is right that the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which the Secretary-General launched in
September 2012 at the request of the Security Council,
seeks to adopt a comprehensive approach to those
challenges.
The expected reinforcement of the United
Nations Office for West Africa at Dakar will play an
essential coordinating role between all players for its
implementation.
However, that strategy would be meaningless if it
were not supported by the mobilization of the entire
international community. In that context, I welcome
the significant pledges for the countries of the Sahel
that were announced last November by the World Bank
and the European Union. France, the top bilateral donor
in the region, has decided to raise its commitment to
€900 million for the years 2014-2015, which amounts to
more than $1.2 billion. We also believe that the action
fund for the Sahel proposed by Mr. Prodi and to be
managed by the African Development Bank could make
a useful contribution to international efforts within the
framework of the United Nations integrated strategy.
For those investments to be effective, however, they
must be aligned with the needs of the States concerned,
and such proposals must be quickly translated into
concrete projects for the peoples of the Sahel.
An estimated 10 million people in the region have
suffered as a result of food insecurity in 2013. It is our
collective duty to improve the access of those people
to basic services, such as transportation, water, food,
education and health. The development of desert spaces
must also be a major focus of our efforts, in particular
through support for shepherding activities and the
development of the infrastructure that will allow such
spaces to be opened up.
To address those challenges, one word strikes me
as essential: trust. Without trust among all of the States

S/PV.7081

of the region, we will not be able to offer a coordinated
response to the transnational challenges. Trust among
all the States concerned — among the States of West
Africa as well as those of the Maghreb — is crucial in
order to collectively attack the region’s challenges. That
is indeed the meaning of the presidential statement that
we have just adopted (S/PRST/2013/20) at the initiative
of our Moroccan colleagues.
With particular regard to the matter of security,
terrorist and trafficking groups in the region recognize
no borders, which makes a coordinated approach all
the more necessary. In that context, we welcome the
two conferences on borders, held in Tripoli in 2012
and in Rabat in 2013. We also hail the cooperation
and coordination mechanism established as part of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which
was agreed on 5 November in Bamako by the ministers
of all the States in the region. That platform, chaired
for two years by Mali, with a secretariat provided by
the African Union and the United Nations, has the
advantage of bringing together all the States of West
Africa and the Maghreb, as well as the relevant regional
and international organizations. The major country
partners would find it useful to associate themselves
with that mechanism.
Both in its national capacity and as part of the
framework of the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, France stands committed alongside the
States of the Sahel to strengthening security in the
region. That is why we are hosting a meeting next week
on drug trafficking and its consequences for peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel. The deleterious
effects of drug trafficking, which encourages corruption
and undermines the governance of States, deserve a
strengthened collective response.
Moreover, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to the peoples of the Sahel as they face the challenges
before them. After the emergency in Mali, it is high
time for the international community to confront the
root causes of the crisis in the Sahel. There can be no
security in the Sahel without development. The reverse
is also true. Improved security is indispensable for the
region’s development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more speakers on my list.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

13-6157525/25
