U NIT ED 'N A T ION S

Distr.
GENERAL
A/3208
8/3688
25 October 1956

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

CRIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Eleventh session
ELECTION OF A MEMBER OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
TO FILL THE VACANCY CAUSED BY THE DEATH OF JUDGE HSU MO
Memorandum) by the Secretary-General
I.

INl'RODUCTION

The President of the International Court of Justice, bya communication dated
28 June 1956, informed the Secretary-Gen.eral of the death on that date of
Judge Hsu Mo. Thus there arose a vacancy in tb~ Court for the remainder of the term
of Judge Hsu Mo, which expires on 5 February 1958. The Secretary-General, by
communications of 13 July 1956, invited the national groups of the States parties
to the Statute of the Court to make nominations for the vacanoy, and the
nominations he
.--- has received have been submitted to .the General Assembly and to the
Security Council in documents A/3198 -S/3662 and A/3198/Add.l - S/3662/Add.l.
2. The Security Council, at its 733rd meeting on 6 September 1956, adopted a
resolution deciding, that the election to fill the vacancy should take place during
the eleventh session of the General Assembly; this resolution was transmitted to the
General Assembly through .the SecretarY-General in document A/3185. The object of 'the
present memorandum is to describe the procedure in the General Assembly and the
Security Council in regard to the election.
3. The names and.nationalities of' the present members of the International Court of
Justice, and the years in which their present terms are due to expire, are as
follows:

1.

.

'56-28089

A/3 20 8
S/3688
English
Page 2
Name

G.H. Hackwo~th, President

..

Nationality

Expiration of present
term (on 5 February)

Lr.ited States of A~erica

1961

A.H. Badawi, Vice-President

Egypt

J.G. Guerrero
J. Basdevant

El Salvador

1958
1964

France

1964

B. Winiarski

Poland

1958

M. Zori6i6

Yugoslavia

H. Klaestad

Norway
Canada

1958
1961

J.E. Read
E.C. Armand~Ugon

Uruguay

F.r. Kojevnikov

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1961

Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Kban

Pakistan

1961

Sir Hersch Lauterpacht

United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

1964

Argentina

1964

Mexico

1964

~.M.

Moreno Quintana

R.. C6rdova
11.
4..

1958
1961

:FRCCEDURE IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND IN THE SECURITY COUNCIL

The election will take place in accordance with the following:
(~) The Statute of the Court, and in particular Articles 2 to 4, 8 to 12 and 14;
(~) Rules 151 and 152 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly; and

(g) Rules 40 and 61 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council.
5.

In accord8.nce with General Assembly resolution 264(III) of 8 October 1948,

Japan, Liechtenstein, .San Marino erJd SWitzerland, which are parties to the Statute
of the Court but not Members of the United Nations, will participate, in the
General Assembly, in the election in the same manner as the Members of the
United Nations.
6.
According to Art'icle 2. of the Statute, the judges are to be el\':lcted regardless
of their nationality from among persons of high moral character, who possess the
qu~,lifications reQuired in their respective countries for appointment to the highest
jud.icial offices, or are jurisconsults of recognized competence in international law.
Article 9 reQuires electors to bear in mind not only that the persons to be elected
should individually possess tee qualificaticns reQuired, but also that in the body

A/320(j

S/3688
English
Page 3
as a whole the representation of the main forms of civilization and of the principal
legal systems of the world should be assured.

7. On the day of the election the General Assembly and the SecurHy Council will
proceed independently of one another to elect a member of the Court in the place of
Judge Hsu Mo (Article 8 of tbe statute). Election requires an absolute majority of
votes in the General Assembly and in the SecurityCcur,cil (Article 10, paragraph 1,
of the Statute). An absolute majority in the General Assembly consists of more than
half of the total number of possible electors, whether or not they are actually
present and voting.

In the Se.curity Council six votes constitute an absolute

majority, and no distinction is to be made between permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council (Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Statute).

8.

The election will be held by secret ballot..

Each elector in the General Assembly

and in the Security Council may vote for only one candidate.

The electors will

indicate the candidate for whom they, 'wish to vote by placing a cross against his
name on the ballot paper.

Under Article 7 of the statute, only those candidates

whose names appear in the list prepared by the Secretary-General are eligible for
election, unless the special procedure
outlined in Article 12, paragraph 2, is used.
,

9.

Under rule 152 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and rule 61 of

the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, successive ballots will
be taken at the same meeting until in each body one candidate bas obtained an
absolute majority of votes.

When this occurs, the Presidents of the General

Assembly and of the Securi.ty Council will notify each other of the names of the
candidates successful in their respective organs, and if the same candidate has
received an absolute majority in both, the President of the General Assembly will
announce his election.
10. If different candidates have received absolute majorities in the -two bodies, the
General Assembly and the Security Council, again independently of one er..other, will
hold a second meeting and, if necessary, a third meeting, at which further ballots
will be taken, the results being again co~pured after one candidate has received an
absolute majority in each organ.
11. If after the third meeting the vacancy still remains unfilled, further meetdI:\gs
may be held in the same way as previously, or alternatively, the General Assembly
and the Security Council may, at any time, at the request of either body, form a
joint ·confer,ence consisting of six members, three appointed by each body
(Article120;f. the Statute).

Any vote of the Security Council for the appointment

A!3208
8/3688
English
Page 4
of members of the conference will be 'taken without any distinction between
permanent and non-permanent members (Article 10, ;PB,ragraph 2, ,of the 8tatute). The
joint conference may, by an absolute majority, agree upon a candidate and submit his
name to the Assembly and to the Council for acceptance. If unanimously agreed, the
.:jointconf'erence may submit the name of a candidate not included in the list of
nominations,providedthat the candidate fulfils the reqUired conditions
(Article 12 of the Statute).
12. If the jOint conference is satisfied that it will not be successful in procuring
an election, those members of the Court who 'have already been elected will, within
~ period to be fixed by the Security Council, proceed to fill the vacant seat by
selection from among those candidates who have obtained votes either in the
General Assembly or in the Security Council. In the event of an equality of votes
among the judges, the eldest·juCige will have a casting vote (Article 12 of the
Statute ).
13. After the conc~usion of the election the 8ecretary-peneral will inform the
seccessful candidate of his election. His term of office '\Irill begin as of the date
of the election.

"
