General Aaeembly-Thlrteenth SeHion

able as a result of disarmament, as and when sufficient
progress is made, additional resources to the improvement of living conditions throughout the world and
especially in the less developed countries.
779th plenary meeting,
4 November 1958.

B
The General Assembly,
Welcoming the report of the Conference of Experts
to Study the Possibility of Detecting Violations of a
Possible Agreement on the Suspension of Nuclear
Tests,1
Welcoming further the decision of the States which
have tested nuclear weapons to meet in a conference at
Geneva, commencing 31 October 1958, concerning the
question of nuclear weapons tests,
1. Expresses the hope that the conference will be
successful and lead to an agreement acceptable to all;
2. Requests the parties concerned to report to the
General Assembly the agreement that may be the result
of their negotiations ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance and provide such services as may be asked
for by the conference commencing at Geneva on 31
October 1958.
779th plenary meeting,
4 November 1958.
C
The General Assembly,
Noting the agreement among certain States to meet
to study the technical aspects of measures against the
possibility of surprise attack,
1. Expresses the hope that the widest possible measure of agreement will be achieved in the forthcoming
study;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render such assistance and provide such services as may be asked for
and required by this conference ;
3. Requests the States participating in the study to
inform the United Nations of the progress achieved.
779th plenary meeting,
4 November.1958.

D
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the universal desire for the establishment of genuinely peaceful conditions in the world
and therefore for taking steps to avoid the destruction
that would result from a major armed conflict,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
for seeking a solution of the disarmament problem,
Expressing its determination that all Members of the
United Nations should be in a position to contribute to
a solution of this problem on a continuing basis,
1. Decides that the Disarmament Commission shall,
for 1959 and on an ad hoe basis, be composed of all the
Members of the United Nations ;
2. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission all the
documents, proposals and records of discussions relating
to disarmament at the thirteenth session of the General
Assembly;

3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to convene as appropriate and to submit to the Security Council and to the General Assembly, at a special session if
netessary, constructive proposals and recommendations
in the field of disarmament;
4. Decides that the first meeting of the Disarmament
Commission shall be convened by the Secretary-General
after consultation with the Member States and that the
Commission, having begun its activities under rule 162
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and
taking that rule into account, shall adopt its own rules
of procedure.
779th plenary meeting,
4 November 1958.

1264 (XIII). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea,2
Reaffirming its resolutions 112 (II) of 14 November
1947, 195 (III) of 12 December 1948, 293 (IV) of 21
October 1949, 376 (V) of 7 October 1950, 811 (IX)
of 11 December 1954, 910 A (X) of 29 November 1955,
1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957 and 1180 (XII) of 29
November 1957,
Noting the exchange of correspondence between the
communist authorities and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland on behalf of the Governments of countries which have contributed forces to the
United Nations Command in Korea, in which these
Governments expressed their wish to see a genuine settlement of the Korean question in accordance with
United Nations resolutions and their willingness at all
times to further the consideration of measures designed
to effect reunification on this basis, and stated that, in
accordance with the existing recommendations of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, the Governments concerned are prepared to withdraw their forces
from Korea when the conditions for a lasting settlement
laid down by the General Assembly have been fulfilled, 8
Noting further that in this exchange the Governments
concerned, observing that the greater part of the forces
sent to Korea in accordance with resolutions of the
United Nations have already been withdrawn, welcomed
the announcement that the Chinese communist troops
were also to be withdrawn from North Korea,
1. Calls to the attention of the communist authorities
;oncerned the continued determination of the United
Nations to bring about by peaceful means the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea
under a representative form of government, and the full
restoration of international peace and security in the
area;
2. Calls upon these authorities to accept the established United Nations objectives in order to achieve a
settle~ent in Korea based on the fundamental principles
for umfication set forth by the nations participating on
behalf of the United Nations in the Korean Political
Conference held at Geneva in 1954, and reaffirmed by
the General Assembly;
• Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/3865).
• A/3845.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Urges these authorities to agree at an early date
on the holding of genuinely free elections in accordance
with the principles endorsed by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to place the Korean
question on the provisional agenda of the fourteenth
session of the General Assembly.
781st plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1287 (XIIl). Question of Cypnu4
The General Assembly,
Having consider eel the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 1013 (XI) of 26 February
1957,
Expresses its confidence that continued efforts will
be made by the parties to reach a peaceful, democratic
and just solution in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1347 (XIIl). Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
Noting with satisfaction the unanimously adopted report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation, 11
Recalling also its resolution 1147 (XII) of 14 November 1957 which requested the Secretary-General in
consultation with the Committee to consider the question
of the strengthening and widening of scientific activities
in this field,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's report8 prepared in response to the above-mentioned resolution,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for its work and
for the valuable report which it has presented ;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
agencies, to the international non-governmental and the
national scientific organizations, and to the individual
scientists who have assisted the Committee in its work;
3. Urges all concerned to take note of the suggestions
made and the views expressed in the report of the Committee;
4. Decides to request the Committee to continue its
useful work, and to report to the General Assembly as
appropriate ;
• This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the First Committee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Ses.rion, Annexes, agenda item 68, document A/4029.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Ses.rion, Supplement No.17 (A/3838).
'Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, documents A/3864 and Add.1,

5

5. Requests the Committee to consult with the other
agencies and organizations concerned on projects within
its sphere of activities so as to avoid the duplication of
wort and ensure effective co-ordination ;
6. Calls upon all concerned to assist the Committee
by making available to it reports and studies relating to
the short-term and long-term effects of ionizing radiation upon man and his environment and radiological
data collected by them, and by pursuing such investigations as may broaden world scientific knowledge in this
sphere and by transmitting their results to the Committee;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with the assistance necessary for
the conduct of its work.
792nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.

1348 (XIII). Question of the peaceful use
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of mankind in outer
space and recognizing that it is the common aim that
outer space should be used for peaceful purposes only,
Bearing in mind the provision of Article 2, paragraph
1, of the Charter of the United Nations, which states
that the Organization is based on the principle of the
sovereign equality of all its Members,
Wishing to avoid the extension of present national
rivalries into this new field,
Desiring to promote energetically the fullest exploration and exploitation of outer space for the benefit of
mankind,
Conscious that recent developments in respect of
outer space have added a new dimension to man's existence and opened new possibilities for the increase of his
knowledge and the improvement of his life,
Noting the success of the scientific co-operative programme of the International Geophysical Year in the
exploration of outer space and the decision to continue
and expand this type of co-operation,
Recognizing the great importance of international cooperation in the study and utilization of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Consiclering that such co-operation will promote mutual understanding and the strengthening of friendly
relations among peoples,
Believing that the developtl}ent of programmes of international and scientific co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space should be vigorously pursued,
Believing that progress in this field will materially
help to achieve the ahn that outer space should be used
for peaceful purposes only,
Considering that an important contribution can be
made by the establishment within the framework of the
United Nations of an appropriate international body for
co-operation in the study of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Desiring to obtain the fullest information on the many
problems relating to the peaceful uses of outer space before recommending specific programmes of international
co-operation in this field,
