United Nations

S/PV.6224

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6224th meeting
Wednesday, 25 November 2009, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its third session (S/2009/444)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-61989 (E)

*0961989*

S/PV.6224

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
third session (S/2009/444)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, El Salvador, Finland, India, the Republic of
Korea, Sweden and Switzerland, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Heraldo Muñoz, Permanent Representative of
Chile and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Muñoz to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2009/444, which contains the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its third
session.

2

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Muñoz. I now give the floor to Mr. Muñoz.
Mr. Muñoz: On behalf of the members of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am pleased to
present the report of the Commission on its third
session (S/2009/444).
The annual debates on peacebuilding in the
Security Council and the General Assembly provide a
platform for reviewing and guiding the work of the
Commission by its parent organs. Most importantly,
they also allow for broader engagement of the United
Nations membership in addressing the critical
challenge of post-conflict peacebuilding.
This year, the Security Council and the General
Assembly were presented with an additional report by
the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). The
report, which received significant input from the PBC,
highlighted the increasing emphasis that the United
Nations is placing on securing a coherent and
integrated global response to the challenges in
post-conflict situations.
As the Secretary-General mentions in that report,
while the United Nations is not the only actor in
post-conflict
situations,
the
Organization
is
increasingly expected to play a leadership role in the
field, facilitating engagement between national and
international actors, as well as among international
actors.
The PBC is the central intergovernmental body of
the United Nations that is mandated to ensure that the
Organization indeed leads the way towards the
alleviation of the suffering of populations in
post-conflict situations. Along with the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO), the Peacebuilding Commission continues to
promote the nexus between security and development
and a strategic vision for sustaining and consolidating
peace, avoiding relapse into violence and strengthening
the rule of law and the respect and promotion of human
rights. With its unique membership and its flexible
approach to engaging existing and potential actors and
partners, the Commission continues to be a viable
instrument for improving the United Nations response
to the needs and priorities of post-conflict countries.
The report of the PBC on its third session
represents a collective effort by the members of its

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Organizational Committee to highlight the most
important facts and analysis pertinent to the activities
undertaken by its various configurations. It also
provides observations on the possible way forward.
The report reflects the ongoing progress made by the
PBC in engaging the countries on its agenda.
Moreover, the Commission addressed a number of
critical policy questions and lessons learned of
particular relevance to its overarching mandate as an
institutional mechanism dedicated to addressing the
special needs of post-conflict countries.
As indicated in the conclusion of the report on its
third session, the Commission has consolidated its core
advisory role and demonstrated increasing support for
the countries on its agenda. In doing so, the
Commission has continued to broaden and deepen its
partnerships with critical actors. This is an essential
step forward as the Commission strives to ensure the
operational relevance of its advice and promote the
coherence of peacebuilding strategies.
First and foremost, the PBC continued to
strengthen its linkage with the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Indeed, during the reporting period, we
witnessed an important breakthrough in efforts to
deepen the relationship with the Economic and Social
Council through the participation of the PBC
Chairperson in the Council’s 2009 substantive session
and an exchange of views with Council members on
the important nexus among security, recovery from
conflict and development. In addition, the Economic
and Social Council and the PBC jointly organized a
special event, in collaboration with the World Food
Programme, on the food and economic crisis in
post-conflict countries. The event was a testimonial to
the continued preoccupation of the PBC with the
challenge of providing for the basic and economic
needs of populations emerging from conflict.
The PBC Chairperson also met with the President
of the Security Council on 1 July and participated in
the Security Council debate on the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (see S/PV.6165). In addition, the chairs of the
four country-specific configurations continued to brief
the Security Council regularly on developments in the
peacebuilding process in the four countries on the
Commission’s agenda: Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone.

09-61989

The PBC also continued to expand partnerships
with numerous national, regional and international
actors, including United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, international financial institutions,
regional organizations, the private sector and civil
society.
In mentioning essential partnerships for
peacebuilding, I wish to highlight the most recently
concluded visit to the African Union headquarters in
Addis Ababa, in which I was accompanied by my
colleagues, the Vice-Chair, the chairs of the countryspecific configurations and the Chair of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned, and supported by the
PBSO and the United Nations Liaison Office to the
African Union.
I paid similar outreach visits to the Organization
of American States, the international financial
institutions headquartered in Washington, D.C., and the
European Commission’s headquarters in Brussels.
These
visits
contributed
to
deepening
and
strengthening dialogue with these key regional and
international partners, whose contributions and support
to peacebuilding in countries on the Commission’s
agenda, and globally, are crucial.
With regard to the activities of the various
configurations of the PBC, it is important to underscore
that the Organizational Committee, representing the
core group of PBC members, continued to address
possible approaches to enhancing its capacity to
implement its core mandates and adapt to prevailing
global realities and evolving approaches to critical
peacebuilding priorities. To this end, the Committee
convened a number of meetings and discussions, which
are enumerated in the report.
I wish to underscore the important discussions
that the Committee convened on enhancing the
capacity of the PBC to fulfil its resource mobilization
mandate; employment and income generation, as well
as private sector development in post-conflict
countries; the implications of the financial crisis on
countries emerging from conflict; the United Nations
rule of law coordination strategy in countries emerging
from conflict; and most recently, the prospects for the
mandated 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture and for improving
engagement with countries seeking the Commission’s
advice.

3

S/PV.6224

In addition, the Chair of the Commission
undertook a number of activities to raise global
awareness of the challenges facing countries emerging
from conflict. To this end, our participation in
numerous seminars, workshops, public media
interviews and special events served as important
platform for advocacy on behalf of the countries on the
PBC agenda and of general peacebuilding challenges.
Most recently, this activity resulted, among other
things, in a unique contribution to the PBF from
proceeds of a commemorative digital version of John
Lennon and Yoko Ono’s classic song “Give Peace a
Chance”. I encourage all representatives to tell their
sons and daughters to download “Give Peace a
Chance” from iTunes, and to do so themselves, because
the proceeds will go directly to the PBF.
The linkage of United Nations peacebuilding
activities to the world of celebrities is deemed to be
important in raising awareness and encouraging
contributions to noble United Nations causes at the
level of the general public. To that end, the PBC is also
working
on
appointing
an
ambassador
for
peacebuilding from among a number of possible sports
and arts celebrities. In addition, the country-specific
configurations continued to lead the design and
monitoring of the progress in the implementation of the
strategic frameworks for peacebuilding in the four
countries on the PBC agenda.
In Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone, the chairs of the four
configurations regularly visited the four countries and
interacted with high-level national officials, civil
society, partners and senior United Nations officials at
the country-level. In the four countries, the PBC
membership collectively continues to promote
inclusiveness and national ownership of the
peacebuilding processes. While facing a number of
country-specific challenges in the areas of resources,
capacity, political commitment and coherence, the
Commission provided a viable political platform to
address these challenges and seek the partnerships that
are needed to help drive the coherence of activities and
deliver tangible dividends on the ground.
Finally, the Working Group on Lessons Learned
continued to provide an informal platform for the
Peacebuilding Commission to draw on the expertise of
practitioners from within and outside the United
Nations system, as well from countries with certain
experience in post-conflict peacebuilding. The Working

4

Group also continued to seek useful ties with the work
of the Commission’s configurations, the United
Nations system and the larger peacebuilding
community. To this end, the discussions addressed
critical priorities, such as rule of law assistance,
sustainable reintegration, regional approaches to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
role of national dialogue in peacebuilding.
Throughout its various configurations, the PBC
received substantive support from the PBSO. The
Office continues to provide an essential linkage to the
PBC with the operational entities within and outside
the United Nations system. The PBSO continued to
give regular quarterly briefings to the Committee on
the activities and operations of the PBF. These
briefings contributed to deepening the strategic linkage
between the Commission and the PBF and provided the
Commission with regular opportunities to provide
overall policy guidance on the use of the Fund in
support of the strategic objectives of peacebuilding in
the countries under the PBC’s consideration. The
synergy between the PBC and the PBF is an area to
strengthen even more.
As the United Nations peacebuilding agenda and
its ties with other peacebuilding actors expand, the
PBSO’s scope and areas of support will continue to
expand as well. The Office’s human and substantive
resources will thus need to be further enhanced. The
recent appointment by the Secretary-General of Judy
Cheng-Hopkins as Assistant Secretary-General and
head of the PBSO brings a capable leadership with
significant field experience to manage the support
provided to the PBC, on the one hand, and the
operations of the PBF, on the other.
Three years since the operationalization of the
milestone decision of the 2005 World Summit to
establish the PBC, PBF and PBSO, the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda is expanding in scope and depth.
Peacebuilding is an area that may contribute to further
defining the image of the Organization in the coming
years. The unique feature of peacebuilding as
providing the nexus between security, the rule of law
and development activities to support laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development is
undoubtedly the primary strength behind the concept.
At the same time, with multiple actors involved in a
range of humanitarian, security and development
activities, the challenge of ensuring a coherent and
integrated response is daunting. Likewise, the

09-61989

S/PV.6224

principles of national ownership and inclusiveness
have been pivotal to the work of the Commission
during these years.

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome this
debate and am very grateful to Ambassador Muñoz for
his briefing.

While we can certainly identify initial progress in
linking the advisory role of the PBC with United
Nations and non-United Nations operational entities,
the PBC remains, in my view, underutilized. The
Commission combines a unique link to the three
principal organs of the United Nations, a unique
composition of membership and a unique degree of
flexibility to engage non-United Nations and
non-governmental actors.

Better peacebuilding is at the heart of this
Council’s work. The thematic debate that Uganda, as
President of the Council, held in July (see S/PV.6165)
highlighted the need for rapid implementation of
measures to improve the way we address peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. The debate that
we convened when we held the presidency of the
Council in August (see S/PV.6178) underlined the need
to build much stronger linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Both debates also highlighted the
critical role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Therefore, a potential added value of the PBC at
the country level is to leverage its weight in order to
advance mutual accountability between national actors
in the concerned country and its international and
regional partners. In particular, the PBC could promote
seamless transition from humanitarian to early
recovery assistance, synergy between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates, and national capacitydevelopment in critical peacebuilding priorities.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304), the Peacebuilding Commission
has a critical role to play in championing and
promoting the agenda outlined in that report. The
Commission is certainly positioned to help realize a
number of important actions recommended by the
Secretary-General in that report. In addition, the
envisaged 2010 review of the Commission’s founding
resolutions will provide a prime opportunity to further
build on the experiences it has gained, define its
potential role in support of an expanding United
Nations peacebuilding agenda, and enhance its support
to countries emerging from conflict.
Finally, in taking the lead on the 2010 review, the
Security Council and the General Assembly will be
charting an important course for the future relevance of
the United Nations in tackling post-conflict situations.
This task will be a challenge to our collective capacity
to deliver on the promises and ideals of the United
Nations Charter, and to respond essentially to the needs
of the most vulnerable people of the world.
The President: I thank Ambassador Muñoz for
his briefing.

09-61989

The year ahead offers an opportunity for us to
address the range of critical gaps that currently hamper
our peacebuilding efforts, but let me first commend the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission over the past
year. I should like to thank Ambassador Muñoz for his
dedicated efforts as Chair of the Organizational
Committee; the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada and Switzerland as chairs of
the country-specific configurations; and El Salvador as
Chair of the Working Group on Lessons Learned for
their very valuable contributions. I should also like to
thank the Peacebuilding Support Office for its support.
The annual report (S/2009/444) describes many
of the PBC’s achievements, as well as its challenges. If
we are to see genuine and sustainable peace take root
in countries emerging from conflict, we must build the
linkages between mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Where they are deployed, peacekeeping
missions have a critical role to play in early
peacebuilding by supporting basic safety and security
and political processes. They also provide
indispensable support to others who deliver the means
of economic recovery and basic services, and who help
to restore the core functions of Government. This
support is essential if political parties, former
combatants and the wider population are to invest in
peace.
But all too often, we are not seeing enough
progress in these keys areas in countries on the
Council’s agenda. Failures to implement, for example,
power-sharing and economic components of a peace
agreement, to tackle youth unemployment or to
conduct effective security sector reform pose serious
threats to peace. This in turn leads to increased

5

S/PV.6224

dependency on United Nations or regional
peacekeepers. The Secretary-General’s peacebuilding
report and the New Horizon non-paper issued by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support offer a number of
recommendations to help address these gaps. We need
now to see rapid progress in implementing them.
The PBC is a key part of this. It can provide a
platform for bringing together political, security,
humanitarian and development components of the
international response to ensure that they are mobilized
behind a single strategy in support of national efforts.
There are too many examples of disparate and
fragmented action by the international community in
security sector reform, the rule of law and in other
areas. The PBC should help forge mutual commitments
between a Government and its partners for the
implementation of agreed priorities and should
regularly monitor their delivery.
The PBC has a particular responsibility to reach
out to the development community and to secure its
early and sustained attention in these complex and
high-risk environments. That includes ensuring much
better communication with the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and regional development
banks.
We need to examine when is the optimal time for
a country to be referred to the PBC. We should be
looking at earlier referrals while peacekeepers are still
deployed, and the PBC should explore more flexible
approaches to its engagement. It should not get bogged
down in elaborating detailed strategies, but make use
of existing plans and rapidly identify practical steps to
address peacebuilding priorities. We need to shift its
focus from New York to country-level action and
ensure that it has a more distinctive role and voice.
A measure of confidence in the PBC will be the
number of countries referred to it and their profile and
complexity. We need to understand the incentives and
disincentives for a country coming onto the PBC’s
agenda, and the Council needs to be more proactive in
assessing which countries, if interested, might benefit
from PBC assistance. We also need to improve the way
in which advice generated by the PBC informs
decisions of this Council.
The PBC review next year offers a critical
opportunity to take stock of achievements to date and
to increase the PBC’s added value. To generate real

6

progress, it is important that the Council take its
parental responsibilities seriously and, together with
the General Assembly, make full use of the review to
make the PBC more effective in delivering its ultimate
goal — preventing countries from falling back into
conflict.
That will be the test of the PBC’s worth. That will
be the test of this Council’s development and use of the
PBC in partnership with the General Assembly. That
will be the measure of our efforts in the eyes of the
millions of men, women and children whose lives will
otherwise continue to be ravaged by the appalling
consequences of conflict.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by thanking Ambassador Muñoz for his dedication to
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during his tenure
as Chair, and express further appreciation to the Chairs
of the PBC’s country-specific configurations for their
committed efforts.
The United States welcomes the third annual
report of the PBC (S/2009/444). We are glad to have
this opportunity to reflect on past achievements and
future challenges as we near the fifth anniversary of
the Commission’s establishment.
The United States was an early supporter of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In 2005, we looked at a
15-year track record of international response to armed
conflict and we saw major gaps. We saw peace
processes at risk, not only because of the inherent
fragility of post-conflict transitions, but also because
many of our diplomatic, security, humanitarian and
development tools were not well suited to the task at
hand, or sometimes even worked at cross-purposes. We
saw a rate of relapse into conflict that was
unacceptably high. We saw development jeopardized
across the board. We saw that a third of the people
living in extreme poverty were from conflict-affected
States, and we knew that we must have been doing
something wrong. We saw that as unacceptable.
However, we were also convinced that it was and is
remediable. The Peacebuilding Commission, we
believed, could be a crucial new instrument to help us
collectively change course.
The PBC is still a young institution trying to
deliver on these expectations. The United States very
much appreciates the PBC’s growing track record,
including its efforts to institute more flexible methods
of work, its success in mobilizing resources from

09-61989

S/PV.6224

traditional and non-traditional donors, its commitment
to nationally driven peacebuilding strategies and its
work facilitating coordination among all stakeholders
in order to have a more concrete impact.
The third annual report documents some of these
notable achievements. In Burundi, the PBC added its
voice to those of regional institutions and others to
help create conditions to resume the political process.
In Sierra Leone, the PBC helped to broaden the donor
base. In Guinea-Bissau, the PBC supported the
organization of legislative elections and helped to
secure crucially needed funding. In the Central African
Republic, the PBC supported the national dialogue and
has helped to enhance prospects for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. My Government also
welcomes the revised terms of reference of the
Peacebuilding Fund, which will give the Fund the
potential to be much more responsive to urgent needs.
As we approach the PBC’s five-year mark, we
have the opportunity to take stock and look to the
Commission’s future. We believe that the PBC has the
potential to be an important instrument for mobilizing
our best collective efforts and helping us to focus on
the most pressing requirements to keep conflict from
reigniting: helping Governments restart critical
services, generating jobs and reviving economies,
restoring the rule of law, reforming the security sector,
tackling crime and transborder causes of instability,
and putting an end to sexual and gender-based
violence. Whether in the PBC or not, these issues are
among the highest on the agenda of the United States
and on our shared agenda here at the United Nations.
We urgently need to strengthen our ways of working
together to address them.
We are committed to a serious and ambitious
review. We believe that we need to approach the
process with open minds and a practical commitment
to frank dialogue about the PBC’s added value and how
to strengthen its role and impact. That includes looking
candidly at our own performance here in the Security
Council where, as we noted in July, we need to do
more to take earlier account of the peacebuilding
components of peace processes.
The past 20 years have brought tremendous
learning and experience in the peacebuilding field —
expertise that the review will need to tap. The review
should engage key stakeholders, especially regional
organizations and actors, international financial

09-61989

institutions and development banks, troop- and policecontributing countries, donors, the private sector,
academics and civil society. Of course, it will also need
to draw on the insights of the PBC’s members,
especially its country-specific configurations, and we
will look to the Secretary-General’s personal
leadership to mobilize ideas and expertise from across
the United Nations system. Most of all, the review
should be informed by the views and experiences of
post-conflict countries, both on and off the PBC’s
agenda. Whether the PBC has something real and
lasting to offer them is the ultimate test of its success.
Let me offer two observations in closing. First,
my Government would like to underscore the
importance of timely follow-up to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). We look forward to
progress in clarifying key peacebuilding roles and
responsibilities, which will enable the United Nations
system to build centres of excellence in critical areas.
We also welcome steady progress in the effort to meet
the so-called civilian capacity gap, with particular
attention to mobilizing talent and expertise from
developing countries. Deeper reflection on the links
among integrated peacebuilding missions, the civilian
components of peacekeeping operations and the related
activities of United Nations agencies can help to ensure
that core civilian functions are filled in the most
effective way.
Secondly, we would also underscore the value we
see in working to forge greater coherence among
United Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Throughout the past year, we
have engaged in a deepening conversation about how
to strengthen peacekeeping. As we look to future
deliberations, both on peacekeeping and the PBC
review, we see an important opportunity to forge a
closer and more dynamic link between these
interrelated efforts.
The PBC was created because of gaps in
international response that left too many countries
vulnerable to violent relapse. The PBC has helped to
shrink some of these gaps, but many remain. The
challenge we all face today is to redouble our efforts to
close those gaps.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by expressing my delegation’s gratitude to
Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz for his leadership and

7

S/PV.6224

distinguished work at the head of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We would also like to commend the
extremely valuable and devoted work of the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations and of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned.
The valuable experience acquired by the
Commission
in
implementing
the
Strategic
Frameworks for Peacebuilding in Sierra Leone,
Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic in the areas of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, rule of law assistance, security sector
reform and the promotion of development must be
viewed as a point of departure for defining the future
work of the Commission, improving its advisory role
and mobilization of resources, and underpinning
peacebuilding processes in the countries on its agenda.
Three years after its establishment, the
Commission has evolved continuously as it has faced
challenges arising from the particular situations in the
countries on its agenda. We therefore believe that its
mechanisms must be adapted still further in order to
enhance its contribution to peacebuilding initiatives
and prepare a more rapid and effective response in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Our final objective
must be to ensure that the dividends of peace become a
reality for the societies involved and are relevant to
their socio-economic development needs.
Given the fact that the Commission is a new body
that has not yet reached its full potential, it is important
to support, as noted in the Commission’s report on its
third session (S/2009/444), the strengthening of its
working methods and its ability to improve the quality
and efficiency of its mandate, promoting action in such
areas as tailoring its response to situations in the field,
harmonizing the work of the various country-specific
configurations, strengthening and diversifying the
mobilization of resources, and extending in-country
visits in order to raise public awareness of the
processes under way.
There is still much potential for the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretariat to avail themselves
more proactively of the advice provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission and, in the interest of
coherence, to seek coordination with other bodies
outside the United Nations system, including local and
regional actors, in order to promote and implement
peacebuilding strategies that contribute to the

8

revitalization of State institutions and their ability to
respond effectively to the needs of the people.
My delegation firmly believes that the
Commission, as a pillar of the peacebuilding
architecture, can play an even more decisive role in
post-conflict prevention and reconstruction processes.
We therefore reaffirm our commitment to the
presidential statements adopted recently by the
Security Council on this matter (S/PRST/2009/23 and
S/PRST/2009/24), which reflect the importance of
coherence and integration among peacemaking,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
development
activities.
We also believe it vital for the Commission to
strive still further, together with the other protagonists
involved, to implement the strategy proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) to guide
peacebuilding activities in five fundamental spheres:
security, support for the political process, the provision
of basic services, the re-establishment of institutions
and economic revitalization.
Since its establishment, my delegation has
recognized in the Commission and its noble mandate a
tool that should be developed with the aim of
identifying a consistent and comprehensive focus on
the promotion of and support for reconstruction efforts
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. Since its
creation, we have been aware of its potential to
enhance the United Nations peacebuilding response, as
we have stated in the Security Council and the General
Assembly when we have addressed this matter.
To conclude, Mexico trusts that the review of the
founding resolutions of the Commission, scheduled for
2010, will be seized as a window of opportunity to
analyse the way in which the United Nations and the
international community can improve our action and
interaction to strengthen national capacities in
post-conflict reconstruction.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, to which
Croatia attaches great importance. We also recognize
the important role that the Peacebuilding Support
Office has to play in our deliberations.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Swedish presidency of the European
Union later in our debate, and we also thank the

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) under the capable
leadership of its Chair, Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz,
for the comprehensive report on the respective areas of
its competence (S/2009/444).
In light of the increasing complexity of conflicts
and their aftermaths, as well as of new emerging
challenges to peacebuilding efforts, focus on this topic
not only deserves the sustained attention of the
Security Council, but also needs to be approached in a
coherent and coordinated manner. Therefore, we
particularly welcome its commensurate review by the
Security Council in the wake of the recent General
Assembly debate. It is the firm belief of Croatia that,
besides conflict prevention and peace-related activities
undertaken during a conflict, peacebuilding is a key
element of peace operations, whose ultimate objective
is the establishment of self-sustainable security and
prosperity for affected populations.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out,
countries in post-conflict situations are, as a rule,
fragile and can over time re-enter the spiral of
violence. That is why utmost attention needs to be
invested in building solid foundations to establish
sustainable peace. For Croatia, the cornerstone of
international peacebuilding efforts continues to be
found in the United Nations architecture, notably the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Peacebuilding Fund, which together
represent the core mechanisms to guide future
peacebuilding and development efforts. Furthermore,
they have proved to be important conduits for
enhancing the coordination and coherence of
international support to the peace-consolidation efforts
of countries.
In taking stock of respective PBC mandates over
the past three years, it is appropriate that we recognize
notable outcomes in its third year of operation. As the
principal organ for maintaining peace and security, the
Security Council should consider how to further
advance the peacebuilding agenda in the United
Nations and beyond so that, collectively, the
international community can effectively support
countries emerging from conflict as they advance on
the path towards sustainable peace, reconstruction,
economic recovery and development.
There needs to be a recognition that
peacebuilding efforts are highly complex and that a
plethora of actors is often operating at any one time,

09-61989

notwithstanding the leadership role played by the
United Nations and its personnel in the field. Every
effort must be made to coordinate the activities of these
actors and others operating in the theatre so as to avoid
duplication or blurring and to achieve a synergy of
efforts. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/304)
itself notes that the existence of a single peacebuilding
strategy, developed through a consultative process of
all relevant partners on the ground, will significantly
help to facilitate coordination efforts.
It is our view that the United Nations should
continue to play the role of umbrella organization,
providing the groundwork for various organizations to
meet, discuss and coordinate plans and projects, while
similarly respecting their independence and their own
approaches and responsibilities. It has been our
conviction that the establishment of a system of
feedback and lessons learned, whereby present
activities will be inspired by the effects of those
undertaken in the past, would provide the best way
forward, and it is for that reason that we welcome the
work being done by the PBC’s Working Group on
Lessons Learned. We are especially supportive of its
focus on key lessons learned by experts on their
respective issues — for example, rule of law issues,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
developing national capacities and coordinating PBC
efforts with regional and subregional organizations.
National ownership must also be a central tenet
of any peacekeeping effort. Our own experiences from
the 1990s have demonstrated that, despite the altruistic
goals set by United Nations missions and agencies in
the field, external actors are often unable to fully
comprehend the real needs of a domestic population. In
other words, external actors are often ill-equipped to
rebuild the institutions of a war-torn State by
themselves. National actors need to be a part of the
earned peace dividend. International support should
build on existing structures and capacities.
Croatia would like to reiterate its support for the
Secretary-General’s report and his recommendations to
strengthen peacebuilding efforts. We welcome the
improved interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, although it
should be noted that there is still room for
improvement to ensure a natural progression from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We would like to stress
that, in its presidential statement of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) the Council itself re-emphasized the

9

S/PV.6224

need for coherence between, and integration of,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. It also pointed out the need for progress
in achieving a coordinated United Nations approach incountry in order to address, among other things, the
critical gaps in achieving peacebuilding objectives.
Before I conclude, allow me to touch upon the
issue of challenges in financing peacebuilding efforts,
especially as in times of global financial constraints the
effects of crises are most exacerbated in areas of
vulnerability. It is therefore understandable that
successful peacebuilding efforts require predictable,
sustained and well-coordinated funding. As stated by
the Secretary-General, funding for peacebuilding
should be seen as an early investment in sustainable
peace and development. As the Peacebuilding Fund can
only provide a limited share of the resources required,
we support the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to engage other non-traditional donors
and partners, such as diasporas and private
foundations. For their part, donor mechanisms need to
be more adaptable to changing needs on the ground.
We also look to other quick-response mechanisms,
such as the Central Emergency Response Fund, which
has been very successful in the four years since its
inception.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Chile,
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as
to the Chairmen of its country-specific configurations,
namely, the Permanent Representatives of Belgium,
Brazil, Canada and Switzerland, for their efforts to
strengthen the role of the Commission in the United
Nations system and beyond. We are also grateful for
the Commission’s report on the work of its third
session (S/2009/444). We share its conclusions and
recommendations.
We have positively evaluated the results of the
Commission’s third year of work. The Commission has
done
serious
work
in
its
country-specific
configurations. It has built up important experience,
including in terms of establishing regular dialogue
between the Commission and the Security Council on
specific countries. We note that the mandates of United
Nations configuration offices in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra
Leone and the Central African Republic call for
assistance in implementing the peacebuilding
frameworks developed by the Commission with the

10

direct participation of the Governments of those
countries. Given the role of the configuration heads as
Resident Coordinators, we believe that we can achieve
significant progress in genuinely coordinating
peacebuilding efforts in the field — for example,
through the practical interaction between the Security
Council and the Commission. The great virtue of the
Commission lies in its ability to establish direct
dialogue with national Governments and ensure their
leading role and responsibility for the peacebuilding
process.
In a year’s time, as called for in the relevant
resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly,
we will carry out a review of the Commission’s work.
In our view, that review should be conducted on the
basis of the following elements: strict observance of
the Charter-enshrined principles governing the
relations between major United Nations bodies on the
basis of their relevant duties and functions, and full
consideration of practical experience gained through
the work of the Commission for the purpose of
consolidating the accumulation of positive results. The
review will probably touch on a wide range of issues,
such as the links between peacemaking, peacebuilding
and sustainable development and the coordination of
peacebuilding efforts inside the United Nations and
beyond.
We believe that one of the major tasks is to
harmonize the agreed functions of the Commission
with the mechanisms at its disposal. We reiterate our
willingness to support a reasonable and realistic
proposal aimed at increasing the authority of the
Commission and strengthening the central principle of
peacebuilding efforts, namely, national responsibility.
The review should result in further strengthening of the
advisory role of the Commission, increasing its
effectiveness in resolving problems associated with
coordinating
international
efforts,
developing
recommendations on political stabilization, improving
security conditions, restoring Statehood and promoting
economic stability and the development of countries
that have experienced severe crises.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like once again to commend your leadership,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for organizing
this very important debate to consider the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on the work of its third
session (S/2009/444). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Muñoz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Commission (PBC), who has just introduced the report.
We congratulate him and commend the Chairpersons of
the PBC’s various country-specific configurations for
their unwavering commitment and determination when
it comes to peacebuilding in countries emerging from
conflict.
This morning’s debate is a very timely one, for it
serves to make the efforts of the Commission more
visible and, in particular, to make it possible to assume
new commitments and respond adequately and
effectively to the needs of countries emerging from
conflict. We would especially like to commend the
efforts made both by the Organizational Committee
and the country-specific configurations of the PBC to
improve their working methods and procedures and, in
so doing, facilitating greater interaction among its
members and the countries on the Commission’s
agenda.
It is clear that no peacebuilding process can be
successful without, first and foremost, involving
national stakeholders and having greater awareness of
the priorities of the countries concerned. It is therefore
reassuring that the Commission, through its various
country-specific configurations, has incorporated the
strategic approach and is drawing on experience and
good practices.
Although much still remains to be done, some of
the initiatives and positive actions undertaken by the
Commission certainly merit attention, for they take
into account many of the considerations and
recommendations that have been made, in particular
with regard to enhancing the Commission’s role in
mobilizing resources from both traditional and
non-traditional partners; promoting ownership of the
peacebuilding process by national stakeholders,
including civil society and the private sector and
involving regional and subregional actors; planning
and coordinating the efforts of all stakeholders in order
to avoid duplication of effort; and strengthening
partnerships with bodies of the United Nations system
and with bilateral and multilateral partners, in
particular regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions.
The compelling nature of some of the challenges
that countries face in the aftermath of conflict requires
urgent support from the international community in
order to avoid the resumption of hostilities. In that
regard, we welcome the invaluable financial

09-61989

contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund. In that
connection, it is essential that efforts continue to be
made to ensure the effective implementation of the
Fund’s guiding principles, namely with regard to
transparency, flexibility, speed and ownership of
programmes by beneficiary countries. We believe that
the Peacebuilding Fund’s revised mandate should make
it possible for it to be more effective and responsive, to
the benefit of post-conflict countries. When it comes to
strengthening
the
partnerships
between
the
Commission and other stakeholders, we absolutely
must take into account those regional and subregional
actors, such as the African Union, who play a
significant role in peacebuilding.
Given the indispensable role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, it is incumbent on us to
furnish it with the appropriate resources in a reliable
way. We wish to commend, in particular, its role as an
advocate in mobilizing international support for
countries emerging from conflict. The strategic
partnerships and arrangements it is developing with
certain institutions, such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, are to be welcomed, as
they provide additional operational know-how and
resources for responding to the priorities of countries
emerging from conflict. Those efforts must be
continued and working methods and mechanisms
adapted to respond adequately and effectively to the
needs of countries emerging from conflict.
We also wish to take this opportunity to
commend the work done by the Peacebuilding Support
Office in support of the joint efforts undertaken
through the Commission. We remain convinced that the
commitment shown by all United Nations organs as
well as the international community and the
continuation of their efforts will make it possible to
carry out peacebuilding processes that are more
reliable and can lead to effective peace and lasting
development in countries emerging from conflict.
In conclusion, we await with interest the
recommendations that will accompany the outcome of
the review in 2010 of the resolutions that established
the Commission. We believe that that report will give
us an opportunity, by drawing on experience and
lessons learned, to strengthen the Commission’s
support to countries emerging from conflict.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like at the outset to express our

11

S/PV.6224

appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I should like to extend my thanks
to the Commission for its third annual report
(S/2009/444). We also extend our thanks to His
Excellency Ambassador Muñoz, the Permanent
Representative of Chile and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and to the current and former Chairs of
the four country-specific configurations for their
distinguished efforts in guiding the work of the
Commission and its configurations.
We appreciate this debate, as well as that which
took place in the General Assembly recently, as
important opportunities to assess the progress achieved
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund in carrying out their mandates to
consolidate peace in post-conflict countries. We should
also like to express our appreciation of the efforts
exerted by the Commission and its country-specific
configurations to increase international interest in and
commitment to the mobilization of resources, so as to
put the strategic plans and frameworks agreed upon
into effect with the countries on the agenda of the
Commission. Libya reaffirms its support for the stance
of the Non-Aligned Movement in this respect.
We express our high appreciation for the efforts
exerted by the Peacebuilding Commission to
collaborate effectively with other bodies of the United
Nations, such as the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, and we
emphasize the importance of continuing such
interaction and fostering further coordination and
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and other regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union (AU). In this respect, we
commend the recent successful visit by a delegation of
the Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by Ambassador
Muñoz, the Permanent Representative of Chile, to the
AU headquarters in Addis Ababa. We call for such
visits and meetings to be continued, with a view to
creating a common strategic understanding of the
priorities for peacebuilding in post-conflict countries
and to specify a more effective methodology for
tackling the current challenges we face in this respect.
Libya commends increased efforts and interest in
peacebuilding and the greater interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission, other bodies of the United
Nations and other regional and international
organizations, which in itself reflects the importance of

12

expanding the membership in the Peacebuilding
Commission. This is a request that has been made
repeatedly by the Non-Aligned Movement. We are
confident that this would enhance the effectiveness of
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict countries and that
the Commission would benefit from the various
experiences that we have accumulated in this respect.
Peacebuilding is a multidimensional process
involving a number of challenges. Among these, we
believe, is the challenge of how to strategically link the
social, economic, developmental, political and security
elements and priorities of peacebuilding. We believe
that peacebuilding efforts will never bear fruit if we
focus on certain elements and priorities and ignore
others, especially with regards to the priorities of
economic recovery and development. We therefore call
for the developmental aspect of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission to be further enhanced.
We agree with the remarks and conclusions
mentioned in the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially those relating to coordination,
coherence and partnerships with a view to developing
integrated peacebuilding strategies based on the
fundamental principles of national ownership, mutual
accountability and continued partnership. There has to
be greater contact, awareness and information on the
role of the Commission, especially with regard to the
countries on its agenda.
With regard to the mobilization of resources,
undoubtedly financing constitutes a fundamental aspect
for maintaining the momentum of peacebuilding. In
this regard, we should like to stress the importance of
confirming the conviction contained in paragraph 79 of
the Commission’s report, which states that “rapid and
flexible funding, aligned to an agreed and prioritized
strategy, is critical for successful peacebuilding”.
Peacebuilding funding must be viewed as an early
investment in peace and development, and this requires
taking greater risks, beyond regular financing for
development. And, in this respect, we call for the
revised competencies of the Peacebuilding Fund to be
swiftly applied, so as to enable the Fund to act as a tool
that provides swift and flexible financing and effective
response to peacebuilding efforts.
Through its membership in the country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic, Libya
is well aware of the importance of making strenuous
efforts to build peace in a country whose people long

09-61989

S/PV.6224

to live in peace and to enjoy sustainable development
and prosperity, especially in view of the broad
momentum produced by the political dialogue and
comprehensive agreements, in whose successful
outcome Libya has participated.
In addition to the commitment expressed by the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
local, regional and international stakeholders, those
developments deserve to be encouraged through
tireless efforts to build peace in that country. That is
what we are striving for, as well as for other efforts on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Burundi. We hope that the
forthcoming visit of the delegation of the countryspecific configuration for the Central African Republic,
to be led by Ambassador Grauls, the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, will be successful. We are
confident in Belgium’s leadership and commitment to
achieving peace.
We look forward to a comprehensive review of
peacebuilding activities in the coming year, which will
help bridge the existing gap, and we trust that
preparations for such a review will start soon.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to thank
Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz for his presentation of the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2009/444).
I am very pleased that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) has continued to make steady
progress during its third year. Under the able
leadership of Chairman Muñoz the PBC has deepened
its partnership with many organizations outside the
United Nations, such as the World Bank, the European
Union and the African Union, in particular. Each of the
four
country-specific
configurations
advanced
peacebuilding efforts, yielding good results on the
ground. For example, the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration organized a special session in June to
help mobilize resources for that country’s new
development plan. In the Central African Republic the
first strategic framework has been adopted, focusing on
the areas of security and development.
It is gratifying that the PBC is a success story of
United Nations reform. Its work is going very well, and
it has established itself as a reliable body and partner to
support countries in post-conflict recovery, linking
security and development in an integrated manner. It
enjoys the continued support of Member States and

09-61989

international organizations. The Commission’s strength
derives largely from the personal commitment and
engagement of the members of the Commission itself.
We therefore applaud the dedication and commitment
of the various chairs: the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, of course, El Salvador
and Switzerland. We are very grateful to all the
ambassadors for their work.
The Peacebuilding Fund is also becoming an
essential tool for countries emerging from conflict. I
hope the Fund will play a catalytic and strategic role to
attract multiplying resources for peacebuilding.
The
Secretary-General’s
July
report
on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) addressed the challenges of recovery at
the very beginning of the post-conflict stage. It
complements the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. I commend
the
Secretariat’s
efforts
to
implement
the
recommendations contained in the report and look
forward to regular updates on its progress.
The year 2010 will be critical for the
Peacebuilding Commission, as it will undergo its fiveyear review, as envisaged in the original founding
resolutions (Security Council resolution 1645 (2005)
and General Assembly resolution 60/180). I would like
to cite four points I consider essential, particularly in
connection with the work of the Security Council —
and, of course, they would be useful input for the
General Assembly, too, but I would like to emphasize
these four points from the Council’s point of view.
First, the review should focus on increasing the
effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission in
achieving positive results and concrete outcomes on
the ground. It is important to reflect on the good
practices of the past three years and to maximize their
strengths and added value to mobilize non-traditional
political and financial support.
Secondly, the Security Council should increase its
substantive interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission. Regular consultations between the Chair
of the PBC and the President of the Council, and now
briefings by the country-specific configuration Chairs
at the Council’s relevant meetings, are now established
practice. But we should probably do more. I believe the
Security Council should make better use of the PBC’s
capacity and potential as its advisory body. For
instance, the Council could ask the Commission to

13

S/PV.6224

examine in depth some specific issues that the Council
has been struggling with but cannot fully address due
to time constraints — such as security sector reform,
electoral assistance and job creation for youths after
conflicts — and report back to the Council with
findings and recommendations.
Thirdly, the Security Council should begin
considering adding new countries to the Peacebuilding
Commission’s agenda. It has four countries now, but as
it makes progress in its work and the workload for
some country-specific configurations is gradually
reduced and could be streamlined, the Commission will
have capacity to take on additional countries, even in
parts of the world beyond Africa. The Council might
also consider asking the Commission to deal with
certain peacebuilding issues that are a priority for a
particular country, instead of what has been the
practice up to now of covering a country’s entire range
of challenges. In doing so, the Commission might be
able to play a role more strategically complementary to
the Council.
Fourthly, we should play close attention to the
relationship between the needs of peacekeeping and of
peacebuilding. The requirements of both are fully
country-overlapping and complement each other.
Overlapping is not a bad thing; it is good, because in
recent years, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
increasingly include peacebuilding tasks such as
security sector reform, democratic governance,
electoral support, enhancing the rule of law, and
capacity-building.
Obviously the PBC does not need to be engaged
in every activity of that nature, but successful
peacebuilding efforts are essential to regulate the
strategy of peacekeeping operations smoothly. The
Commission can take charge of a country once the
main focus shifts from security to stability and
development. We need to develop a coherent strategy
to bridge gaps between peacekeeping, early recovery
and nation-building.
Lastly, with regard to the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, it may be useful for the
Council, as one of its founding organs, to organize an
Arria Formula meeting bringing in the perspectives of
experts and interested parties to enrich our work. It
might also be appropriate to nominate a facilitator to
guide the Commission’s review process, someone with
extensive knowledge of peacebuilding and capable of

14

forging consensus in this area. As a peace-fostering
nation, Japan is committed to contributing proactively
to the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and to its
review process.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): We too wish
to thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz of Chile for his indepth briefing on the related activities of the
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund during the
period under review.
The overriding purpose of Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005) is to strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations to prevent conflicts and to assist
countries emerging from armed conflict in their efforts
towards sustained recovery, reconstruction and
development.
In that connection, the Vietnamese delegation
wishes to underscore that, in its initial years of
evolution, the PBC has consolidated its core advisory
role and leant significant support to critical
peacebuilding priorities. The Commission has made
strong efforts to enhance public awareness and
outreach, capacity-building and policy guidance. It has
also strengthened the common platform for closer and
more effective cooperation among the relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
among regional and subregional organizations. A more
notable strength of the Commission is its capacity to
help initiate funding for the countries on its agenda to
respond to emergency financial difficulties.
Viet Nam commends the Commission’s work in
its third year of development. The PBC, through its
country-specific
configurations
and
integrated
peacebuilding strategies, has yielded concrete and
important results under challenging circumstances in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone and Burundi, the first
two countries on the Commission’s agenda, have surely
recorded real progress in consolidating peace, while
Burundi has made headway in its peace process
through the inclusive political dialogues. Sierra Leone,
for its part, has now emerged as a country firmly on the
path towards stability and development, with
significant reforms having been undertaken in the
socio-economic and security sectors.
Three years after the establishment of the PBC,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, in accordance with the 2005 World Summit

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Outcome (resolution 60/1), peacebuilding is steadily
expanding in scope and depth. With its comparative
advantages residing in its unique representative
membership and convening power for various actors
and stakeholders, the Commission has become a viable
institution for promoting the nexus between security
and development, as well as a strategic vision for
consolidating peace and avoiding relapses into
violence in post-conflict countries.
There remain, however, a number of persistent
challenges to the Commission in its activities. These
challenges range from supporting political processes
and reconciliation to sustaining safety and security, and
from strengthening the rule of law to facilitating the
provision of basic services and the revitalization of
economies destroyed by armed conflict and war.
In all these areas, more tangible and measurable
results continue to be a central element of all its work
on the ground. The Commission will be more effective
in furthering the international peacebuilding agenda if
its activities are better tailored to the needs and
priorities of recipient countries. To this effect, the PBC
should redouble its efforts to improve its rules of
procedures and working methods, intensify interaction
with countries on its agenda, and rationalize its
institutional relationships with the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with the respective competence
of each body as defined by the Charter.
In view of the aftermath of the global economic
and financial crisis, the Peacebuilding Fund should
build upon its revised terms of reference and truly
serve as a catalytic, responsive and focused resource
for peacebuilding support. Overall, the efficient
functioning of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture rests upon the capacity to deliver a real
impact on the ground.
At the same time, bringing to bear the full force
of the United Nations system in support of a country
emerging from conflict requires unity of purpose and
action in all areas of peace and security, human rights,
the rule of law, development and humanitarian affairs,
as well as coherence among preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Greater
emphasis on education and training, job creation,
agriculture, infrastructure, private sector reform and
other development agendas can ultimately address the

09-61989

root causes of conflicts and break the vicious cycle of
poverty, marginalization and violence.
The upcoming 2010 review process will be a
good opportunity to take stock of achievements, gaps
and impact in the exercise of the Commission’s core
mandates. It will also be a good opportunity for the
PBC to build on lessons learned and experiences to
date so as to help the Commission better adapt to
prevailing global realities and better support the
countries that are or will be on its agenda.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
France commends the organization of this debate, held
a few months before the fifth anniversary of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). It is an opportunity
to underscore the initial gains of the PBC and to focus
on priority efforts that could improve the effectiveness
of its work. The 2010 review should allow the
Commission to become an influential tool that will
bring added value to key areas of peacebuilding.
We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Muñoz, Chair of
the Commission, for his dedication and his work at the
head of the PBC since January 2009. France also
wishes to express its gratitude to the four Chairs of the
country-specific configurations engaged in resolute
peacebuilding efforts in the countries in question.
As its report (S/2009/444) indicates, the PBC has
already achieved satisfactory results in the four
countries on its agenda. For four years, the
Commission has played a growing role in its United
Nations peacebuilding efforts in countries that are just
emerging from conflict, by mobilizing resources and
coordinating international assistance. My delegation
emphasizes the importance of the ties that have been
established between the PBC and the national
authorities of those four States, in particular in the
definition of strategic priorities. The ownership of
those peacebuilding strategies by all stakeholders is
vital. We therefore call on the Governments of
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic, which have the primary
responsibility for successful peacebuilding, to pursue
their cooperation with the Commission, in particular in
completing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes under way, reforming their
security sectors and organizing elections.

15

S/PV.6224

Despite that progress, we feel that the
Commission’s effectiveness can still be improved. The
Commission has not yet achieved all the objectives
entrusted to it when it was created. France favours
strengthened relations between the Commission and
the Security Council, as suggested by the SecretaryGeneral in his June report (S/2009/304). The primary
objective of the Commission is to ensure the transition
between
peacekeeping
operations
and
the
peacebuilding process. To that end, the Commission
and the Council must cooperate more regularly and
more closely to ensure, in particular, that the
peacebuilding dimension is taken into account at the
earliest possible phase in defining post-crisis strategies.
The effectiveness of the Commission also
depends on its relations with the United Nations
system, in particular the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Increased synergy with
those organs will ensure the coordination of actions
conducive to the establishment of lasting peace in the
political, economic and social spheres. We also call on
all Member States to pay particular attention to the
work of the Commission and to support it.
The main contribution of the Commission is to
mobilize energies and resources while coordinating
activities on the ground, including the work of
international financial institutions, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations with
which the PBC is in ongoing contact. In that regard, it
is vital that the Commission follow up on projects
financed by the Peacebuilding Fund in order to ensure
the coherence of the international community’s
financial assistance. Thus, the Commission’s value
added could lie in the coordinated selection of projects
and of the States that are recipients of funds through
the Peacebuilding Fund.
The Commission should review some of its
working methods and step up its efforts on the ground.
The Commission’s presence on the ground in the form
of a PBC focal point, through a United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office, is a prerequisite for
coordinating international efforts and for ensuring the
credibility of the Commission. The Integrated
Peacebuilding Offices should serve as effective day-today intermediaries in the implementation of approaches
jointly defined by the Commission and the State in
question.

16

Finally, I welcome the role played by the
Peacebuilding Support Office in supporting the
activities of the Commission. I wish great success to
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, who recently took up her
post.
In our view, the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be a critical milestone in enabling the
Commission to enhance its effectiveness and to gain
visibility and influence here in New York and, most
especially, on the ground. The in-depth and objective
review should provide a comprehensive view of its
strengths and weaknesses of the Commission’s
activities, with a view to making it more effective.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) for report on its third session
(S/2009/444). Our thanks go to Ambassador Muñoz,
Chairman of the Commission, for his briefing; we
appreciate his hard work over the past year.
Last week the General Assembly considered the
report of the PBC. The broader membership of the
United Nations offered a positive assessment of the
Commission’s work over the past year. At the same
time, members expressed their views on the 2010
review of the work of the PBC, including on the need,
inter alia, to consider the linkage between
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding operations
in an integrated manner, to strengthen the coordination
of the PBC with other United Nations bodies and
agencies, to further enhance the Commission’s
fundraising capacity and to expedite the disbursement
of funds by the Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that the
PBC will seriously consider and incorporate those
rational proposals.
I wish to make a number of points about the
future work of the PBC. First, the Commission needs
to optimize its relations with other United Nations
bodies and agencies. Within the United Nations, the
PBC should enhance its interaction with the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. System-wide, the Commission should
further strengthen its communication and coordination
with the relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes; this should be extended also to regional
organizations with a view to establishing a
peacebuilding support and funding network. On the
ground, the PBC should make full use of the resources

09-61989

S/PV.6224

of United Nations projects, funds and peacekeeping
missions, so as to avoid redundancy and waste.

for their good work and their achievements during the
reporting period.

Secondly, the PBC should enhance its
partnerships with recipient countries. Recipient
countries bear primary responsibility for their own
peacebuilding efforts. Recipient countries should have
adequate say in identifying peacebuilding priorities. In
implementing peaceful reconstruction strategies, the
PBC should pay greater attention to training human
resources and building the capacities of recipient
countries. It should make full use of recipient
countries’ existing human resources and expertise.

The Peacebuilding Commission is playing an
important role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding. We
are convinced that greater priority and more resources
should be devoted to peacebuilding. It is the foundation
for sustainable security, stability, economic growth and
development in post-conflict situations. As we pointed
out during the thematic debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding in July (see S/PV.6165), the United
Nations system and the wider international community
need to put greater focus on ensuring better coherence
in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development.

Thirdly, the PBC should take the opportunity
afforded by the 2010 comprehensive review and
continue to work towards completing its institutionbuilding. The Commission is expected to streamline its
meetings, improve its efficiency and ensure the quality
of its meetings. It is our hope that, as it identifies
peacebuilding priorities — beyond security sector
reform, human rights and the rule of law in recipient
countries — the Commission will pay more attention to
deeply rooted problems that are the cause of conflict,
including problems related to economic and social
development.
Sierra Leone, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic are the PBC’s countryspecific focus. They are also on the agenda of the
Security Council. Close cooperation between the
Council and the PBC is therefore crucial in
consolidating the peace processes of those countries.
Links between the two bodies should be strengthened.
The Security Council can provide the Peacebuilding
Commission with guidance through formal meetings,
informal consultations and other modalities. In
handling relevant issues, the Council should, to the
extent possible, take on board the professional
suggestions made by the PBC. Moreover, in the light of
conditions in particular countries, the Council should
consider
referring
new
countries
for
PBC
consideration.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank
Ambassador Muñoz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for presenting the report of the
PBC (S/2009/444) and for his outstanding leadership
of the Commission. We commend him and we
commend the respective Chairs of the country-specific
configurations and of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, as well as the Peacebuilding Support Office,

09-61989

Uganda welcomes the PBC’s increasing
engagement with countries on its agenda, through
facilitating strategic coordination and the alignment of
political and financial support to nationally agreed
priorities. In that regard, we have seen commendable
progress in Burundi and Sierra Leone. In the Central
African Republic and Guinea-Bissau, the PBC’s efforts
in the coordination and mobilization of support to
address specific challenges, such as security sector
reform, are promising.
National leadership and ownership are of
paramount importance in any peacebuilding endeavour.
The national authorities must take primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions
for security, governance and economic recovery, with
the support of the United Nations and international
partners. It is therefore important for the PBC to
prioritize its engagement with countries on its agenda,
building on existing national strategies and capacities.
We are encouraged by the initiatives for
flexibility and the responsive funding being undertaken
through the Peacebuilding Fund and the launching of
its country-level multi-donor trust funds. We look
forward to operationalization of the Fund’s revised
terms of reference to facilitate expeditious funding of
peacebuilding activities.
The Peacebuilding Commission also needs to
strengthen its monitoring and review of mutual
commitments of national and international actors. The
forthcoming 2010 review of the Commission’s
founding resolutions will provide an opportunity to
take stock of its work and to focus on how to further

17

S/PV.6224

enhance its effectiveness in fulfilling its role and
mandate.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz
for presenting the third annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2009/444) and to
congratulate him and to thank him for his work as
Chair of the Commission.
The United Nations has learned and accepted that
the prevention of resurgence of armed conflict means
early work on peacebuilding and continuing the work
on consolidating the peace beyond the implementation
of any agreements that put an end to conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission is the tangible expression
of that conviction. The international community now
realizes that peace cannot be achieved merely by
ending an armed conflict but that it requires a
painstaking and complex construct to support
development and create conditions for lasting peace.
That is now construed as the creative coexistence of a
human community in harmony with its natural and
political environment.
The Peacebuilding Commission has also learned
to quickly provide the strategic and comprehensive
support needed by countries to build peace and has
shown itself to be a dynamic, innovative and flexible
body, able to adapt to the various requirements arising
in the countries on its agenda. Here, we commend the
leadership and dedication of the chairs of the countryspecific configurations — the former Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, Ambassador Frank
Majoor; the Permanent Representatives of Sweden and
Switzerland, Ambassadors Anders Linden and Peter
Maurer; Ambassador John McNee, Permanent
Representative of Canada; Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil; and
Ambassador Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of
Belgium.
Over the last two years we have seen how the
Security Council has increasingly taken in the
peacebuilding perspective. Costa Rica welcomes the
practice whereby the chairs of the configurations
participate in debates on the respective national
situations. The Council has also transformed the United
Nations offices in the Central African Republic, Guinea
Bissau and Sierra Leone into integrated peacebuilding
offices. It has thus sought to act in a more
comprehensive and strategic fashion for the entire

18

United Nations system in those countries. We are sure
that the success achieved will be a valuable stimulus to
improve the work in that area and to strengthen the
Council’s relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially with the respective countryspecific configurations.
The revision of the Commission’s mandate will
be a valuable opportunity to evaluate results, to
consider the lessons learned and to strengthen the
Commission’s work and its relation with other organs
and agencies of the United Nations system.
Peacebuilding will no longer be the last thing to
be considered in preparing for an exit or for closure of
peacekeeping operations. It is, and must continue to be,
a central axis for all United Nations actions, included
from the earliest stages of all peace operations. Soon
the Peacebuilding Commission will have valuable
experience of which the Council must take advantage
in drawing up and renewing mandates for peace
missions that it authorizes. The Secretariat also bears a
responsibility to recommend, from the very earliest
stages of peace operations, the inclusion of
recommendations on peacebuilding actions in its
reports.
Costa Rica enthusiastically welcomes the idea of
strengthening
United
Nations
capacities
in
peacebuilding by establishing and consolidating a team
of competent civilian experts able to deploy rapidly to
support tasks such as, inter alia, security sector reform,
institutional strengthening and support for judicial
systems. Here, we support the endeavours to broaden
and deepen the body of experts and civilian volunteers
for peacebuilding, and we concur that it is necessary to
pay particular attention to capturing and mobilizing
greater
capacity
from
developing
countries,
particularly women.
National actors must be both the engine and the
drivers of peacebuilding processes in their own
countries. Hence, the role of the international
community must be one of support, not of protagonist.
All peacebuilding efforts must have as a goal the
construction and enhancement of national capacities to
ensure sustainable peace once the international
presence decreases in those countries that have lived
through armed conflicts. Costa Rica considers it vital
to involve civil society, including the private sector, to
generate and promote ideas and changes in their
communities.

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Lastly, we wish to express once again our support
for the Commission’s endeavours to construct and
enhance alliances and partnerships among donors,
institutions, regional and subregional organizations and
civil society to support peacebuilding processes.
Certainly those partnerships contribute to ensuring
more consistent and strategic participation of the
international community.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Since we discussed the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2009/444) at length in the General Assembly last
Friday, 1 will confine my intervention to a few points.
But before doing so, I would like to thank Ambassador
Muñoz for his briefing and to underscore the fact that
the progress achieved in the Commission’s work during
the past four years is very positive and promising. Our
thanks also go to the chairs of the country-specific
configurations. It is clearly seen from the report that
that relatively new instrument, with a growing track
record, plays an essential role in helping the countries
in need to attain a durable peace.
Yet the increased complexity of the post-conflict
reconstruction processes, the evolving priorities of
peacebuilding and the need to adapt to changing
conditions on the ground call for a continuous review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture on the
basis of the lessons learned.
With that in mind, we are pleased to see that the
Commission has already engaged in a process of
consultations on how to better improve its work,
increase its impact and mobilize sustained international
attention. We are also pleased that the new terms of
reference for the Peacebuilding Fund are in place.
We believe that these ongoing processes will be
further advanced with the envisaged review in 2010 of
the Commission’s founding resolutions. In this regard,
I would like to emphasize five key issues for further
consideration within the review process.
First, bearing in mind the importance of national
ownership of the peacebuilding process, priority should
be given to the issue of building national capacities.
Our aim should be to transfer expertise rather than to
create dependence on it.
Secondly, we should think more about the
strategic planning of a coherent and effective transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, as well as about
the identification of critical early peacebuilding tasks,

09-61989

particularly within the first two years. As pointed out
in the thematic debate held under our presidency of the
Council last June (see S/PV.6152), peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are integral parts of a whole, and success
can come only if we treat them as such. Turkey will
actively pursue all efforts in that direction.
Thirdly, the gender perspective should be an
essential element in the work of the Commission. The
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and the need for their
empowerment in peacebuilding efforts should be
stressed more within the work of the Commission.
Fourthly, the efficient functioning of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture rests on its ability
of to deliver as one. Therefore, the harmonization of
policies and procedures among the different arms of
the United Nations emerges as a vital component for
the success of our efforts. In this regard, the capacity
of the Peacebuilding Support Office should be
strengthened with a view to promoting a more
integrated and strategic United Nations response in
post-conflict countries.
Last but not least, we believe that the financing
mechanism in support of peacebuilding efforts should
be more predictable, sustainable, transparent,
accountable and flexible. That is why Turkey stands
fully behind its commitments to the Peacebuilding
Fund and makes its contributions to it without any
caveat. The Fund indeed has the potential to fill a
unique niche in the post-conflict arena, and we hope
that the revised terms of reference will allow the Fund
to improve its efficiency and responsiveness.
The momentum the Commission has gathered in
terms of advancing the peacebuilding agenda within
the United Nations and its success in promoting a
convergence of views among Member States
constitutes its most important added value. We believe
that the upcoming mandate review in 2010, based on
lessons learned, will be useful in charting the course of
the Commission’s future work. Turkey is ready to
actively contribute to this process by sharing with the
members of the Commission and the Secretariat the
experiences it has gained through its rather extensive
involvement in and support to the recovery efforts of
various post-conflict countries.
Finally, I fully agree with Ambassador Takasu
and others who have argued for a closer working
relationship between the Security Council and the

19

S/PV.6224

PBC. Regular meetings between the Presidents of the
two bodies and increased mutual feedback on each
other’s work will certainly be useful in creating
synergy in our efforts and effectiveness of our common
endeavours.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.
Austria too would like to express its thanks to His
Excellency
Ambassador
Heraldo
Muñoz
for
introducing the third annual report (S/2009/444) on the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We are
grateful for the hard work undertaken and the excellent
leadership provided by Ambassador Muñoz in the PBC.
We also thank all PBC member States and the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations for their work and
for their collective efforts in preparing this report.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later in this meeting.
Effectively profiting from the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict is
a crucial investment for long-term peace and stability.
Peacebuilding perspectives must be taken into account
from the very first day after the cessation of a conflict,
and peacebuilding efforts must go hand in hand with
the possible deployment of peacekeeping missions.
The importance of bringing peacekeeping and
peacebuilding closer together has also become evident
to us in our work as a member of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Sierra Leone. We also felt that the development there
of an Integrated Peacebuilding Office is a very
interesting and important model, and we therefore
welcome the fact that the Security Council has already
mandated other integrated peacebuilding offices.
We believe that it is evident that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission has a very important
security dimension, especially when it deals with areas
such as security sector reform or the destabilizing
effects of drug trafficking and many other areas that
have to do with stability issues and involvement in the
country. For all those reasons, we believe that
peacebuilding is an area that requires a constructive
and forward-looking dialogue between the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
Austria welcomes the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country’s

20

post-conflict needs by promoting a coherent and
integrated approach highlighting the principles of
national ownership and regional cooperation. The
Peacebuilding Commission provides valuable support
for long-term democratic consolidation and sustained
economic development. It is therefore best placed to
develop a well coordinated, international consensus on
peacebuilding and to bridge the gap between early
stabilization and recovery efforts and long-term
development planning.
In our view, it is essential to pay particular
attention to two aspects: first, the transition, as I
already said, between peacekeeping and peacebuilding;
and secondly, the interface between peacebuilding and
long-term cooperation for sustainable development.
The successful negotiation of both elements is key to
the ultimate success of an international engagement.
In our view, the Peacebuilding Commission is an
extremely important forum to ensure this, along with
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. The PBC, in accordance with its mandate,
should advise on the interface between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. This would facilitate timely
consideration by the international community of the
longer-term perspectives on international engagements,
including in the socio-economic area.
Well-functioning State institutions and rule of law
in a post-conflict context are prerequisites for
sustainable and long-term development. We are
convinced that successful peacebuilding can take place
only if all relevant actors are included. We welcome
the PBC’s efforts to strengthen its linkages within the
United Nations system as well as with other national,
regional and international actors, the private sector and
civil society.
We attach great importance to building further on
the Commission’s accomplishments and look forward
to its further development, as well as that of its
working methods, in the context of the 2010 review.
The review must be carried out in an inclusive way,
with the participation of the entire United Nations
membership, to ensure broader ownership of the
process. Moreover, it should aim at strengthening the
interaction between the Security Council and the PBC
and increase the close coordination with the
Peacebuilding Support Office on all peacebuilding
efforts.

09-61989

S/PV.6224

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Security Council
for the invitation to participate in this debate in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The report of the PBC on its third session
(S/2009/444) presents a detailed appraisal of the
activities undertaken by the Commission in the period
under consideration. It is encouraging to note that
much progress has been achieved since the
Commission was established. The same applies to the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), which has been
instrumental in providing catalytic funding to postconflict countries.
In this connection, I would like to commend the
Chair of the Organizational Committee, Ambassador
Heraldo Muñoz, for his dedicated efforts to enhance
the role and visibility of the Commission. Our gratitude
also goes to the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the Chair of the Working Group on
Lessons Learned.
The developments highlighted in the annual
report are most welcome. In the case of Guinea-Bissau,
we have been able to address the priorities established
in the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding adopted
last year, despite the tragic assassinations of March and
June and the many challenges ahead. We are now
engaged in the process of reviewing the Framework,
which will result in conclusions and recommendations
on the way forward in the next year.
Since I was appointed chair of the countryspecific meeting, I have visited Bissau five times on
different occasions and circumstances. In all of my
visits, I have been able to witness the importance
attached to the Commission and the commitment of
Guinean authorities to the peacebuilding process. The
successful conclusion of the presidential elections and
the inauguration of a new Government represent a
golden window of opportunity for peace and stability,
around which we should focus our activities. GuineaBissau is a rich country, endowed with abundant
natural resources, and needs our continuous support to
fulfil its potential.
This debate on the PBC is timely, taking place as
we consider the report of the Secretary-General on

09-61989

peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and begin a discussion on the 2010
review process. A number of recommendations have
been made. It is now up to us to see how best they can
contribute to strengthening the United Nations capacity
to deal with peacebuilding challenges in a coherent,
expedient and cost-effective manner. Based on our
experience with the Guinea-Bissau configuration, we
appreciate the importance of enhancing coordination
among different actors on the ground, strong leadership
teams and rapid and flexible funding instruments.
Those are valid guidelines to address the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict.
The question of funding is key. We all know how
difficult it is to ensure adequate levels of financial
assistance under the uncertainties usually associated to
post-conflict scenarios. We therefore praise the work of
the Peacebuilding Fund, which has been able to
delivery catalytic assistance in priority areas. Its new
terms of reference will allow for more flexible and
rapid disbursements, in close synergy with the
Peacebuilding Commission. In the case of GuineaBissau, an initial allocation of PBF funding focused on
four priority areas identified by the Government. It is
my hope that a second tranche will be announced soon
after we finalized the review of the Strategic
Framework. We are aware that the PBF is not supposed
to address all peacebuilding issues. However, we
expect that its catalytic role in providing seed money to
fund priority peacebuilding activities can show the way
in attracting supplementary resources to allow such
activities to be scaled up.
A successful peacebuilding strategy should also
rely on coordination, bringing together all actors,
including the international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies, funds and programs on the
ground in order to maximize synergies. By the same
token, cooperation with regional organizations is
indispensable, given the transnational nature of many
peacebuilding challenges. The consultations with the
African Union during the recent PBC mission to Addis
Ababa highlighted the importance of closer and more
frequent interactions with an institution that plays an
important role in peacebuilding in Africa. I also found
that the visit I paid to the headquarters of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
Abuja on 11 November was very useful in
strengthening coordination between our work and the

21

S/PV.6224

work of ECOWAS on matters of common concern
regarding peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, it goes without saying that a strong
United Nations presence on the ground is sine qua non
for shortening the gap between New York and the
country concerned, enhancing coordination and
assisting the Government. In Guinea-Bissau, we
welcome the decision to upgrade the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau into an
integrated Office and hope it will enjoy positive
consideration in the Fifth Committee so that it can start
its operations at full capacity as soon as possible.
We hope that the experience of the PBC in its
various configurations can inform the beginning of an
open, transparent and comprehensive review process in
2010. The PBC is yet to reach its full potential, as
outlined in its founding resolutions. It is now time to
heed the lessons learned and allow the PBC to grow,
consolidate its position at the centre of the
peacebuilding architecture, and make a difference in
the lives of millions of people in war-torn societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the European Union. Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
This year, Member States and United Nations
system have taken important steps to strengthen
international support to countries emerging from
conflict. We have had debates in this chamber and in
the General Assembly on the matter. Concrete
initiatives are under way to enhance the coherence and
effectiveness of our engagement.
Ending violence is merely the first step in
building peace. Weak State institutions, broken
economic systems and a lack of trust and confidence
between former adversaries remain potent threats to
stability long after a peace agreement has been signed.
The challenge is to ensure basic security while starting
the long process of building sustainable peace. This
requires a comprehensive and coordinated response
from the international community in support of
national efforts.

22

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
mandated to promote coordination, marshal resources
and advise based on integrated strategies for
peacebuilding. It was created as a forum for policy
coordination at the strategic level among key
international actors, including the international
financial institutions. The Commission can play a
central role in addressing critical gaps in peacebuilding
efforts and contribute to increased coherence among
security, development and humanitarian actors.
Experience shows that the PBC can also be an
important framework for mutual accountability, under
which host Governments and the international
community can be held to account against agreed
commitments. The unique membership of the
Commission provides international legitimacy to
deliver effectively on these roles.
The 2010 review provides an important
opportunity to reinvigorate the vision behind the PBC,
inject renewed political attention and generate a
common understanding on the way forward. In the
review process, we should build on our experiences
from the PBC’s first years of operation. We know that
support to post-conflict countries must build on
national ownership and be context specific. The PBC
should therefore be flexible in its engagement,
focusing on a limited set of priorities and building on
existing strategies and capacities at the country level.
We also know that high level commitment and
ownership by the PBC membership is central. We must
ensure that our words and policies correspond with our
actions in countries on the PBC agenda and in relevant
multilateral organizations.
The European Union would welcome a more
structured relationship, including increased interaction,
between the PBC and the Security Council. This would
promote the early inclusion of peacebuilding
perspectives in Security Council considerations and
decisions. We need to ensure better use of synergies
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping, from
mandating and planning to deploying and carrying out
peace support operations.
The processes of reviewing the peacebuilding
architecture and the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations should be undertaken in tandem. The
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and the non-paper “A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Peacekeeping” highlight these linkages. Further efforts
are needed to implement the integrated mission
concept for more strategic and coherent United Nations
support to peacebuilding. United Nations leadership incountry needs to be empowered to corral international
support behind early and prioritized strategies. The
operational capacity in core peacebuilding sectors must
be strengthened, including through improved and
timely deployment of civilian capacities. The European
Union will continue to engage actively in taking these
recommendations forward.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, urgent action must be taken to implement this
agreement. More resources are needed to advance
gender
equality
within
transitional
recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction efforts. Efforts in
countries emerging from conflict can offer
opportunities to redress gender inequities of the past
and set precedents for the future. Gender equality
brings new degrees of democratic inclusiveness, as
well as faster social recovery and more durable
economic growth. The international community should
enhance these opportunities.
It is the international community’s moral
obligation and responsibility to support countries
emerging from conflict. We must not fail to meet this
challenge. The United Nations, with its global
legitimacy and broad range of tools, has a central role
to play. We look to the Secretary-General for strong
leadership in enhancing the coherence and
effectiveness of the United Nation peace and security
structures. The European Union will continue to
actively support efforts to better assist countries in
building sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Muñoz of Chile, for
his strong and effective leadership and for his
presentation today.
We now have three years of experience with the
Peacebuilding Commission since the 2005 World
Summit Outcome. The record so far leads us to several
conclusions.

09-61989

First, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office are filling important gaps in the United Nations
response to crisis and conflict. They are helping to
prioritize and sequence tasks, identify overlooked areas
of programming and funding and facilitate a more
unified international presence in post-conflict
countries.
Secondly, institutional progress has been made.
The Peacebuilding Commission has provided useful
support to the countries on its agenda, reformed its
working methods and developed a pragmatic and
strategic approach.
Thirdly, in our view, it is time to be more
ambitious. The Commission’s agenda can and should
be expanded, and its impact should be greater at the
earliest and most tenuous stages of post-conflict
recovery. That is precisely when the international
community’s concentrated attention and resources can
play their most critical role in consolidating peace.
The past year has shown signs of promise in
several areas. Canada particularly welcomes growing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In my capacity as Chair of
the Sierra Leone configuration, I have had the honour
of regularly briefing the Security Council on
peacebuilding progress in that country. In my most
recent briefing, I noted that the PBC’s engagement
with Sierra Leone has evolved. In June, the Sierra
Leone configuration aligned itself behind the
Government’s national strategy, the Agenda for
Change, and also endorsed the new joint peacebuilding
approach developed by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team. That streamlined approach
specifically prioritizes the issues identified by Sierra
Leone as major risks to peace consolidation and
economic growth, such as good governance, drug
trafficking and youth unemployment. At the same time,
the configuration has also advocated for support to
Sierra Leone on critical issues highlighted by the
occurrence of political instability in March, notably
deepening democratic dialogue and enhancing police
capacity. That is one example of how the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission can work
together to achieve more coordinated and integrated
peacebuilding in the field.

23

S/PV.6224

Another positive outcome is the development of
the Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). This
process demonstrated the value of institutional
cooperation on important policy questions.
The PBC has a diverse membership, a unique
mandate to work at the nexus of security and
development, and growing links to other international
institutions. It can serve as a useful forum for input
into Security Council deliberations. The Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission should
consider better defining and implementing this
advisory role.
Finally, the PBC itself has made great strides. All
of the country-specific configurations have taken
significant steps to align their engagement with
national priorities, adapt to changing circumstances on
the ground and reduce administrative burdens. The
tools of engagement are being modified and refined. A
more flexible and strategic Peacebuilding Commission
is gradually emerging, one that is better prepared to
fulfil its political mandate and identify opportunities to
add value to existing efforts.
Today’s debate takes place as Member States
prepare to embark on the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. In our view, the
review should begin by taking stock and consulting
widely with post-conflict States and all relevant
peacebuilding partners. At the same time, it will be
important at the end of the process to retain the
Peacebuilding Commission’s current flexibility and
adaptability.
With that in mind, Canada would like to propose
three issues for discussion in the review.
(spoke in French)
First, the Peacebuilding Commission should be
prepared to vary the intensity and nature of its
engagement depending on the circumstances in a
country and stage of post-conflict recovery. To do that,
modifications to working methods and tools of
engagement may be required. Closer cooperation at the
United Nations itself with the Security Council,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
will also be required.
Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission should
consider adopting a multi-tiered agenda to
accommodate the need for different kinds of

24

approaches. Indeed, not all countries emerging from
conflict will require or want the level of engagement
that includes the creation of a full country-specific
configuration. In such case, the Commission’s role may
be limited to monitoring progress in peacebuilding or
providing more targeted support.
Thirdly, as the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/444) demonstrates, the Commission
must pay greater attention to thematic issues and
lessons learned. It must focus more on the policy
dilemmas, strategic challenges and operational
difficulties that peacebuilding presents. That includes
the central question of knowing how to manage the
transition from peacekeeping and humanitarian action
to early recovery and development. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Support Office should become a focal
point for peacebuilding expertise, particularly by
drawing more regularly on the knowledge and
experience of peacebuilding actors outside the United
Nations.
The creation of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture was part of a broader recognition within
the international community of the need to improve
support for States recovering from conflict. In this
respect, the Peacebuilding Commission has made
progress and holds great potential. It is time to turn
potential into reality and to address the remaining
challenges. The 2010 review is thus a critical
opportunity to realize the full ambition of the original
vision articulated four years ago.
It is our view that, if we wish to assist the people
of States emerging from conflict and working to build a
more peaceful and prosperous future, that is the least
we can do.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): We should like to express our gratitude to
the delegation of Austria for convening this meeting to
consider the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2009/444).
El Salvador has been committed to the cause of
peacebuilding since the Commission was created, as
we believe that the contribution of countries, like ours,
that have themselves overcome armed conflicts is
critical to building the capacity to identify the causes
of violence, share experiences and implement, with the

09-61989

S/PV.6224

agreement of national authorities, comprehensive
peacebuilding strategies within the framework of the
Commission.
Our
statement
today
complements
my
delegation’s expression of its position on this matter in
the General Assembly on 20 November. We reiterate
our gratitude for the leadership shown by Ambassador
Heraldo Muñoz at the helm of the Commission, and we
also welcome the support given by the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations.
The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(A/2009/304) is, in our view, an extremely important
contribution for the entire United Nations system,
inasmuch as it places the responsibility for
peacebuilding on the shoulders of national authorities
along with the international community, which also has
a decisive role in the implementation of a common
strategic goal. Likewise, the third report of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the subject of our
meeting today, takes a new approach, thanks to the
experience accumulated by the Peacebuilding
Commission and the countries on its agenda, to
important issues, such as relations among the principle
organs of the Organization, increased public awareness
and the visibility that the Commission should have,
which includes coordination with the funds and
programs of the United Nations system and with
international financial institutions and regional
organizations and subregional banks.
In this context our recent visit to the African
Union headquarters in Addis Ababa with the Chair of
the Commission and other Commission members gave
us an opportunity to consider how important it is to
enhance communication, dialogue and coordination
between the Commission and regional organizations,
because they are the main actors and they know the
reality and the culture on the ground, so as to give
effect to the Commission’s commitment to prevent the
recurrence of violence in those countries.
I would also like to indicate that the
Commission’s report refers to the fact that the Working
Group on Lessons Learned has touched on some
important matters. Membership in that Group has given
us the opportunity, along with other countries, to
examine issues of importance to the countries under
consideration, such as the role of the United Nations in
establishing the rule of law and regional approaches to

09-61989

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as in
the Great Lakes region of Africa. The Working Group
has also focused on national capacity-building in the
aftermath of conflict, including the coordination
between the Commission and regional and subregional
organizations, sustainable integration and the need to
set up permanent forums for dialogue among different
sectors to promote genuine national reconciliation.
My country has had the privilege of chairing this
Group since it was established, and we firmly believe
that the work done holds added value for the work of
the Commission. It has become an open arena wherein
Member States, together with civil society and the
academic world, have been able to come together to
share a vision, which has contributed not just to
enhancing the presence of the Commission in various
post-conflict countries but also to enhancing the
visibility of the Commission’s activities. On the eve of
the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
delegation would like to suggest that the members of
the Security Council consider allowing the Working
Group in Lessons Learned to continue and become an
institution.
The experience garnered as a member of the
Commission leads us to indicate how important it is for
there to be greater coherence among the various
subsidiary bodies when it comes to their respective
mandates, so that strategic planning among the various
entities responsible for post-conflict peacekeeping and
peacebuilding demonstrate a shared vision and
integrated mechanisms.
That leads us to propose a more rational use of
equipment and goods employed by peacekeeping
missions in the field, which could greatly benefit the
country teams as they move into the peacebuilding
phase. In other words, the capacities assigned to
peacekeeping missions could be kept in place in the
countries in which they operate — if needed, and in an
appropriate way — such as to accelerate moving into
the peacebuilding phase. We believe that there would
be a reduction of the financial costs in both phases and
that a synergy between the teams would be created. We
must not forget that this would make it possible to
enhance the response capacity of national institutions
and regional organizations, together with the
Commission, when the national priorities are defined
in the phases of reconstruction, rehabilitation,
institutional capacity-building, respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and others.

25

S/PV.6224

These thoughts come to us from considering how
important it is to improve and strengthen the steering
function and the coordination and coherence that must
exist among the various organs and subsidiary bodies
to achieve a fuller realization of the goals of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the field.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate El
Salvador’s firm commitment to continue to play an
active part in United Nations endeavours to contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
as well as to the 2010 review process of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
organizing this annual debate. Its importance is even
greater, given the five-year review of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2010. I would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the Chair of the
Commission, Ambassador Muñoz, and the new
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Cheng-Hopkins, two
people whose vision and tireless efforts are very much
appreciated. Belgium fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union (EU), which sums up the
starting point of the EU’s contribution to the United
Nations five-year review of the architecture of the
Commission.
As Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration I often have an opportunity to remind my
listeners that the Commission must report to two
bodies, the General Assembly and the Security
Council. I am in front of one of them right now.
Moreover, the thematic nature of the Commission
makes it a natural interlocutor for the Economic and
Social Council.
Last week, during the debate in the General
Assembly on the reports we are discussing here today, I
had the opportunity to present the principles that will
guide the efforts of Belgium in the context of the fiveyear review process: first, to draw on the vision which
in 2005 was the basis for the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission; secondly, the evolving and
dynamic nature of the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and, thirdly, the need to view the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
context of the overall picture, taking into account in

26

particular the developments over the past years in the
other areas of United Nations reform.
Today, I should like to take these thoughts a little
further by focusing on the relationship between the
Commission and the Security Council. In recent years,
the Council has shown growing interest in
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflicts. This is a
welcome development. Both within the Council and
beyond, there is broad consensus on the purpose of the
Peacebuilding Commission: the task of filling the
institutional void that arises during post-conflict
transition by giving attention to security, development,
good governance and the rule of law. Successive
presidential statements of the Council have mentioned
the role that the Peacebuilding Commission should
play in various contexts, such as addressing problems
relating to gender, children and armed conflict, conflict
mediation and resolution, and the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We have taken these
areas fully into account in the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration.
However, relations between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission should be better
articulated and further intensified despite the already
frequent participation of Chairs of country-specific
configurations in Council debates. In this connection,
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict states that:
“The Security Council should consider more
proactively how the advice of the Commission
could contribute to its work during the early
phase of the Council’s consideration of postconflict situations, for example, by providing an
integrated peacebuilding perspective and specific
suggestions for the Council’s own engagement
with the country on its agenda”. (S/2009/304,
para. 82)
Following this report, the Council asked the
Commission, inter alia, to make more room on its
agenda for its advisory role. We believe it is important,
in the context of the five-year review, to consider and
to specify in greater detail the modalities of the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
I should like to speak of the links between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Council in the
various stages of United Nations and international

09-61989

S/PV.6224

responses to post-conflict periods: start-up, follow-up
and the gradual withdrawal of the international
presence.
First of all, I shall concentrate on start-up. As
stressed in the report of the Secretary-General, once
the main conflict has ended, many critical
peacebuilding activities are only beginning. The
Peacebuilding Commission is well placed to act as a
point of contact for the various stakeholders involved
in putting together the international response. At the
request of the Security Council, the Commission could
make recommendations to the various stakeholders and
consider the immediate needs that a United Nations
presence would have to meet. United Nations missions
in countries on the agenda should be equipped with
mandates and tools sufficient to effectively assist the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
ground. Recent efforts to transition towards integrated
missions and mandates that incorporate support for the
Peacebuilding Commission, as in Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic, are
aimed at responding to precisely this need.
In the follow-up period after the initial phase, the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission should include
the monitoring of progress, coordination and advice.
Here the Secretary-General’s report states that the
establishment
of
national
peacebuilding
and
reconstruction frameworks should lay the groundwork
for a follow-up mechanism which international and
national partners could draw upon. In this context, the
Peacebuilding Commission would have the role of
strengthening the reciprocity of commitments and
coordinating the monitoring and evaluation of progress
made. So that this process may be oriented more
towards partners of the Commission, in particular the
Security Council, we will need to strike the right
balance between benchmarks that are too detailed and
objectives that are too general. There is no doubt that it
would be worthwhile for the Council itself to
endeavour to define what its needs are in this area, as
the delegation of Japan has just suggested.
In the countries on its agenda, the Peacebuilding
Commission can strengthen the legitimacy and
coherence of the activities of the various units of the
United Nations system and other stakeholders
involved. This task of coordinating the efforts of the
international community is a difficult one but it is
indispensable for making international support both
more predictable and more flexible.

09-61989

With regard to its advisory role, the Commission
could be involved to a greater degree by the Security
Council in the preparation of Council documents
relating to countries on the Commission’s agenda. In
the same vein, the Commission could participate in the
consideration of and follow-up on cross-cutting issues
relevant to its work, such as issues relating to children
and armed conflict or to sexual violence. To that end,
more significant collaboration between the relevant
working groups of the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should be developed.
Finally, I shall address the gradual withdrawal of
the United Nations presence. The last phase that the
Peacebuilding Commission should help to plan and
implement is the withdrawal of the United Nations
presence. We should bear in mind that a premature or
ill-conceived withdrawal can in very quickly destroy
the foundations of development that it took many years
to build. That is why the best strategy for exiting a
post-conflict country is to strengthen its national
capacities while gradually removing international
assistance. The Peacebuilding Commission is the
foremost advocate of rapid development of national
capacities.
In conclusion, it would, without a doubt, be
useful for the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Secretariat and the Security Council to engage in a
dialogue on strategies and instruments for the
prevention of conflicts, since, as we have long known,
preventing violent conflicts is far preferable to, as well
as much less costly than, curing their aftermath.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We appreciate
the timely scheduling of today’s debate on the annual
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2009/444).
Let me begin by placing on record our appreciation of
the good work being done by Ambassador Heraldo
Muñoz, Chair of the Commission, who brings a wealth
of experience to this assignment, the new Chairs of the
country-specific configurations and the Chair of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned. I also wish to
congratulate Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins on her
appointment as the head of the Peacebuilding Support
Office. My delegation will remain constructively
engaged in the process and assures them our fullest
cooperation and support.

27

S/PV.6224

The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304)
rightly acknowledges the imperatives of national
ownership and of anchoring peacebuilding efforts at
the country level. Equally significant is the fact that the
Peacebuilding Commission is trying to cooperate and
coordinate with other United Nations agencies as well
as other international institutions and is trying to
expand the web of stakeholders as well as their
involvement in the peacebuilding process.
As a contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund and as
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, India has
remained actively engaged in the critical task of
peacebuilding. We will continue our active association
with both the Commission and the Fund with a view to
enabling those institutions to fulfil in their entirety the
tasks assigned to them by the General Assembly and
the Security Council. India has always held the view
that the setting up of the Peacebuilding Commission
filled an important institutional gap and that the
Commission can and should make an important
contribution to the recovery, reconstruction and
development of countries emerging from conflict,
wherever it agrees to act upon a request for advice and
assistance by any such Member State.
It was with this conviction that India has been
proactively engaged in revising the terms of reference
for the Peacebuilding Fund and sponsored General
Assembly draft resolution A/64/L.72 in that regard in
May. We are happy to note that the Secretary-General’s
annual report on the Peacebuilding Fund observes that
its revised terms of reference have enabled the Fund
“to serve as a fast-disbursing, agile, responsive and
risk-taking peacebuilding instrument” (S/2009/419,
para. 55). In all our endeavours, it is important that the
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission and
all donors be managed creatively, so as to utilize
synergies in existing peacebuilding strategies.
In its own unique experience of nation-building,
India has developed multifaceted capacities relevant to
peacebuilding and development. We have shared this
experience and expertise in a number of countries
transiting from conflict to peace. We are very happy to
continue to make our capabilities in nation-building
available to countries in post-conflict situations, and to
cooperate with the United Nations in its peacebuilding
activities, including those in the areas of development,
social sector reform, and the rule of law and security.

28

Let me conclude by stressing two important
imperatives. First, we must always strive to ensure that
there is an effective two-way dialogue at all stages
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
countries on its agenda. Secondly, we need to
constantly improve the governance structures of the
peacebuilding architecture. It should be in a position to
respond swiftly and with greater efficiency so that all
available resources geared towards peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations are properly harnessed in the
shortest possible time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Ms. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
The Nordic countries attach great importance to
peacebuilding. The entire international community has
a responsibility to support post-conflict countries in
recovering and establishing foundations for sustainable
peace
and
development.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was established to ensure that the
efforts of the international community to assist postconflict countries are carried out in an integrated and
effective manner.
The Nordic countries are strong supporters of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It has a special role in
promoting a coordinated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding. During the past three years the PBC has
demonstrated the ability to develop innovative means
of engagement. While those beginnings show promise,
the ultimate yardstick of success must be change on the
ground. We must be willing to take a frank look at the
record so far and make adjustments where needed. The
2010 review will be a good opportunity to improve the
Commission’s impact. Such a stocktaking exercise will
help us create more momentum for peacebuilding and
generate a common view on the way forward.
The Peacebuilding Commission is mandated to
bring together all relevant actors and to act as a forum
for strategic policy coordination. It should therefore
contribute to coherence between the political mandate
given by the Security Council and the development and
humanitarian mandates of United Nations agencies.
However, this is not a concern for the PBC alone; we,
the Member States, should also have coherent
peacebuilding policies and maintain a consistent
approach in our activities.

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding focus
on different dimensions of post-conflict needs. In this
context I especially want to highlight the link between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The ongoing process
of reviewing United Nations peacekeeping and the
upcoming review of the peacebuilding architecture
provide a unique opportunity to make better use of
synergies between these two areas. Furthermore, in
order to deliver on the Commission’s mandated
advisory role, enhancing its relationship with the
Security Council would be highly beneficial.
Ensuring national ownership of peacebuilding
efforts from the very beginning is essential. Only
national actors can identify the most pressing needs of
their society and the most effective ways of addressing
them. Each post-conflict situation is unique; there is no
one-size-fits-all
solution.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific strategic frameworks
should not impose an additional layer of planning, but
should rather be flexible instruments of engagement
that build on existing assessments and strategies. Such
shared responsibility is reflected in the principle of
mutual accountability. The PBC urges national as well
as international actors to commit to peacebuilding
efforts and encourages a review of these commitments.
We support the further development of this principle,
especially through enhanced resource-mapping and
measurement of donor pledges against actual
disbursements.
The international community has to create a
space for a truly inclusive national process and
undertake all peacebuilding in a way that strengthens
the capacity and commitment of local institutions.
Priority-setting, planning and implementation need to
be genuinely shared responsibilities. The extensive
participation of civil society, private sector and
community-level local actors in the peacebuilding and
reconstruction process is essential. This applies
especially to women. Real reconciliation and
rebuilding happens at the local level, and women are
often the best experts in identifying the most crucial
needs of their communities. Their experience,
knowledge and determination are very much needed.
Yet women are still too often left out of peace
negotiations and post-conflict planning processes. We
must address this. The Nordic countries therefore
welcome the recent adoption of resolution 1889 (2009).
It takes steps towards ensuring sufficient funding for
women’s needs in post-conflict situations and

09-61989

addressing the participation of women in post-conflict
planning. These important steps reemphasize the
message of resolution 1325 (2000): A woman’s place is
not in the margins, but in the centre of decision-making
forums.
To conclude, let me warmly congratulate
Assistant Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins on
her appointment as the head of the Peacebuilding
Support Office. A strong Support Office has a key role
in bringing the United Nations system together on
peacebuilding. At the same time, we welcome the
strong leadership of the Secretary-General in
advancing peacebuilding. I guarantee that the Nordic
countries will remain a committed partner in making
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture a success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council today. Like others, I would like to thank
Ambassador Muñoz for his well-informed and wellcrafted report, contained in document S/2009/444.
Switzerland’s experience in peacebuilding and
our recent experience as Chair of the country-specific
configuration on Burundi of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) leads me to make the following
points.
First, the principle of mutual accountability, as
substantiated in the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Burundi and its biannual reviews and
similar documents, has proven to be a most useful tool
for responsible partnership. In our view, such a
partnership implies not only mutual understanding on
objectives, priorities and means to achieve them, but
also a commitment to seek solutions through
constructive cooperation. That goes for the relationship
between the country on the agenda and the
international community, as well as for the national
actors
themselves.
National
ownership
in
peacebuilding is essential, but national ownership, in
our understanding, cannot be the exclusive prerogative
of the Government alone.
Second, we see much merit in our close
relationship with the actors on the ground. Our actions
are guided by the principle of subsidiarity between the
Commission and those actors. It is not in New York

29

S/PV.6224

that our efforts will bear the best fruit. Peace is built on
the ground.
Third, in every peacebuilding process, elections
are a crucial phase. Several elections are planned in the
next months, including in Burundi. Elections raise two
particular challenges. One is the challenge to
support — and adequately fund — the electoral
process. The other is to balance the inherent tensions of
electoral competition with a basic understanding and
willingness between the parties to cooperate in order to
stabilize societies.
In post-conflict situations particularly, elections
should not become winner-take-all events. Rather, they
are essential for democratizing the peace process and
building national ownership for peace. It is thus
important for all political parties to have access to the
political space at hand, which is a key element in
ensuring a sincere and sustained dialogue. The
Peacebuilding Commission, along with the Council,
have a role to play in getting this message across.
Fourth, one of the tasks of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to provide advice to the Council. In that
regard, I would like to recall and support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304), like other speakers have done before me,
namely, first, to consider more proactively the potential
contributions of the Commission, and second, to foster
the complementarity between the Security Council and
the Commission.
Like troop-contributing countries, members of the
Commission and its country-specific configurations
should be involved as early as possible in the Council’s
deliberations on countries on the PBC agenda.
Fifth, we have to share more systematically
experiences and lessons learned. While all
peacebuilding situations are unique, in most of them
the same key issues need to be addressed, such as
security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, job creation, return and reintegration
of displaced persons and the future of restless young
people.
Six, aware that peace cannot be achieved unless
all efforts concur to that end, the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture was created for the purpose
of
overcoming
institutional
barriers
between
humanitarian,
development,
peacebuilding
and

30

peacekeeping activities. Those challenges remain. We
still act too often in institutional silos within the United
Nations, competing for scarce human and financial
resources. We must increase efforts to build bridges.
Seventh, as an all-stakeholder forum, the
Commission is well qualified to identify gaps,
overcome blockages, muster resources and focus the
spotlight of international attention on the process of
peacebuilding. It has done well for the four countries
on its agenda. However, we all know that there are
more than those four situations where societies are
struggling to avoid falling into armed conflict or trying
to escape from it.
We should ask ourselves these two questions: are
we doing all we can do to make the best use of the
United Nations peacebuilding instruments where peace
can be built? And are those tools fit to be applied to all
situations where peace is to be built?
Finally, the 2010 review of the peacebuilding
architecture is a good opportunity to take stock and
reflect on ways to foster its potential in the new
prevailing international environment. There are
numerous initiatives under way, and we welcome them
all. Nevertheless, we also believe that there is merit in
conducting a more structured and inclusive dialogue
between all stakeholders, and that the review process
deserves authoritative guidance.
We therefore call upon the Secretary-General to
present, by the end of April 2010, a forward-looking
report with specific recommendations. Such a report
could take stock of challenges to peace, it could
highlight the complementarity of mediation and
conflict
prevention,
peacekeeping,
operational
activities for development for peacebuilding and it
could also reflect on the reform processes in those
fields.
A report by the Secretary-General would provide
a sound basis for adopting a new consensus on the
Peacebuilding Commission at the highest political
level at the high-level plenary meeting in September
2010. One or two high-level personalities could,
following the model established with the Prodi report
on the relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union, give stature and authority to that kind
of response and thus facilitate a clearer focus for our
debate.

09-61989

S/PV.6224

The President: I call now on the representative
of Bangladesh.

critical element for any successful peacebuilding
endeavour.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. We commend Ambassador
Muñoz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for introducing the third annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), contained in
document S/2009/444, before the Council this
morning.

We welcome the revised terms of references of
the Peacebuilding Fund. My delegation is particularly
pleased to see the more flexible and responsive nature
of the Fund, including the role it plays in the context of
those terms of reference for the Commission in
advising the Secretary-General on the selection of
countries eligible for consideration for funding.

We also express our sincere appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Switzerland and El Salvador for their good
work in chairing the respective country-specific
configurations and in gathering the lessons learned.
We welcome the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which reflects the activities of the
Commission for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009. We commend the Commission’s work. The
Peacebuilding
Commission
is
the
central
intergovernmental advisory body that, along with the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, fills an important gap in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
We are encouraged to see that the PBC has
continued to combine and deepen its linkage to the
three principal organs of the United Nations — the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. We also appreciate the
Commission’s continued efforts towards expanding
partnerships with different national, regional and
international actors, including United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, as well as international
financial institutions, regional organizations, the
private sector and civil society.
My delegation would like to reiterate
principled position on the following issues.

its

First, the Peacebuilding Commission should have
the central role in post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation processes. Secondly, post-conflict
societies must take charge of their own destiny, that is,
the Commission’s work should be based on national
ownership and national priorities. Thirdly, a more rapid
and flexible funding mechanism is necessary for
effective peacebuilding efforts.
Finally, women’s
involvement and empowerment, in all stages, is a

09-61989

We commend the Secretary-Generals’ efforts in
producing a comprehensive report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of the conflict, contained in
document S/2009/304. We are encouraged to see the
Commission’s advisory role in shaping the report,
including incorporation of views of the Member States,
which, in effect, makes it more comprehensive and
inclusive.
The challenges that post-conflict countries face in
the immediate aftermath of conflict — defined as the
first two years after the main conflict in a country has
ended — cannot be overstated. We could not agree
more with the Secretary-General when he articulates
the following in his report: the need for strengthening
national ownership of the peacebuilding process and
capacity development from the outset; the necessity of
rationalizing the capacity of the United Nations system
to provide knowledge, expertise and deployable
personnel to meet the most urgent peacebuilding needs
together with partners who have a comparative
advantage in particular areas; and the need for working
with Member States to enhance the speed, alignment,
flexibility and risk-tolerance of funding mechanisms.
In the context of comparative advantage in
particular areas, my delegation would like to highlight
the fact that, being one of the major troop-contributing
countries for more than two decades and currently the
largest police-contributing country, Bangladesh is
uniquely positioned to assist in identifying and drawing
on the most relevant capacity requirements on the
ground in post-conflict countries. For example,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes and security sector reform are recognized
as two key elements in the peacebuilding process.
However, those two elements are also included in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. Thus, any
experience gained and lessons learned in peacekeeping
operations could significantly assist and complement
the Peacebuilding Commission’s work. In this regard,

31

S/PV.6224

we would like to recall the penultimate paragraph of
the Security Council’s presidential statement of 5
August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24), which underscores the
importance of introducing peacebuilding elements in
peacekeeping operations before a transfer to the
Peacebuilding Commission, which, in reality, is yet to
be translated into reality in any country-specific
context. My delegation therefore emphasizes the need
for strong synergy between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates.
We further take note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to broaden and deepen the pool of
civilian experts with a view to strengthening United
Nations capacities concerning peacebuilding activities
on the ground. In this regard, my delegation is willing
to engage in Commission’s future work, as outlined in
paragraph 86 of the third report, aiming to analyse how
the United Nations and the international community
can help to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts and volunteers for peacebuilding, giving
particular attention to mobilizing more capacities from
developing countries, especially women.
In line with Security Council resolution 1889
(2009), we strongly emphasize the need for the full,
equal and effective participation of women at all stages
of peacebuilding. We further underscore the key role
women can play in re-establishing the fabric of a
recovering society by contributing to the reintegration
of ex-combatants into the family, including postconflict reconstruction activities. We would also like to
highlight the need for women’s involvement in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies in order to take their perspectives and needs
into account in the peacebuilding process. My
delegation looks forward to becoming engaged in the
future debate concerning women’s participation and
inclusion in peacebuilding and planning in the
aftermath of conflict.
We further recognize that civil society and
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs)
can
significantly contribute to the process of achieving
sustainable economic growth leading to lasting peace
and
development
in
post-conflict
countries.
Bangladesh, home to world’s largest non-governmental
organization and microcredit enterprises, is best placed
to offer to share best practices with regard to the role
of NGOs, in partnership with the public authorities, in
nation-building endeavours. We would further like to
refer to our post-liberation experiences, where we have

32

developed and learned the importance of domestic
initiatives such as microcredit to address poverty
through, inter alia, capacity-building, self-employment
and women’s empowerment.
In this context, I am happy to note that a leading
non-governmental organization based in Bangladesh —
BRAC, which is the largest NGO in Bangladesh and
probably in the world in terms of its population
coverage, with its wide-ranging operations in poverty
alleviation, empowerment of the poor, health,
education including non-formal education, community
development,
agriculture
and
microfinance
development projects — has recently begun to help
residents of Kroo Bay and other communities in Sierra
Leone and, inter alia, in other countries in Africa.
Countries emerging from conflicts need to
consolidate democracy as a step forward; at times they
require national identification cards to help the
Government and the election commission to prepare
non-controversial, transparent and accurate voter lists.
Bangladesh has the experience and expertise in issuing
nearly 90 million national identification cards and
preparing voter lists in recent years and we stand ready
to share our knowledge and capability with postconflict countries.
The 2010 review of the Commission’s founding
resolutions will provide a good opportunity to take
stock of achievements and remaining challenges,
including charting the future role of the Commission in
support of an expanding United Nations peacebuilding
agenda and enhancing its support to countries emerging
from conflict. We look forward to working in close
collaboration with all in that regard.
In conclusion, may I say that Bangladesh’s
commitment to peace and security in post-conflict
countries has a deeply rooted emotional basis. Given
that Bangladeshi peacekeepers, while serving in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in those countries,
often under very difficult situations, were able to
establish strong bonding with ordinary people, thus
gaining their confidence and, more important, their
hearts. We would not and cannot therefore shy away
from any efforts which aim at ensuring the overall
well-being of the people of post-conflict societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.

09-61989

S/PV.6224

Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
debate on the third annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2009/444) and giving us this
opportunity to address the Security Council.
As was articulated by many voices during the
General Assembly debate on this subject last week, the
third session of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
was a rewarding period. During its session, the
Commission focused on, and showed notable progress
in, the areas of enhancing global awareness of
peacebuilding activities, mobilizing resources and
developing strategies to coordinate the rule of law in
post-conflict countries. However, we also faced a
series of challenges during this period, most notably
the global financial crisis, food security issues and
political turmoil in certain agenda countries. How to
harness the progress we made and how to tackle those
challenges will be subjects that require our close
attention during the upcoming 2010 review process.
The Peacebuilding Commission is a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. For the Commission to function and carry out
its mandate effectively, close linkage with, and strong
political support from, the Security Council is
fundamental. In turn, the lessons learned and the
experiences that the Commission has accumulated in
the field will provide valuable advisory inputs for the
Security Council’s discussions. I appreciate the support
that the Security Council has shown to the Commission
to date, but at the same time I would also like to echo
the view expressed during the General Assembly
debate last week that the Commission is still
underutilized considering the potential it has shown. I
would like to share my observations as Vice-Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission regarding enhancing
the linkage between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council.
First, peacekeeping missions need to further
embody early peacebuilding elements in their mandates
and operations, considering that one of key elements of
success in peacekeeping activities is to deliver peace
dividends and bring about immediate and tangible
impacts on the ground.
On early peacebuilding, the PBC has its own
unique added value to contribute, and it would be
advisable to arrange for the Commission to provide its
input to discussions on peacekeeping missions from the

09-61989

earliest stages. I understand that this issue has been
raised in the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and by the Secretariat non-paper on the
New Horizon project, and I look forward to more
detailed and concrete proposals and discussions on this
subject.
Secondly, a systematic way for the Security
Council to utilize the assets of the four countryspecific meetings of the PBC could be developed. The
accumulated lessons learned and experience of each
country-specific meeting will bring a valuable
perspective to the discussion in the Security Council of
a concerned country on the agenda of the PBC.
However, as was stated by Member States during the
General Assembly debate, country-specific meetings,
which are the main vehicles of the PBC, are
underutilized. I see possible areas where synergy could
be created when the assets of the country-specific
meetings are efficiently incorporated into the
discussions of the Security Council, and hope that
more modalities are developed to enhance the
interactivity of the country-specific meetings and the
Security Council.
Thirdly, it is time to think of increasing the
number of countries on the agenda of the PBC so that
the lessons learned and experience of the Commission
can be shared more broadly and applied more
comprehensively. The country-specific meetings are an
instrumental and effective mechanism allowing the
PBC to reach out to and intensely engage with
countries emerging from conflict. I believe that the
value of the country-specific meetings has been quite
well proven over the past three years. At the same time,
we should also consider the Commission’s limited
capacity to engage multiple countries simultaneously,
and develop new and innovative working methods.
Fourthly, as various players participate in
peacebuilding activities, the importance of an
integrated approach cannot be emphasized enough. An
increasing number of integrated peacebuilding offices
in the field represents a compelling reason to deliver as
one in the field. The catalytic role of the PBC can be
instrumental in this process, and in this regard, I hope
that the Commission can more actively participate in
discussions on the operations of integrated
peacebuilding offices.

33

S/PV.6224

Finally,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
sustainable development should be pursued seamlessly
and with a holistic approach. Overarching strategies
integrating all of these dimensions need to be
developed from the first stage of peacekeeping, and
thus the linkage between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission is again emphasized here.
Separately developed strategies will not work as
efficiently to harness synergy and increase the
possibility of success on the ground as those developed
holistically. In the same vein, I believe that entry and
exit strategies are no exception to this.
Close linkage between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is crucial in carrying

34

out our peacebuilding mandates and helping countries
to meet the dramatically increasing number of postconflict demands in the field. The challenges identified
over the Commission’s past three years of operation
only reinforce the importance and critical value of this
linkage. When the relationship between the two bodies
is further strengthened, we will be better poised to
meet the challenges on the ground.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

09-61989
