S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7670th meeting

Thursday, 14 April 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao/Mr. Shen Bo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Jorge
Mr. El Shanawy
Mrs. Boniface
Mr. Kobayashi
Mr. Hew
Mr. Walbridge
Ms. Mukhametzyanova
Mrs. Diagne
Mr. García-Larrache
Mr. Bondiuk
Mr. Patchett
Mr. Watson
Mr. Rivas
Ms. Chan Shum

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Countering terrorism
Letter dated 1 April 2016 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/306)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10541 (E)
*1610541*

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to kindly limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would also like
to appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
reasonable speed so that the interpretation can be
provided accurately.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the initiative
of the Chinese presidency to hold this open debate,
which is timely, especially in the light of the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent briefing this morning.
The scourge of terrorism continues to plague our
societies. Last month, eight cities across Africa, Asia
and Europe were targeted by terrorist attacks — attacks
against the very foundation of peaceful, democratic and
open societies. In times like these, there is a risk that
we allow divisiveness, fear and hatred to get the upper
hand. Political rhetoric is calling for banning Muslims
from entering our territories or for equating Syrian
refugees with terrorists. We must resist all forms of
scapegoating or fearmongering. Targeting a certain
religion, region, nationality or ethnic group plays right
into the hands of the terrorist ideology that we seek
to counter.
A comprehensive and balanced implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is needed. All
four pillars should be given emphasis. First, we need to
continue to strengthen measures to enhance security.
Killing is killing, regardless of any ideology invoked
in its defence, and terrorism is a crime, whatever its
cause. It is essential to ensure without delay the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on the
financing of terrorists, on foreign terrorist fighters and
on sanctions.
Secondly, we need to put more emphasis on two
pillars that are often overlooked, namely, dealing with the
2/50

14/04/2016

conditions conducive to terrorism, and ensuring respect
for human rights and the rule of law. They are essential
to making our work against terrorism sustainable over
the long-term, as well. The Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action on the Prevention of Violent Extremism is
both timely and critical. We all agree that dealing with
the root causes of violent extremism and radicalization
is essential. In that regard, the initiative launched by
the United Nations Development Programme Regional
Bureau for Africa, “Preventing and responding to
violent extremism in Africa: A development approach”,
is a good example of how development initiatives can
make a contribution.
Thirdly, ensuring a tailor-made implementation
at different levels will be key. Regionally, the United
Nations system must work with organizations, such as
the African Union, the European Union, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Those organizations bring added value,
given their networks, established programmes and
the internal collaboration among their member States.
Nationally, the United Nations must work closely
with Governments and stand ready to support the
development of national action plans, when invited.
Locally, the potential for working with civil society must
be fully realized. Women’s groups, youth networks and
faith-based organizations play a fundamental role in
promoting the kind of tolerance, dialogue and inclusion
that is essential if we hope to succeed in preventing
violent extremism and terrorism.
Finally, a better coordinated United Nations
approach is necessary, so as to utilize scarce resources
efficiently and to support countries in capacity-building.
The interconnectedness of the decisions of the Security
Council, the actions of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate with the other parts of the United
Nations system, including funds and programmes,
should be strengthened.
Terrorists seek to divide communities and spread
fear. Dialogue is the best long-term method for
neutralizing the divisive forces of racism, xenophobia
and Islamophobia. No one is born a terrorist. The
strongest counter-narrative against polarization is
inclusion. At this critical point in time, we must
be resolute and stand united. In June, we will have
an opportunity to demonstrate our unity, adopt a
comprehensive approach and reaffirm our support for
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We hope that
we can seize that opportunity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (spoke in French): Switzerland
thanks the Chinese presidency for having convened this
open debate. We would like to take this opportunity
to emphasize two elements: first, the importance
of prevention in countering terrorism and violent
extremism, and secondly, the recent Geneva Conference
on Preventing Violent Extremism, which was organized
by Switzerland and the United Nations.
Terrorism continues to spread around the globe. It
constitutes one of the gravest threats to international
peace and security, aggravated still further by the
emergence of terrorist groups like Da’esh, which control
vast swathes of territory, the people who live there
and their resources. In our battle against terrorism,
we must make use of preventive as well as punitive
measures. Preventing terrorism and violent extremism
means stepping up efforts to promote the rule of law,
human rights and, in situations of armed conflicts,
international humanitarian law.
Fighting against terrorism through the prevention
of violent extremism is a priority for Switzerland, a fact
that is given concrete expression in the Swiss framework
of commitments to peace, security, development and
human rights. We are convinced that national security
is inextricably interwoven with human security and
human rights, and secondly, that preventing violent
extremism is the most effective way of countering
terrorism. In order to underline our commitment to
prevention, Switzerland has developed a foreign policy
plan of action for the prevention of violent extremism.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which gives
renewed energy to United Nations prevention activities
and to pillars I and IV of the 2006 United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. On 7 and 8 April,
Switzerland, with the United Nations, organized the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism.
The Conference, attended by 125 Member States, gave
participants the opportunity to present their views on
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action.
The Conference helped to highlight the need for a
more comprehensive and balanced approach to tackling
terrorism, which includes systematic measures to

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

prevent violent extremism. The participants recalled
that security solutions alone cannot solve the problem of
terrorism and reiterated that violent extremism cannot,
and should not, be linked to any particular religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Moreover,
the Conference offered an opportunity to stress the
importance of the first and fourth pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, ahead of
its review to be held in June in New York. Other results
of the discussion at the Conference can be found in the
Co-Chairs’ conclusions, which were circulated at the
end of the Conference. We hope that the Conference is
able to provide a valuable contribution following these
discussions in the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Yparraguirre (the Philippines): The
Philippines thanks the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate.
Without a doubt, terrorism and violent extremism
are two of the biggest threats to international security.
Our individual and collective actions must, therefore,
rest on two parallel tracks: prevention and countering
its spread. The two are not mutually exclusive and must
be taken simultaneously for our efforts to be effective.
The Philippines advocates a whole-nation approach
to countering and preventing terrorism and violent
extremism within our borders. It entails engaging
non-traditional Government agencies, academe and the
private sector in implementing community-awareness
campaigns and target-hardening programmes. The
Philippines is also proactively engaged in various
domestic undertakings to strengthen its counterterrorism preparedness. We continue to pass laws
aimed at assisting in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. The anti-money laundering law and
anti-terrorist financing law were passed and amended
to further strengthen our counter-terrorism and counterviolent-extremism efforts. The Human Security Act of
2007, our landmark law against terrorism and violent
extremism, is undergoing its final phase of review.
We have also been collaborating with country
partners, through bilateral talks, agreements and
joint projects, and with international organizations to
ensure that our front-line agencies and offices have an
integrated and synchronized approach to countering
terrorism and violent extremism and are abreast of
international developments. Here at the United Nations,

16-105413/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

14/04/2016

the Philippines, together with 10 other countries,
are members of the Group of Friends of Chemical,
Biological, Radiological or Nuclear Risk Mitigation
and Security Governance, which seeks to shine a
spotlight on chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear issues, including those that relate to terrorism
and violent extremism.

Ms. Wilson (Australia): Australia also welcomes
the timely initiative of the People’s Republic of China
in convening this open debate. The debate takes place
during a time of great challenges posed by terrorist
organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, and other non-State actors
threatening the global order.

Information sharing plays a key role, not only in
ensuring greater coordination, but also in enhancing
intelligence sharing among Government agencies. We
established the Philippines Regional Anti-Terrorism
Council Convergence Groups in the various regions
of the country, which are tasked with ensuring a rapid
response to any potential threat. An Inter-Agency
Working Group on Persons of Interest and Foreign
Terrorist Fighters in Conflict Areas has devised a
plan of action on information collection, collation
and processing. We intend to establish a special
investigations committee on foreign terrorist fighters
to study what penal laws would enable us to prosecute
those who travel for terrorism or related training,
pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014).

Australia strongly condemns all acts of terrorism,
wherever committed and whatever the purported
motivation. Terrorism’s growing transnational nature,
including recruitment, facilitation and funding, and the
indiscriminate nature of attacks and victims underscores
the importance of international cooperation to combat
that pernicious threat.

On the prevention side, the Philippines continues to
develop its capacity to detect and prevent insider threats
from homegrown violent extremists. We support grassroots-based efforts to help communities understand
how to protect themselves against extremists or terrorist
propaganda. Deradicalization programmes are being
strengthened through partnerships with local religious
leaders and religious schools to improve their capability
to promote moderate or tolerant religious teachings.
The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism has
also been assisting us in that effort. We have started
a comparative research study on radicalization in
Zamboanga City in Mindanao in an effort to identify
and isolate the drivers or motivating forces that lure
the vulnerable sector to become violent extremists.
Through the study, we are working on a conceptual
model of the radicalization of communities that could
strengthen our preventive efforts.
As we review the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in June, it is our hope that we will
be able to infuse new and effective ideas into our
collective approach that will ensure long-term success
in our fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
4/50

The United Nations has a unique international
role to play in preventing and fighting terrorism. Its
conventions and resolutions on terrorism have set
valuable international norms and established legal
instruments. United Nations sanctions regimes are
also an important enforcement tool, particularly in
disrupting the sources of terrorist financing.
Australia has established invaluable counterterrorism partnerships in forums such as the United
Nations, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation,
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, and the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund. We
also continue to work bilaterally with various country
partners, helping to build their capacity to combat
terrorism. Australia also strongly supports the
critical role of community groups and civil-society
organizations in countering violent extremism and
extremist messages. We need to counter the narrative
from terrorist groups such as Da’esh, which have been
using social media to spread their destructive ideology.
Governments need to work together to contest the
social media space. We also need to engage the private
sector and industry, because of their significant role in
countering violent extremism and extremist messages.
We also need to create an environment that is conducive
to social and religious tolerance, harmony and cohesion.
The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is one of great
concern to Australia, with an estimated 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters originating from over 100 Member
States involved in the conflict in Syria and Iraq.
Australia continues to advocate for full implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014), which focuses international
attention on the foreign terrorist fighter threat.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Australia supports the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. In
particular, we welcome the Plan’s call for countries to
develop national and regional plans to prevent violent
extremism. The Plan aligns well with Australia’s
strategy for countering violent extremism and provides
a framework for advancing the outcomes of Australia’s
Regional Summit to Counter Violent Extremism held in
Sydney in June 2015.
Looking ahead, the June Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review will be another key opportunity to
ensure that our international efforts to combat terrorism
are the best they can be.
Australia remains firmly committed to working at
all levels to bolster international action against terrorism.
We urge Member States to ensure that any measures
taken comply with the Charter of the United Nations
and their other obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking the People’s Republic of China for organizing
this open debate and by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. This meeting provides a timely
opportunity to exchange views on how to enhance
international efforts to prevent and fight terrorism. The
United Nations is the appropriate forum to identify ways
and means to tackle that global threat. Discussions that
took place just a few days ago at the Geneva Conference
on Preventing Violent Extremism also provide useful
inputs for the upcoming review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Brazil is a country committed to the elimination
of the scourge of terrorism. The Brazilian Constitution
establishes the repudiation of terrorism as one of the
guiding principles for our foreign policy. Moreover,
Brazil is a signatory to 14 international legal instruments
against terrorism negotiated under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Our commitment to effectively preventing and
countering terrorism, including its financing, has also
been translated into domestic legislation. In October
2015, Brazil adopted a law specifically designed to
facilitate the implementation of Security Council
resolutions concerning sanctions against individuals

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

and entities affiliated with terrorist organizations.
Last month, in March 2016, we also adopted legislation
defining the crime of terrorism. As Brazil prepares to
host the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio
de Janeiro this summer, we have redoubled our efforts
to counter terrorism, including through the creation of
platforms for the exchange of information and good
practices, as well as for the sharing of intelligence.
The absence of a universally agreed upon definition
of terrorism is detrimental to the shared goal of
eliminating it. We are convinced that filling that legal
gap would contribute to enhancing cohesion in counterterrorism efforts. It would also properly establish the
relationship between concepts, such as terrorism and
violent extremism. It would create improved conditions
for harmonizing regional and national initiatives in
terms of the due process of law and compliance with
human rights.
As several reports on peace and security have
reminded us in 2015, prevention is always the best
policy, and that template should also be applied to
fighting terrorism. In that context, we should give due
consideration to the underlying causes, including those
associated with social, political, economic and cultural
exclusion. Approaches that rely exclusively on military
strategies have demonstrated their limitation in tragic
ways: today, terrorism is more widespread and claims
more lives than 15 years ago.
Terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, have been
attracting recruits by offering them a sense of purpose,
belonging and identity that they have probably failed
to acquire elsewhere. Social exclusion and youth
unemployment have been increasing the vulnerability of
youth to violent extremist narratives that are conducive
to terrorism. The promotion of genuine inclusion in all
countries will undoubtedly contribute to inoculating
societies against terrorism. In that regard, we must
also take a critical look at certain types of response to
the refugee crisis. Such responses may be increasing
rather than decreasing the risks associated with violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. We cannot argue
that there is a responsibility to protect civilians when
they are victims of waves of terrorism and human right
violations in theatres distant from our homes and then
ignore their plight when they knock on our doors.
Countering terrorism is a goal that has a
galvanizing potential. That can be demonstrated by
the fact that the Council has often been able to reach

16-105415/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

consensus on decisions related to counter-terrorism,
even as it remains divided on other important issues.
In the particular case of countering terrorism, recent
experience should encourage the Security Council to
recommit to diplomatic efforts as the privileged vehicle
for promoting peace based on justice. At the same
time, let us not lose sight of the protracted conflicts
that directly or indirectly fuel terrorist agendas. Our
collective failure to deal adequately with ongoing
crises in the Middle East, including the Israel-Palestine
conflict, is an obvious case in point.
We can no longer fail to acknowledge that
strategies that privilege the use of force and unilateral
interpretations of Security Council mandates have
generated more harm than good. The presence of
Da’esh in countries, such as Iraq and Libya, cannot
be dissociated from the local and regional instability
provoked by military intervention.
The Charter of the United Nations is both our
best ally and our best defence against terrorism. Our
efforts will only be effective to the extent that they
are consistent with international law, including human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
The Council has a duty to condemn terrorism and
prevent its spread in a coherent and universal manner,
that is, wherever and whenever international terrorism
strikes.
There can be no justification for terrorist acts.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional
response to that serious threat to peace and security
and remains convinced that cooperation and dialogue
within the United Nations will enhance our capacity to
achieve the results we are all looking for. We will only
succeed if we join efforts on the basis of shared values
and enhanced multilateral cooperation.
Mr. President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate and thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of European Union. I would like to add
a couple of comments from my national perspective.
Terrorism has become one of the biggest challenges
to international peace and security, and no region or
country is fully safe from its widespread consequences.
6/50

14/04/2016

This sad reality should not, however, lead us to despair;
rather, it calls for united and resolute efforts on the part
of the international community aimed at tackling this
common challenge.
We are about to review the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June this year. While
reflecting on our priorities, we must bear in mind that
countering the scourge of terrorism is not possible
through forceful means alone. We have to be aware of
the direct link between security and development.
We cannot be effective in combating terrorism
without tackling its root causes. In that context,
Poland welcomes the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism presented by the Secretary-General. In the
process of its implementation, it is essential to ensure a
high level of coherence with ongoing initiatives aimed
at countering violent extremism conducted by the
European Union and other international organizations.
To address the root causes of terrorism, we need
to reflect also on the issue of the radicalization of
youth, an increasingly challenging aspect of the fight
against extremism. The Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy indicates in its first pillar the socioeconomic
conditions that are conducive to the spread of
radicalism. Unemployment, lack of education and basic
social services, and poor perspectives for personal
development are among the major factors that make
young people so vulnerable to propaganda. Terrorists
offer them the illusion of security and power. The
cynical propaganda of terrorist groups is masterful
in taking advantage of the economic struggles and
idealism of youth.
These factors underlie the phenomenon of the
approximately 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters who
have already travelled to conflict zones. To tackle it, we
need adequate legal mechanisms at the national level as
well as close international cooperation between security
services. In taking these actions, we should remember,
however, that radicalization and violent extremism are
not exclusive to any religion or nationality. All of the
efforts within the hard security area have to be combined
with actions that promote greater levels of social
inclusivity. Ensuring access to education, including the
human rights component, as well as working with local
communities and media, and raising awareness among
young people through programmes on the Internet and
social media seems to us of the utmost importance in
combating violent extremism.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Poland welcomes the actions taken by the Security
Council aimed at cutting off the sources of financing of
terrorist groups. We strongly condemn the looting and
illicit trafficking of cultural properties perpetrated on
an unprecedented scale in Syria and Iraq, especially by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. In this regard,
we call for strict implementation of all relevant Council
resolutions by the international community.
As underlined in the concept note (S/2016/306,
annex) prepared for this debate by China, terrorism
is a common enemy of humanity. We need to stand
committed and united to respond to it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): From Brussels to Istanbul and
from the Ivory Coast to Tel Aviv, the world is facing an
unprecedented surge of terrorism and violent extremism.
Radical extremist groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab have declared war on our societies. Terror
is the common enemy of humankind and requires a
unified effort to fight it. The State of Israel, my State,
stands shoulder to shoulder with the international
community in this global effort.
Unfortunately, the reality of terror is one that
the people of Israel have known for decades, and it
continues today. From the Fedayeen attacks of the
1950s to airplane hijackings in the 1970s and suicide
bombings in the 1990s, Israel has faced wave after
wave of terrorist violence.
In the last six months alone, we have endured more
than 300 attacks. That means two terror attacks a day,
every day, for half a year. Thirty-four people have been
killed and hundreds injured.
In order to defeat this terror, we must have moral
clarity. The decision to pick up a knife or put on a
suicide vest is not about human nature. There is nothing
natural about repeatedly stabbing an innocent woman
in front of her home or shooting a young husband and
wife in front of their children. Terrorism must never be
excused or justified; it must be fought. And there can be
no double standards in this fight.
Since the beginning of this wave of terror, the
Security Council has not condemned a single terror
attack against Israel, not even one. The lives of Israelis
killed in the streets of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv are no

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

less precious than those of Europeans murdered in
Paris and Brussels. The attacks against Israel must be
condemned by the Council. Terror is terror is terror.
In order to fight terror effectively, the Council must
speak out against all terrorist groups, without distinction.
Hizbullah, a terrorist proxy of Iran, openly threatens
to launch attacks against Israeli civilians. Just recently,
the leader of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, warned of
an attack on the ammonia storage tanks in the Israeli
city of Haifa. He described it as “exactly the same as a
nuclear bomb”.
Let me remind all present that Hizbullah has more
than 100,000 rockets and long-range missiles that can
target any place in Israel. It has transformed the villages
of southern Lebanon into terror outposts, placing rocket
launchers next to schools and United Nations facilities,
and storing missiles in living rooms.
The Secretary-General warned only recently that
Hizbullah was ready and willing to use those weapons.
He has condemned Hizbullah’s alarming rhetoric. He
emphasized the very grave consequence of this military
buildup not just for Israel but for the entire region.
Even the Gulf States and the Arab League have
called Hizbullah a terrorist organization. So why
does the Security Council refuse to call this terror
organization by its proper name? If it makes threats
like a terror organization, if it stockpiles weapons like
a terror organization, if it shows disregard for human
life like a terror organization, then what is it?
Hizbullah is a terror organization, and it is
preparing for another round of violence. The Council
must take action now. Resolution 1701 (2006) must be
enforced. Hizbullah must be disarmed.
The major source of violent extremism in our region
is Iran, the world’s leading State sponsor of terrorism.
Iran sponsors terror groups throughout the region,
including the deadly activities of Hizbullah in Syria.
Recently Iran conducted ballistic-missile tests. These
missiles are designed to carry the nuclear warheads
they have promised not to build. Written in Hebrew on
the side of these missiles were the words “Israel must
be wiped off the face of the Earth”.
Such a threat by one State Member of the United
Nations against another Member State is outrageous
and unacceptable.

16-105417/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The voice of the Council must be heard. Iran must
be condemned.
While Iran supports Hizbullah in the north, it
sponsors and supplies Hamas in the south. Hamas,
an internationally designated terrorist organization,
also employs the cynical terror tactic of using civilian
infrastructure for terror operations. And it has never
stopped working to achieve its goal: the destruction
of the State of Israel. Ever since the end of the last
conflict, Hamas has worked to rebuild it arsenal of
rockets and reconstruct its network of terror tunnels.
When groups like Hamas and Hizbullah are more
interested in warfare with Israel than in the welfare of
their own people, it is a recipe for disaster. The Council
must denounce these terror organizations by name.
Because of the ongoing need to protect our people,
Israel has developed techniques, technologies and
tools for counter-terrorism unmatched by any other
country. We are committed to sharing this knowledge
and expertise through bilateral collaboration and
constructive engagement here at the United Nations.
As I said at the beginning, Israel stands firmly with the
family of nations in the fight against terror. We expect
that the international community and the Council will
stand with Israel in our own fight against terror. If we
stand united, we can defeat global terrorism and stop
those who seek to undermine our way of life.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. Ten other countries align themselves
with this statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.
I would like to thank you, Mr President, for
organizing this debate ahead the upcoming anniversary
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and following on the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism presented by the Secretary-General.
I would like to thank the Secretary General for that and
for his briefing.
Horrific terrorist attacks around the globe remind
us of the need to join forces and give a comprehensive
8/50

14/04/2016

response. Terrorism cannot be defeated with security
measures alone; we need to act together and we need
to strengthen our preventive dimension to respond to
radicalization and recruitment in a holistic manner.
All these measures should uphold the rule of law and
respect for human rights, international humanitarian
law and international refugee law.
The European Union has a long-standing and
comprehensive engagement in countering terrorism and
preventing radicalization and recruitment. Yet there is
long way to go. Our foreign affairs Ministers recently
renewed their commitment to comprehensive counterterrorist measures with enhanced and more coordinated
action. We have strengthened our approach at the
internal and external levels with non-EU member states
and others. We have presented our renewed vision in a
European Agenda on Security.
Terrorist organizations, as well as individual
terrorists, need financing to maintain their networks,
to recruit and supply, and to commit terrorist acts.
Cutting off their sources of financing is imperative yet
increasingly challenging, due to the new trends that
have emerged with Da’esh and the returning terrorist
fighters, such as trafficking in resources and cultural
heritage artefacts. These need to be addressed through
modernized legislation, better multilateral and bilateral
cooperation, and exchange of key information.
When it comes to detecting the movement of
funds, tracking systems such as the Terrorist Financing
Tracking Programme are key tools; nevertheless, there
is a need to also focus on low-cost terrorist operations
that can still have a devastating effect and that use
new modalities of payment, which are difficult to
track. In response, the European Union has already
taken important steps. Following the adoption of
the resolution 2199 (2015), we started the review of
our legislative framework in order to meet enhanced
requirements for the criminalization of the financing of
terrorism. The European Commission has proposed a
draft directive on combating terrorism that is expected
to be adopted by the end this year. The European
Council, our leaders, is currently preparing a decision
to amend the listing criteria in line with the resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2178 (2014); it will be complemented
by a Council regulation to determine the specific
restrictive measures to be applied to those persons and
entities listed.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The European Commission has also issued an action
plan to strengthen the fight against terrorist financing,
identifying short- and medium-term measures aimed
at, first, tackling the abuse of our financial system for
terrorist purposes and, secondly, at targeting the sources
of funding, including by considering a wider response
to illicit trafficking in cultural goods and wildlife. This
set of measures is also linked to our engagement at the
external level, where we have increased our support to
partner countries for capacity-building and compliance
with the legal requirements of Security Council
resolutions and the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force.
Stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and tackling their return is another complex challenge
where international cooperation is needed. We strongly
support action under resolution 2178 (2014) and the
recommendations for its implementation contained in
the guiding principles adopted in Madrid in July 2015,
as well as efforts to bolster international action to
prevent violent extremism.
As the top tier of terrorists is removed or brought
to justice, it is increasingly important that we increase
preventive actions to ensure that they are not replaced
by new recruits who are younger and more technically
sophisticated. From the criminal justice perspective,
we are in the process of ratifying the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism. We are currently negotiating
comprehensive criminal law provisions in the draft
European directives on combating terrorism and on
passenger name record data. In addition, ongoing
efforts are also being undertaken in order to support
knowledge-sharing within the European Union. Some
2,000 European practitioners — such as teachers, healthcare workers, social and youth workers, prison officers
and non-governmental organizations — exchange good
practices on the prevention of radicalization. This
approach is based on understanding root causes and the
goal is to proposed practical tools and recommendations
to both practitioners and policymakers. We are ready to
share our expertise in the United Nations framework.
Externally, we are an active member of various
initiatives, such as the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum (GCTF) and its working groups, where members
and non-members exchange good practices on a variety
of subjects related to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Such

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

subjects include detention, reintegration, the rule of law
and criminal justice efforts that are needed, preventing
violent extremism, foreign terrorist fighters. We are
also actively supporting the three GCTF inspired
institutes: the Hedayah Centre, the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund in Switzerland, and
the International Institute on Justice and the Rule of
Law in Malta.
Education, youth participation, interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, as well as offering employment
possibilities and promoting social inclusion, are key
to preventing radicalization by promoting common
values, fostering social inclusion, building resilience
and enhancing mutual understanding and tolerance.
In support of EU member States, the European
Commission is developing a series of concrete actions.
At the external level, we also address root causes by
continuing to provide material support and capacitybuilding to developing countries, aimed at poverty
reduction, ensuring sustainable economic, social and
environmental development, democracy, the rule of
law, good governance and human rights. These are
critical pieces of the anti-radicalization challenge.
As you, Sir, rightly identify in the concept note
(S/2016/2016, annex) prepared for this debate, misuse
of the Internet and social media by terrorists in order
to target our youngest, most vulnerable citizens with
messages of violence is another complex challenge that
we need to tackle while simultaneously upholding the
fundamental human rights of freedom of expression
and freedom of information. We have launched an EU
Internet Forum, which serves as a platform for relevant
stakeholders, such as ministries, law enforcement
agencies, Internet companies and civil society, to work
together to identify common tools, best practices,
innovative and new solutions to tackle all IT-related
issues of terrorism. Main priorities in that domain
should be to reduce the accessibility of terrorist content
online, empower civil society partners to increase the
volume of effective narratives that are more attractive
to young people than terrorist content. We have also
set up a referral mechanism with the European Police
Office to help EU countries and Internet companies to
identify terrorist material online. Initial results have
been very positive and we are again ready to share our
experience with the United Nations on that initiative.
We are also active in developing strategic
communications outside the EU. We have set up a task
force on strategic communications working with Middle

16-105419/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Eastern and North African countries to identify shared
values and develop concrete communication actions.
In conclusion, terrorism and violent extremism are
global challenges, and the United Nations has a central
role in supporting Member States in this endeavour.
Only together can we pool the sufficient resources and
expertise required to address them. A joint approach
based on our shared values is a sine qua non.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Chinese presidency for initiating and convening this
open debate on the critical subject of terrorism, which
is today destabilizing both regional and global security.
International terrorism has grown increasingly
sinister. It has moved from isolated acts in individual
countries to a large-scale terrorist aggression across
Europe, Asia and Africa. The activities of terrorist
groups undermine the foundations of the existing world
order far beyond the conflict zones of North Africa
and the Middle East, even reaching the Central Asian
region. That is quite evident in the fact that citizens
of various Member States have been recruited or are
volunteering to fight in Syria and Iraq. The everincreasing violence there has led to an escalation in the
number of civilian victims, mainly women and children,
as has resulted in the forced migration of people to
Europe at an unprecedented rate. That uncontrollable
exodus, together with the destruction of cities, sites and
historic monuments is of great concern to all of us in
the United Nations community.
Moreover, it may be just a matter of time before
nuclear weapons and the technology that produces them
fall into the hands of terrorists. Our world is once again
in danger and the risks cannot be underestimated. It is
with this in view that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled “Manifesto: The World. The 21st
Century” at the fourth Nuclear Security Summit held
recently in Washington, D.C. The document features
a critical take on the issues of war and peace. The
President has proposed to establish, under the auspices
of the United Nations, a global coalition of States for
peace, stability, trust and security. Its common task for
the next decade is
10/50

14/04/2016

“to end wars and conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Yemen, Libya, and Syria, in eastern Ukraine, and
the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation”.
In September, my President also suggested
establishing, under the auspices of the United Nations,
a unified global network comprised of various entities
to counter terrorism in order to defeat this scourge and
bring perpetrators — and their supporters — to justice
(see A/70/PV.13).
My delegation is deeply convinced that the fight
against international terrorism demands a long-term
comprehensive approach and cooperation at all levels
with the active participation of all Member States, global
and regional structures and civil society. Kazakhstan
is party to all the major international conventions and
instruments against terrorism and is also guided by
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country proposes that current United Nations
mechanisms, including the Global Strategy, be made
legally binding through relevant Security Council
resolutions. We call on all delegations to support this
bold and forward-looking approach and to speedily
adopt a comprehensive document on international
terrorism, which has challenged our efforts for the last
20 years. We also call on all Member States to work
together on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. We congratulate the
organizers who are present for the very successful
meeting held recently in Geneva.
Kazakhstan has also acceded to a number of regional
and global instruments on countering violent extremism,
and the illicit trafficking of arms, ammunition and
explosives. Currently, we are engaged in the Joint Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
That document was elaborated by five states of the
region, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
global and regional powers and organizations. We have
hosted two meetings in Almaty on this regional plan,
as well as two training workshops of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
the South and Central Asia Regional Conference on
Countering Violent Extremism in Astana. We believe
that all of these symbolize our sincere contribution to
the united fight against the scourge of terrorism.
To order to ensure peace and security in the entire
Asian region, here at United Nations Headquarters in
1992 Kazakhstan initiated the Conference on Interaction
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, a forum for
collaboration on how to counter new terrorist threats
and challenges. It has become a unique pan-continental
security forum. Kazakhstan, as the 2010 Chair of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), hosted the organization’s first conference on
the prevention of terrorism. The Astana Commemorative
Declaration was adopted at that conference, confirming
the commitment of participating OSCE States and
partner countries to combatting terrorism. Those
activities continue even today within the framework
of Kazakhstan-European Union cooperation. We
listened very carefully to the statement of the Observer
for the European Union. In addition, my country
also cooperates on counterterrorism matters with
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization within the
framework of the individual partnership action plan,
thus expanding collaboration with the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council.

I would also like to commend your delegation for
preparing a useful concept note (S/2016/306, annex) to
inform this debate. We agree with you that terrorism
can be defeated only when all Member States unite
and effectively coordinate their efforts. Your initiative
is also timely, Sir, as we approach the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on
its tenth anniversary this June.

Spiritual and religious leaders play a significant role
in fostering inter-ethnic and interreligious harmony,
and so Kazakhstan regularly convenes the Congress of
Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, bringing
together religious and political leaders to promote
peace. At the national level, we adopted a Programme to
Counter Religious Extremism and Terrorism to ensure
public and societal safety through the direct engagement
of our citizens in prevention and rehabilitation outreach
activities. In a few weeks, on 6 May, Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly, will
organize a high-level conversation on Religions for
Peace, initiated by Kazakhstan and supported by our
partners, with a view to demonstrating the power
of religious unity against the destructive nature of
terrorism and violent extremism.

Ten years ago, when Member States deliberated
upon the draft of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, Pakistan was a leading voice
urging the international community to focus on the
root causes of terrorism. In our view, security measures
alone were not enough to address the underlying drivers
of terrorism. In fact, the more we resorted to kinetic
means alone to defeat terrorist groups, the more we saw
their splintering and proliferation. Today, the terrorist
threat has become more pervasive and has evolved in
complex and unpredictable directions, posing an even
greater danger to international peace and security.
Now, in addition to existing challenges, a multitude of
small terrorist cells and violent extremists perpetrating
guerilla-style or lone-wolf attacks have emerged.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan is committed to working
closely with the international community as a part of its
deep commitment to combat the ever-growing scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lohdi (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s open debate. The scourge of terrorism
is among the most serious threats to international peace
and security of our times. We appreciate your effort
to focus on this phenomenon in order to strengthen
international cooperation to counter it.

My country condemns all terrorist acts perpetrated
anywhere in the world for whatever reason. We fully
endorse the need for the international community to join
hands to combat this menace, urgently and effectively.
In the past 15 years, the United Nations and its Member
States have made huge investments in countering
terrorism. But despite all these efforts, our goal
remains elusive. We have had successes, substantial
successes, but with each success, we also encountered
a new challenge, at times more imposing than the one
we surmounted. It is time to assess why that is so.

Now that the international community has finally
acknowledged the need to craft preventive approaches
to violent extremism, it is important that we address
all its drivers, both local and international, in a
comprehensive manner. In today’s globalized world,
little operates in isolation. We must deal with both the
external and internal dimensions of this phenomenon
and recognize the complex interplay between local and
international factors to prevent violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.
At the same time, our focus on a preventive
approach should not be at the cost of counter-measures
against terrorism. Member States must continue to act
individually and with the United Nations to implement

16-1054111/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

relevant Security Council resolutions as well as to take
steps beyond their international obligations. Pakistan’s
commitment to the campaign against terrorism is clear,
present and tangible. We have adopted a comprehensive
approach to what after all is a multifaceted phenomenon
and we have a diverse policy toolkit to address it. Half
of our national action plan to counter terrorism focuses
on a preventive approach; the other half focuses on
security measures. Most of the action points in this plan
go well beyond our international obligations.
Pakistan is perhaps one of the few countries that has a
ministerial-level committee to oversee implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. Over the past
five years, we have taken significant strides in upgrading
our measures to counter the financing of terrorism.
The Financial Action Task Force acknowledged these
steps last year, as we continue to cooperate with it and
strengthen our implementation measures.
On the security front, we have made significant
gains. We have sought to eliminate all terrorist groups
through forceful law-enforcement actions and targeted
military operations. Operation Zarb-e-Azb, as we call
it, launched in June 2014, is the largest anti-terrorism
campaign anywhere in the world and has produced
remarkable results. Thousands have been killed or
captured. The rest are on the run. At the same time,
through a well-coordinated intelligence-based law
enforcement operation across Pakistan, as I speak, a
focused campaign is under way against terrorist sleeper
cells, their supporters, sympathizers and financiers.
With the Operation now in its conclusive phase in North
Waziristan, the few remaining hideouts of the terrorists
will be cleared out.
Pakistan has been at the forefront of the global
fight against terrorism. We have lost tens of thousands
of lives in this fight, but that has not shaken our resolve
to continue the fight until the last terrorist is eliminated
from our soil. It is therefore reprehensible that some cast
aspersions about our contribution. Baseless accusations
only set us back and undermine our joint efforts to
counter terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the need for all
States to work together in a coordinated and cooperative
manner to address this menace comprehensively in
all its forms and manifestations has never been as
compelling as it is today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
12/50

14/04/2016

Mr. Braun (Germany): Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for convening today’s debate. Germany
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union.
As illustrated by recent attacks in Turkey,
Belgium, Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire and Pakistan, terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other groups continue to
commit atrocities and extreme violations of human
rights. While the threat level has increased also in
Europe, terrorism remains highly concentrated, as most
of its activity occurs in just five countries: Iraq, Nigeria,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria. This disturbing
observation dramatically belies one of the core claims
of radical Islamic terrorist groups. The hatred and
fanatical rhetoric may be directed towards the Western
world, but their actions predominately target Muslim
societies, which is a sad and very deplorable fact.
The spread of violent extremism transcends
religious and ethnic boundaries. It requires enhanced
international collaboration and a unified response.
A collective effort is of the essence, an effort that
simultaneously addresses all of the underlying factors
conducive to terrorism and violent extremism. It is a
truism that the fight against this scourge to humankind
cannot be won solely by military means, nor can we
gain the upper hand by exclusively relying on enhanced
cooperation among our law enforcement agencies or
enhanced information sharing between intelligence
services. In addition, economic, social and educational
aspects need to be addressed. What that means is that
what is needed is a smart combination of all those tools.
But of course the fight against terrorism has to be
conducted militarily, as is illustrated by the international
alliance against ISIL in Iraq and Syria. Germany lends
material and personnel support and is leading the effort
to train and equip Kurdish forces in northern Iraq in
the fight against the terrorist organization. Terrorism
cannot be defeated in the long run without focusing on
its root causes. Germany supports the Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism presented by the SecretaryGeneral. We commend the all-of-United Nations
approach expressed in the Plan of Action, which makes
presenting a violent extremism a cross-cutting issue of
a number of the United Nations bodies and agencies.
What we also need now is a unanimous approach by all
Member States to addressing these issues.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While the process of radicalization differs in
each individual case, the Internet undoubtedly plays a
decisive role in terrorist propaganda, recruitment and
financing. It may be at its most powerful during the
early stages of the radicalization process. Germany is
working with service providers to increase awareness
about the use of social media platforms by terrorist
organizations to gain new recruits. We should also
think creatively about what else we can do to curb
terrorist use of the Internet, while maintaining its open,
secure, stable, accessible and peaceful character.
It is a task for society as whole to actively counter
the narrative of organizations such as ISIL and
Al-Qaida by revealing their ulterior motives that aim
to abuse a religion under the pretext of martyrdom. It
is essential that their fanatic statements be countered
by sound arguments from moderate religious leaders.
The romantic image of the jihadist struggle must
be demystified by the fact that behind of every dead
jihadist there is a broken family that has lost a son or
a daughter. Most importantly, we need to refute the
alleged opposition between the West and Islam by
pointing out that Muslim citizens are an integral part of
Western societies.
The fight against terrorism needs to be fought by
the international community on many fronts and with
many different tools. It is a collective effort that will
take years, if not decades. Germany is fully committed
to playing its part.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
China for organizing this timely debate on an issue that
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Italy’s contribution to this joint effort is
multidimensional. We believe that our response
should be be holistic — political, cultural and
diplomatic — and we focus on training local security
forces and countering financial flows to extremist
groups. I would like to share with the Council the main
features of our approach.
First and foremost is prevention. Italy appreciates
the Secretary-General’s focus in his Plan of Action on

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

preventing violent extremism. Long-term solutions
should be based on an understanding of the forces that
alienate individuals, young people in particular, and
lead them to join extremist groups. To tackle the root
causes of the phenomenon, we also need to address
problems such as a lack of socioeconomic opportunities;
marginalization and discrimination; poor governance
and violations of human rights and the rule of law;
prolonged and unresolved conflicts; and radicalization
in prisons and marginalized communities. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) will
play a pivotal role in those areas, as will women’s
empowerment and engagement with youth.
The second feature is implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Over the years,
we have put together a toolbox for international efforts
aimed at cracking down on terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Al-Qaida. We have adopted resolutions on cutting off
the financial sources of terrorism, stemming the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters, preventing terrorists from
using the Internet and social media to commit terrorist
acts, and preventing incitement. In that context, Italy
looks forward to the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The third revolves around the fact that the
responsibility for preventing violent extremist acts lies
with Member States, with the support of the United
Nations system. To be effective, national ownership
requires the involvement of religious and community
leaders, women’s and youth associations, the private
sector and the media. At the same time, international
cooperation remains essential if we are to achieve
significant results.
My fourth point is that it is imperative to cut off the
financial sources of terrorism by fully implementing
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). Together with
the United States and Saudi Arabia, Italy co-chairs
the Counter-ISIL Finance Group, which met in Rome
last week, with China participating for the first time.
The Group adopted an action plan aimed at preventing
ISIL’s use of the international financial system;
countering its extortion and exploitation of economic
assets and resources; denying it funding from abroad;
and preventing it from providing financial or material
support to foreign affiliates. Our joint efforts are
seeing significant results. Within the framework of the
Group, Italy is also the coordinator of a project group

16-1054113/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

on cultural heritage whose purpose is to counter the
looting and illicit trafficking of cultural goods, one of
the main sources of terrorist group financing.
My final point is about culture and education,
which are at the core of our actions aimed at preventing
rather than countering violent extremism. Terrorists
seek to divide us by race, ethnicity, nationality and
values. Investing in education and protecting our
cultural heritage are key components of our effort. We
believe that no society can flourish without culture
or education, and no relationship can be established
without respect for a people’s history and soul. On
16 February, Italy and UNESCO signed a landmark
agreement to establish a task force to protect ancient
cultural artifacts in crisis areas. The Blue Helmets of
culture, as we call them, are a tangible sign of Italy’s
commitment to the Unite for Heritage campaign and to
the protection of our common cultural heritage from
terrorist and extremist groups.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the People’s Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate on the extremely
important topic of countering terrorism. I would also
like to commend Angola for its wise and successful
leadership of the Council last month.
Iraq firmly condemns all acts of terrorism and
barbarism committed by the transnational terrorist
group Da’esh and by groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.
We would also like to state that the threat posed by such
terrorist groups does not simply affect the security of
the people and the Government of Iraq but is rather a
threat to international peace and security as a whole
and to all the other peoples of our region, without
discrimination. The recent such attacks, in Brussels,
serve only to underscore the fact that the danger of
terrorism is never far away from any of us.
Strengthening mechanisms for countering the
financing of terrorism is a key element in limiting
the funding for groups such as Da’esh and others that
cooperate with it. Those mechanisms currently in place
are not capable of putting an end to such financial
transactions, particularly the illicit trade in oil and
petroleum-derived commodities, which is the pillar
of terrorist activities in Iraq and Syria and one that
14/50

14/04/2016

is conducted on routes well-known to all in crossing
the borders of Syria and Iraq, in direct or indirect
cooperation with Da’esh. We hope that the Security
Council will not confine its efforts to condemning
such direct and indirect commercial transactions,
particularly those in oil, petroleum products, arms and
archeological artifacts, carried out by certain States or
their citizens in cooperation with Da’esh.
Beyond that, the Council should consider such
commercial links to terrorists not just as a means of
assistance or support to terrorism, but as a threat in
themselves to international peace and security. Such
States should be stopped and dissuaded, including
those that deliberately ignore the Security Council’s
resolutions relating to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and continue to do business financially
and militarily with Da’esh groups, which serves only
to improve the capacity of those groups to recruit and
incite people to terrorist activities at any time and in
any territory or country they choose, as we have seen
recently in Baghdad, Brussels and Tunis. That means
that such individuals and societies that have dealings
with Da’esh should be put on sanctions lists, and that
States must be required to detain them and bring them
to justice, in accordance with international instruments
and legislation.
The terrorist entity Da’esh exploits the regions
under its control in Iraq and Syria in order to fight and to
engage in smuggling and trafficking in highly valuable
cultural relics so as to finance its terrorist activities
and recruit foreign terrorist fighters. It depends on a
network of mediators and middlemen in neighbouring
countries — Turkey and Syria in particular — who
facilitate and streamline the transport of those cultural
relics and of petroleum, gas and related products to
the markets of Europe and elsewhere. We must closely
monitor those middlemen and networks.
We hope that the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities will
pursue its activities to identify the ways and means
whereby petroleum and related products are, inter alia,
smuggled across borders and used to finish Da’esh
and the Al-Nusra Front. Its work is very important
in determining how the petroleum is trafficked and
traded, particularly in border regions and settings that
lack air coverage and monitoring.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We call on the Security Council to consider
establishing an international legal mechanism, on the
basis of a legally binding agreement or resolution, to
prosecute and try foreign terrorist fighters and ensure
that the responsibility for apprehending and bringing
them to trial for the crimes committed in Iraq falls to
the country of which they are nationals. In some cases,
those crimes may include genocide and other serious
violations, in particular given Da’esh’s activities in
the Turkmen region of the Kirkuk governorate in Iraq,
where it has fired missiles loaded with mustard gas at
the minority population. We have submitted a report
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons containing all the relevant information on
these incidents.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of China for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of Non-Aligned Movement.
Indonesia takes note with grave concern the
increasing incidents of terrorist attack in many places
throughout the world. The attacks are a grim reminder
for us to redouble our global efforts to defeat terrorism.
In that regard, the role of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, in our multilateral cooperation
to counter terrorism becomes more and more critical.
Along that line, Indonesia underlines the importance of
the forthcoming biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June. The
review will present a good opportunity to take stock
of what we have and have not done in implementing
the Strategy, which has been in place for 10 years,
as well as to discuss the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, as mandated by General Assembly
resolution 70/254. Indonesia hopes that the review
will lead to a more solid and effective framework of
cooperation in addressing global terrorism.
To take advantage of this discussion, I would like to
highlight three pertinent points, as follows.
First, security measures alone will not suffice in
defeating terrorism. The Security Council must further
contribute to making the United Nations system’s more

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

robust and coherent and take concrete measures against
terrorism. The Council, for example, must be firm and
united and work harder in conflict management and
resolution, in light of the fact that several terrorist groups
have for years been using conflict areas as safe havens
to build the groups. Prolonged conflicts and injustices
have also been identified as promoting conditions
suitable to the breeding of terrorist motivation.
Secondly, working with States to increase their
capacity remains an essential role that the Council
should continue to focus on through the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.
Capacity-building programmes must be developed
based on the objective needs of respective State. It
is of the utmost importance for the Council, and the
United Nations system, to work with States and
regional organizations, if necessary, in developing and
implementing a comprehensive strategy to counter
terrorism. There is an urgent need to strengthen
mechanisms for the real-time exchange of intelligence
information among Members.
Prevention must also continue to be at the centre of
our strategy. To our understanding, there exist personal
and communal motivations to embrace radicalism
or extremism, and to commit acts of terrorism. All
those motivations are shaped further by a complex
intertwining of political, social and economic
conditions. This unique but intricate dynamic is
sometimes different from one country to another.
In that regard, Indonesia sees the merit of building
networks of civil society organizations from different
parts of the world that focus on sharing information
on local dynamics and their ramifications outside
the country or region, as well as best practices in
addressing them. These networks will complement
the work of Governments in identifying conditions
conducive to terrorism and formulating the necessary
responses. Soft measures in a preventive approach
must be emphasized, such as through education; the
participation of civil society organizations and media,
including social media; and strengthening the roles of
families, women and youth.
The strategy should also appreciate the efficacy of
dialogue in promoting respect and tolerance, and aim at
strengthening the engagement of public and community
leaders, as well as religious and cultural understanding
and approaches. We also must address the increasingly
worrying trends of terrorism, such as the movement of

16-1054115/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

foreign terrorist fighters to and from conflict areas, the
flow of financial resources of terrorist groups, and the
use of digital technology to spread terrorist narratives
and terrorist recruitment.
Lastly, Indonesia underscores the danger of
associating terrorism with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group. This careless practice is
not only entirely incorrect, but also creates a larger
problem. It is inconsistent with international standards
and norms as enshrined in various treaties, and runs
counter to our efforts to generate coordinated and
coherent approaches at all levels.
My delegation is very much in agreement with the
assertion made by the Secretary-General at the Geneva
Conference last week, to the effect that the extremists
seek to divide us and to make us turn on each other.
This we must avoid. Terrorism is not the problem or
fault of a single country or a few countries; it is a global
challenge. In the face of the dreadful threat of global
terrorism, our unity is needed more than ever.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I congratulate China on
its accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We count on your well-known vision and
wisdom, Sir, in the stewardship of that work. I should
also like to thank you for convening this open debate
and for the concept note that you circulated earlier this
month (S/2016/306, annex).
I would like to start by commending the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his leadership
in coordinating the efforts and actions of the United
Nations on this issue.

14/04/2016

xenophobia and Islamophobia, which are emerging as
the new faces of violent extremism. We will continue
to warn against all misconceptions and dangerous
associations of terrorism with a religion, a civilization
or a geographical area.
Only the resolute and coordinated action of
the international community will bear fruit against
this scourge.
Terrorism is a global threat, and it requires a
global response. In that regard, the United Nations
framework is the most suitable and efficient forum for
dealing with it. Preventing and combatting terrorism
still requires a high level of vigilance, mobilization
and multi-faceted cooperation at the national, regional
and international levels. Countering terrorism cannot
be limited exclusively to the necessary repressive
dimension but depends on various other upstream and
downstream actions, with a coherent strategy based on
prevention, dialogue and understanding. Why and how
some people resort to terrorism remains an unanswered
question. In 2006, Member States adopted the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which
provides an encompassing approach, from preventing
and combatting terrorism to addressing the conditions
conducive to terrorism and from strengthening the
capacity of States and the United Nations to ensuring
the full respect of human rights. This year will mark
the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We look forward to that important step, which we see as
an opportunity for keeping the United Nations strategy
relevant and up-to-date, in the light of the emerging new
threats and evolving trends in international terrorism.

Algeria has most likely paid the heaviest toll to
the scourge of terrorism, and welcomes the fact that
international cooperation against terrorism is nowadays
at the top of the agenda. I take this opportunity to
reiterate our strong and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms of terrorism, regardless of their motivation and
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed. It
is appalling and always shocking to learn of and see
all the places and cities that have been attacked and hit
so hard. We need to act swiftly and together. We are
also appalled by the magnitude of new phenomena like
foreign terrorist fighters.

Algeria reiterates its support for convening a
high-level conference under the auspices of the United
Nations to formulate a common stance on the eradication
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations in
accordance with several General Assembly resolutions.
My delegation stresses the need to agree upon an
accurate definition of terrorism in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, which
should avoid any confusion between acts of terrorism
and the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial
and foreign occupation to achieve their inalienable
right to self-determination, as endorsed by General
Assembly resolution 46/51 and other related United
Nations texts.

The struggle against violent extremism and
terrorism must also include the fight against

The increasing number of incidents of kidnapping
and hostage-taking committed by terrorist groups

16/50

16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

looking for funds or political concessions remains a
disquieting issue. Algeria’s policy not to pay ransom or
make other substantive concessions to hostage-takers
is well known and clear. We welcome the significant
progress made in the prohibition of the payment of
ransom. As part of our counter-terrorism efforts,
Algeria will also host, in the latter part of this month
and in the beginning of May, two workshops on the role
of the Internet and social networks, cyberterrorism, and
democracy in counter-terrorism efforts.
Algeria’s efforts include regional and international
awareness and cooperation in that regard. From the very
beginning, Algeria has sought to strengthen efforts
against terrorism at the African level. Today, we have
many legal instruments. Initiatives have been taken
that today play a very important role in enhancing the
effectiveness of efforts on the part of African countries.
In that respect, through its decision with regard to the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups, the appointment
of a special representative for counter-terrorism
cooperation and the establishment of a sub-committee
on terrorism within the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the African Union is doing its share
and showing its full commitment in the fight against
terrorism in all its forms. In its communiqué adopted
September 2014, the African Union Peace and Security
Council urged
“member States to take the measures required to
combat effectively transnational organized crime,
in line with the relevant African and international
instruments, and to ensure that terrorist groups
do not benefit from the proceeds of such criminal
activities, including drug trafficking, to finance
their activities”.
In the Sahel region, the concepts of coordination and
cooperation are developing their full potential, because
the prevailing situation requires both coordination and
the strengthening of countries’ capacities. Bearing in
mind the principle of ownership, Algeria has engaged
in a concerted approach through numerous cooperative
mechanisms aimed at facilitating the development of
cooperation in line with Security Council resolutions. One
of the primary aspects, for example, is the coordination
and strengthening of border-control measures, as well
as intelligence-sharing among countries of the region.
With the enhanced strengthening of the control of
our borders, we are not only fulfilling the mission to
protect ourselves, but also strengthening the security
and stability of our immediate and distant neighbours.

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

In the same vein, Algeria continues to contribute to the
stabilization and promotion of peace in the Maghreb,
the northern part of Mali and the Sahel region, based on
strict respect for the universal principles of sovereignty,
non-interference and cooperation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, Sir, I would like to congratulate you
on your presidency of the Security Council and thank
you for having convened this very important meeting.
My country’s delegation has looked at the concept
note that you circulated (S/2016/306, annex), and we
thank you for that as well. We agree with China’s
convictions that terrorism is one of the most serious
threats that the world is currently encountering. It is a
common enemy of humankind as a whole. It therefore
behooves the international community, represented
by the United Nations and the Security Council, to
play its role in coordinating and leading international
cooperation to combat terrorism.
International counter-terrorism instruments urge
all Member States to take legislative and operational
measures to combat the scourge of terrorism. Despite
that fact, the Governments of some Member States,
which are not unknown to those present in the Chamber,
such as those of Saudi Arabia and Turkey, continue to
supply all types of assistance to terrorism. They provide
that assistance in the form of money, weapons, Taf kiri
extremist ideology, recruits and foreign mercenaries.
Furthermore, the Governments of other countries,
some of which are members of the Security Council,
continue to politicize counter-terrorist issues and deal
with them by applying double standards, while the
actions of Governments that support terrorism go on
unnoticed, despite the fact that firm accountability is
required for those actions.
Over the past five years, terrorism has continued
to target my country. It has targeted our people,
the State, our infrastructure, and our educational,
cultural, economic and social institutions, as well as
archeological treasures. Terrorism, barbarism and
criminality have reached an unprecedented level in
Syria. Moreover, other States have suffered abhorrent
acts of terrorism characterized by their great ferocity,
although the identity of the perpetrators has been
different. Nevertheless, that heavy toll has been
accompanied by several successes on the part of the

16-1054117/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Syrian Arab Army and its allies in the fight against
terrorism. As examples, I will cite the liberation of the
historic city of Palmyra and of Cariatan from members
of Da’esh. Furthermore, we liberated numerous cities
and villages from the hands of Da’esh, the al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups that are operating
within Syrian territory.
My delegation reiterates once again that any
counter-terrorist effort will fail if it is in contravention
with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law and if it is not implemented through
full coordination with other countries concerned. Any
such effort will fail if other countries use terrorism as a
tool for their foreign policy and if we ignore the actions
of countries that support terrorism. In that regard, we
reaffirm that some countries have tried to justify their
military intervention in Syria. They claim that they
are intervening in order to fight Da’esh in accordance
with Article 51 of the Charter, but that is being done
without any coordination with the Syrian Government.
It is therefore a matter of manipulating international
law. The only effective way to combat terrorism is
by building an effective global alliance based on
international instruments and with the involvement of
the States affected, including Syria. Syria is the main
stakeholder combating terrorism in the region. In that
connection, the Syrian Arab Republic supports the
ideas laid out by His Excellency President Vladimir
Putin of the Russian Federation to combat terrorism.
The Syrian Arab Republic again urges the
United Nations and the Security Council to take the
following measures. First, we urge the full and robust
implementation and application of international
instruments to counter terrorism that we have adopted
over the years, including resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), as well as the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In doing
so, there must be no politicization, no manipulation
of the situation and no double standards. We urge the
Security Council not to ignore documents regarding
the information that some countries have provided on
terrorism. We urge all countries to bring an end to any
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The failure of the Security Council
in that matter seems to send a message implying the
tolerance of terrorists.
We must also combat hate speech. Extremist and
destructive speech have nothing to do with religions or
18/50

14/04/2016

civilizations. In addition, we need to combat incitements
to hatred and violence. We must combat discrimination
and persecution based on religion, nationality, ethnicity,
colour or any other factor that could serve as collective
punishment for some sectors of society.
Furthermore, efforts need to be coordinated in
order to combat foreign terrorist fighters. Those foreign
terrorist fighters number in the tens of thousands.
According to United Nations reports, there appear
to be more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters,
from 115 countries, who have gone to Syria to kill
our people and destroy our civilization, economic
success and infrastructure. In addition, there need
to be additional border controls. Networks of foreign
terrorist fighters need to be dismantled. The resources
of terrorism, including funding, should be cut off. We
must also combat the illicit trafficking in Syrian oil
and its derivatives and in the archaeological relics from
our country.
We must have an international alliance against
Da’esh, which is destroying Syrian institutions
and infrastructure. It is not our network. We need
those infrastructures to rebuild our countries. We
need to ensure that information and communication
technology, the Internet, television and radio are not
used to promote or incite violence or to recruit people
for terrorist groups. We must also prevent terrorist
groups from getting their hands on weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems. We need to
prosecute those States that have provided assistance to
terrorists and those that have used chemical weapons
on numerous occasions, as was the case in our country
a few days ago.
The occupied Palestinian territories are still
suffering from Israeli occupation and State terrorism,
perpetrated by the occupying Power against them. That
form of terrorism, which started in the 1920s and 1930s
with the Irgun and Haganah groups, has taken root,
thanks to the assistance provided to consecutive Israeli
Governments. We saw that, during the Syrian-Israeli
crisis, Israel provided assistance to those fighting
against us, and that such Israeli support crossed the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force line in
the Golan Heights. The Security Council must bring
that situation to an end.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates and
underscores the role played by women, young people,
civil society, religious leaders and the media in
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

combating terrorism. We reaffirm that we do not
expect of the United Nations today only a series of
reports or statements or instruments. What we want
is real resolve, the unfailing determination to combat
terrorism, to prosecute those who support terrorism.
We want resolve to spare humanity from that scourge
and, thereby, to build international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr President, and in honour of the Chinese
presidency of the Council for this month and having
lived in Beijing for four years, I will try to express my
thanks in my best Chinese.
(spoke in Chinese)
I thank you, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)
At the outset, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to the People’s Republic of China for
organizing this important open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/306, annex).
Today’s debate is timely in our view, given the
terrorist attacks that continue to wreak havoc upon
societies around the world. We will not be silenced by
those attacks. We will continue to stand shoulder to
shoulder with the countries that have fallen victim to
those horrible acts. Together with our partners, we will
continue to combat terrorism in our countries, in our
cities and in our communities.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to add a few remarks
on the need for cooperation, on the life cycle of
radicalization and on resources. In view of the time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement, and my full statement will be available
through a link on my Twitter account.
On the importance of cooperation, the recent attacks
serve as a grim reminder of the need for such cooperation
and the need for the sharing of information. We must
work closely together at all levels, internationally, in
multilevel forums and international organizations like
INTERPOL, and at the United Nations, as well as
regionally through institutions like the European Union,
the African Union and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). Allow me also to highlight,

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

quoting our Indonesian colleague, the importance of
the Regional Counter-Terrorism Centre, established in
Indonesia for that purpose. We must also work better
together on a bilateral basis, for even though we come
from diverse backgrounds, we face a common enemy in
terrorism. We are proud of the Centre just mentioned,
as the Netherlands worked together with Indonesia on a
bilateral basis to help set it up.
In our view, terrorism can be countered only by
working together on the basis of what we share. We
share the horror, we share the grief, we share the anger
about terrorist attacks, their cowardly perpetrators and
their tragic consequences. We need to do more than just
share information, however. We must also implement
the well-known resolutions adopted by the Council,
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014) and
2253 (2015). Now is truly the time for action rather than
words. Only by cooperating, sharing and implementing
the Council resolutions fully can we stop the terrorists
and secure our homelands. At the same time, we must
continue to reflect upon the tools at our disposal. We
should remember that those tools were devised to
defend our freedom, our human rights, our way of life.
My second point is the so-called life cycle of
radicalization. The efforts of the United Nations and
other forums should be focused on addressing the
entire life cycle of radicalization, from the first steps
on the road towards terrorism, where radicalization
manifests itself, all the way through to the final stages
of the cycle. Our approach must address the whole
cycle: prevention, protection and prosecution, but we
must do so appropriately. For example, the abuse of the
Internet by terrorists in order to target our youngest,
most vulnerable citizens with messages of hatred and
violence is a complex challenge. We need to address
that challenge firmly, while upholding the fundamental
human rights of the freedom of expression and the
freedom of information. The fact that those approaches
go hand in hand was aptly identified in the concept note
prepared for this debate, for which I already commended
you, Sir. Let us not forget that, at the end of the cycle,
reintegration is a key issue.
My third point is on resource mobilization.
Targeting the life cycle of radicalization requires
resources, and resources are not limited to financial
ones. The biggest resources we have are resilience of a
community, of a nation, of our youth and the combined
energy and courage of our whole communities to defend
our common values. We in the Netherlands are trying

16-1054119/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to be active in fostering and promoting these resources
and this resilience. We are doing so as co-Chair of
the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), together
with Morocco, our fellow co-Chair. We congratulate
Morocco on assuming this post earlier this week and we
thank Turkey as outgoing co-Chair for their hard work
during the past years and the excellent cooperation we
had together.
The GCTF has been active in helping to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and our members have made available hundreds of
millions dollars for counter-terrorism capacity-building
in other countries. The GCTF supports activities like
the Border Security Initiative, which aims to assist
countries at risk in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel. The
GCTF presented this week its strategic plan of action
in The Hague. In this plan, the GCTF reiterates its
commitment to fighting terrorism in close cooperation
with the United Nations and its Member States.
Last week in Geneva we discussed the Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism and soon we will review
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I hope that my statement and those of others today will
contribute to the implementation of the Plan of Action
and provide valuable input for the debate on the review.
But only after the review has been completed will the
real work start. Like Confucius said, if I may quote one
of China’s biggest philosophers, it is in the details of
one’s daily behaviour that true virtue is manifested. We
all have to make it happen in our daily lives.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, stands ready to act accordingly. We are
ready to work in partnership, for only through genuine
cooperation can we overcome the scourge of terrorism,
for peace, for we all long for a world free from
terrorism; for justice, which we owe to the victims of
terrorism; and for development, in order to contribute
to addressing the root causes conducive to terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of the Netherlands for using Chinese in
his statement.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See sincerely thanks
China’s presidency for placing this extremely important
topic in open debate before the Security Council.
20/50

14/04/2016

Today’s debate comes at a time when we face
the dehumanizing impact of terrorism fuelled by
violent extremism. The ongoing, and in some regions,
escalating use of terror is a reminder that this challenge
requires a shared commitment from all nations and
people of good will. Indeed, terrorism represents a
fundamental threat to our common humankind. This
institution was founded in the wake of an era in which
a similar nihilistic view of human dignity sought to
destroy and divide our world.
Violent extremism knows no border. Recent terror
activities in many parts of the world and in many
countries illustrate that fundamentalist terror is a
transnational phenomenon. They also demonstrate a
total disregard for civilian immunity as extremists
kill and maim women, children, the elderly and the
handicapped and commit unspeakable crimes against
women and girls. Religious and ethnic minority groups
are bearing the brunt of their ruthlessness. The utter
barbarity of their behaviour and crimes leaves us
dismayed and asking how the human heart can plan and
carry out such horrible acts.
Another indicator of the transnational nature
of terrorism is the presence of some 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters coming from 100 Member States, who
enter areas controlled by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant across national boundaries. Once trained and
completely indoctrinated in the most warped and violent
ideologies, they travel to sow terror in other countries.
The internationalization of terror can be countered
only by a collective international response. This
response must also address the root causes upon
which international terrorism feeds. In fact, the
present terrorist challenge has a strong sociocultural
component. Young people travelling abroad to join
the ranks of terrorist organizations are disillusioned
by what they experience as a situation of exclusion
and by the lack of integration and values in certain
societies. Together with the legal tools and resources
to prevent citizens from becoming foreign terrorist
fighters, Governments should engage with civil society
to address the problems of communities most at risk
of radicalization and recruitment and to achieve their
satisfactory social integration.
Moreover, the borderless nature of the terrorist
groups requires the international community to control
cyber technologies that violent groups use to recruit new
adherents, finance their activities and coordinate terror
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

attacks. Their access to cyberspace must be denied.
Their access to funding must be cut off. No country,
no company and no individual must be permitted to
do business with terror groups, in particular in arms
and ammunitions. Collaboration with terror groups,
whether for profit or for ideological complicity, must be
outlawed. Member States that abet violent extremism or
shelter terror groups must be vigorously challenged by
the Council. Violations of international humanitarian
law and all crimes against humanity committed by
terror groups must be vigorously pursued.
Any lasting solution to defeat violent extremism
and fundamentalist terror must consider the centrality
of the inviolable dignity and rights of the human
person, regardless of race, religion, political belief and
difference. Too many individual citizens and groups
have suffered and continue to suffer death and all
forms of violence and discrimination because of their
religion, ethnicity or political beliefs. In the Middle
East, in particular, terrorists must never be allowed to
destroy centuries of peaceful coexistence of Muslims
and Christians in the region.
The mendacity and blasphemy of terrorist groups
that claim to kill and oppress in the name of religion
must be openly denounced in the strongest possible
terms. Religious leaders, in particular, have a grave
responsibility to condemn co-believers who seek to
instrumentalize their religion as a justification for
violence. No one of whatever religion or culture must
be allowed to carry out acts of violence and oppression
in the name of that religion or culture or under
whatever pretext.
No matter how grave the threats that terrorism
poses to our collective security, any effective lasting
response cannot be achieved solely by military
coercion, but rather through a culture of dialogue and
encounter that breeds mutual acceptance and promotes
inclusive societies. That is the only way to lasting peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all, Sir, to congratulate your country on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this very important debate on the
thorny scourge of terrorism, which has become public

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

enemy number one of the international community at
the dawn of the twenty-first century.
Many countries have suffered nefarious terrorist
acts in recent months, joining a long list of countries
that have been victims of terrorism. The Kingdom of
Morocco expresses its solidarity with the countries
affected by such acts and offers its condolences to the
victims’ families. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity to reiterate its resolute condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and stresses that nothing can
ever justify a terrorist act. It would also like to reaffirm
that terrorism can not be associated with any religion,
civilization, nationality or ethnic group.
The adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) in September
2014, following the Security Council summit, reflects
the will of the international community to put an end to
this scourge. It is an appropriate response in light of the
unprecedented spread of terrorism, both in the Middle
East where Da’esh controls large territories in Iraq and
Syria, as well as in the Sahelo-Saharan and Maghreb
regions where Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb are particularly active and where Da’esh has
seized some territory in Libya as a launching pad for a
push into the region.
The arrival of Da’esh in Libya and its rivalry
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb to expand its
influence in the Sahelo-Maghreb area constitutes a
threat to the stability and territorial integrity of the
countries of the region. The terrorist attacks against our
brother nation of Tunisia speak to this being Daesh’s
avowed goal; hence Morocco’s appeal for vigilance
and for the strengthening of regional and international
cooperation so as to curb the spread of terrorist and
organized-crime networks in the region.
Morocco’s commitment to helping its Libyan
brothers to overcome their differences and difficulties
by hosting, under the auspices of the United Nations,
the inter-Libyan talks, culminating in the signing in
Morocco on 17 December last of the Libyan political
agreement of Skhirat also stands as one of the many
efforts by which the Kingdom is seeking to prevent
Libya from sliding into the clutches of Da’esh and thus
prevent the destabilization of the entire North African
and Sahel region.
The report of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (S/2016/49)
spelled out in black and white that the deterioration of

16-1054121/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the situation in Libya had attracted terrorists seeking
refuge and promoted the trafficking in weapons
destined for terrorist groups located both in the region
and elsewhere.
Terrorist groups, in particular Da’esh, finance
their terrorist activities through the illegal trade in oil
and cultural relics and human trafficking. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) are an appropriate
response that seeks to cut off sources of financing for
terrorism and terrorist organizations. The funds they
acquire, together with a sophisticated communications
strategy that harnesses the most advanced information
and communications technologies, including the
Internet and social networks, have allowed terrorist
organizations to recruit foreign terrorist fighters from
the four corners of the world. that is why we now
have 30,000 such foreign terrorist fighters for more
than 95 countries. It is therefore important to keep an
eagle eye on the implementation of the aforementioned
resolutions and also to ensure that laws are being
drafted that are capable of regulating and halting the
abuse of the Internet, with, of course, full respect for
freedom of expression and human rights.
The report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate on the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2014) sounded the alarm about the
return of foreign terrorist fighters to their countries
of origin and the threat that this poses to countries
and third countries, hence the importance of properly
understanding the repercussions of that threat. In
addition, the report of the Secretary-General drawn
up pursuant to resolution 2195 (2014) acknowledged
that certain terrorist groups are directly linked to
organized-crime networks.
The Kingdom of Morocco attaches particular
importance to international cooperation, the
strengthening of border security, the exchange and
sharing of intelligence, the use of INTERPOL’s databases
and the roll-out of deradicalization and reintegration
programmes, as we believe that such actions are the
best way to foil terrorists’ plans. Morocco played host
to conferences in 2013 and 2015 on border security. In
July 2015, it participated in the Madrid meeting that
culminated in the adoption of a declaration calling
upon us all to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
We also took part in the Washington Nuclear Security
Summit, whose final communiqué calls for greater
efforts to prevent the obtaining by non-State members
of nuclear or radioactive material for pernicious
22/50

14/04/2016

purposes. We also took part in the Geneva conference
on violent extremism.
The fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be a perfect opportunity
for us to assess the effectiveness of the Strategy and
to take stock of the Plan of Action on Preventing
Violent Extremism. In addition to such activities, the
Kingdom of Morocco co-chairs with the Kingdom of
the Netherlands the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum
(GCTF). In this respect, we commend the Netherlands,
as all of this is the result of deep-rooted work on the
part of, and cooperation between, our two countries,
and we will seek to build on the work already done by
the United States of America and Turkey along these
lines.
The ministerial meeting of the GCTF adopted in
September 2014 The Hague—Marrakech memorandum
on good practices for a more effective response to the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, in addition
to which Morocco and the Netherlands also chair the
Foreign Terrorist Fighters Working Group within
the GCTF.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Morocco
has developed a comprehensive and coherent approach
based on prevention and action that is fully consistent
with the provisions of the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015),
which my country co-sponsored. This approach was
shared on 30 September 2014 when we met with the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Our approach is based on the following.
First, it is based on optimizing security governance,
enhancing and making fit for purpose a legal framework
for counter-terrorism activities, the adoption of relevant
new legislation and vigilance in terms of security.
The second factor is the rollout in 2005 of a
national initiative for human development that is
focused on the individual as a way of fighting against
social ills, exclusion and precarity, and focusing on
the empowerment of women. Women have seen their
status in society enhanced thanks to their engagement
in counter-terrorism efforts and efforts to tackle
violent extremism.
Thirdly, we have focused on reform of religious
practices, notably through the establishment of a
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

learned council responsible for interpreting the text
of the Koran and the hadith; the training of young
preachers, both men and women, in the precepts of Islam
based on the values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation,
coexistence and respect for others, as espoused by
the Islamic religion; the launch of a deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration programme for foreign
terrorist fighters. Morocco’s experience in the field of
training preachers has been shared with several friendly
countries in Africa, in the Arab world and in Europe
through bilateral agreements.

We must also stress that there is a need to find a
political solution to the Syrian crisis. Let me point to
the fact that combating the funding of terrorism cannot
be achieved through individual national efforts or
independent efforts by individual institutions. There
are many sources for the funding of terrorism. We must
therefore look into mechanisms that ensure concerted
efforts at the national level as well as cooperation at the
regional and international levels. Lack of coordination
nationally, regionally and internationally is one reason
for the success of those groups in obtaining resources.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.

I must also refer most regretfuly to an expanding
phenomenon that is the fear of Islam and of Muslims
around the world. It is a destructive phenomenon, one
which leads to erroneous ideologies and thoughts,
feeding the extremists and their objectives that seek to
divide us. Let me stress that those suffering the most
from terrorism and its crimes are Arabs and Muslims,
more than any other ethnic or religious groups.

Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for
having convened this important meeting. Time is short,
so allow me to briefly take up some points that we wish
to share.
Jordan, led by His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, will remain at the forefront of all
international and regional efforts to confront terrorist
groups in the context of a comprehensive approach that
takes into account military, security and ideological
confrontation. Let me remind the Council of what
his Majesty said: “Because this war is our war, we,
Muslims and Arabs, must unite our efforts and lead
an Arab-Muslim coalition, as we defend our religion
and our noble civilization as we protect and ensure the
security of our peoples and countries”.
We must continue to work together to confront
more effectively the issue of the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters towards the full implementation of resolution
2178 (2014). It is also important to promote and
improve the ability of local parties to combat Da’esh.
In this regard, Jordan has supported the efforts by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to set up an Islamic military
alliance to combat terrorism. We participate therein,
support it strongly and were among its initiators.
A part of the solution to the problem of terrorism
lies in understanding the root causes of extremism and
terrorism. Failed States, chaos in some conflict regions,
sectarian divisions, marginalization, exclusion and
the fragmentation of States are all fertile ground for
terrorism and extremism. Failure to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is a fundamental factor in this
respect. Failure to reach a peaceful and just settlement
gives terrorists a pretext to recruit and gain support.

We must concentrate on the youth. Jordan was in the
forefront of those pointing to the need to protect youth.
Let me stress here the importance of implementing the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2250 (2015)
on youth, peace and security, based on the initiative
of Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II during
Jordan’s presidency of the Security Council in April
2015 and the Amman Youth Declaration on Youth,
Peace and Security, of August 2015. Furthermore, we
must deal with the struggle within States to prevent
Da’esh from recruiting new members internationally,
luring them through social media, in addition to using
the electronic media to smuggle millions of dollars’
worth of archaeological treasures.
Jordan reasserts its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We look to its contents very positively, as long as it
goes along with national plans.
Finally, the heinous terrorist crimes perpetrated
by terrorist groups surely must point to the fact that
those terrorists are trying to undermine our joint
common values. The war against terrorism is indeed a
third world war, and we must participate effectively in
combating it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President,
my delegation would like to commend China for its

16-1054123/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and expresses its appreciation on the convening of this
important debate on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts.
Recent acts of terrorism across the world have again
exposed the callous and heinous nature of terrorism.
That is demonstrated by the indiscriminate killing and
maiming, the damage to property and infrastructure,
the fostering of fear in local communities and the
undermining of social and economic confidence. While
old threats remain, new threats and vulnerabilities have
developed with the emergence of a new, technologically
advanced and skilled generation of terrorists who
harbour territorial and transnational ambitions. Those
groups are willing to sacrifice women and children in
the service of their cause.
South Africa stands firmly with the rest of the
international community in its condemnation of
those attacks and reiterates its stance that terrorism,
in whatever form and from whichever quarter, must
be condemned. We are cognizant that no country is
immune and that we are all vulnerable to this threat.
With terrorism’s global reach and changing nature,
international cooperation in countering this threat is
critical. International efforts should therefore support
a comprehensive, multifaceted and integrated approach
to deal with the scourge. Efforts should be focused
on countering the radicalization and recruitment of
individuals. We need to hamper the movement of
terrorists and the flow of funds. Last but not least, we
need to contradict and dispute the terrorist narrative,
notably on the Internet.
We have all noted that no country can shoulder this
burden alone. Therefore the South African Government
wishes to renew its pledge to fully support the global
campaign against terrorism within the framework
of the United Nations. The centrality of the United
Nations in coordinating and facilitating international
efforts is pivotal if we are to succeed. We also welcome
initiatives and efforts that promote dialogue, tolerance,
diversity and understanding among peoples, cultures
and religions. Acts of mobilization directed against
individuals, communities or nations simply because of
their faith, language or race cannot be tolerated.
South Africa reiterates its view that terrorism
cannot be defeated militarily and cannot be dealt with
solely through the use of force or coercive measures.
We believe that the only way for our collective efforts
24/50

14/04/2016

to succeed is to address the root causes of terrorism. We
need to understand and address the conditions that make
terrorism an attractive option to the disaffected. It is
critical to engage people, including through education,
to eliminate inequalities and work with disadvantaged
groups of society, particularly the youth, and to develop
appropriate strategies at the national, regional and
international levels.
In that context, it is important to resolve conflicts
in all parts of the globe, including through the search
for lasting peace in the Middle East. Promoting
political solutions aimed at resolving conflict and
creating the conditions for a better future over the
long term will go a long way to counter that scourge.
Those solutions should be based on all-inclusive
dialogue without prejudicing any party. International
cooperation in combating terrorism should also
include a joint commitment to eradicate poverty and
underdevelopment. Countermeasures can never be
sustainable if those factors are not addressed in tandem
with other counter-terror initiatives.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly, is a useful and flexible collective tool for
guiding the international community’s response to
terrorism. Together with the Secretary-General’s plan
for countering violent extremism, it provides a holistic
and multifaceted response to the many facets of that
challenge, premised on respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the rule of law.
At the regional level, recognizing the need to
strengthen cooperation and to develop a common
and coordinated approach to counter this threat, the
Southern African Development Community developed
a regional counter-terrorism strategy, formally adopted
during its thirty-fifth Summit of Heads of State and
Government in August 2015.
At the national level, South Africa’s counterterrorism efforts are guided by the values of human
dignity, human rights and the rule of law, as enshrined
in our Constitution. We have adopted a national counterterrorism strategy, which is closely aligned to the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Its pillars
are, first, understanding and prediction; secondly,
prevention; thirdly, mitigation; fourthly, combating
terrorism; and fifthly, dealing with its consequences.
Our national strategy provides a comprehensive and
proportionate response to the threat of international
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism and extremism to South Africa’s democracy.
It takes both local and international best practices into
account, while upholding human rights and the rule
of law. Furthermore, the South African Government
works closely with various organizations established
by our Constitution to promote and foster social,
cultural, religious and linguistic dialogue, as well as
social cohesion.
In conclusion, we acknowledge the valuable role
the United Nations continues to fulfil in countering this
scourge. With its global reach and mandate and itself
the target of devastating terrorist attacks, the United
Nations is best placed to deal with this threat in all its
forms, while helping to ensure that global efforts are
rooted in respect for human rights, the rule of law and
the peaceful resolution of conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
No country can defeat the scourge of terrorism
alone. Terrorism does not respect national or
geographical boundaries. Today, social media are being
used by terrorists to spread radical ideas and promote
violent extremism across borders. Southeast Asia is
not immune. In addition to the January 2016 attacks
in Jakarta, there are now over 1,000 South-East Asians
who have joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), including a handful of Singaporeans. They are
battle hardened and have combat skills and violent
tendencies and embrace an extremist ideology. When
they return, they pose a significant risk. They hope
to overturn Governments and establish a caliphate in
Southeast Asia.
As an international hub and a multi-faith society,
Singapore takes the threat posed by ISIS and other
extremist ideologies seriously. They are threats not
only to physical safety, but also to social harmony. In
our view, there are three key elements in an effective
approach to addressing violent extremism and
terrorism. First, it is crucial to build national resilience.
Inclusive economic development, good governance, and
political and social stability are a critical starting point
in our approach. On top of that foundation, we also
need to promote tolerance and mutual understanding.
Singapore works closely with religious and community
leaders to encourage dialogue and counter the spread

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

of extremist exclusionist ideologies. We have put in
place initiatives such as the Interracial and Religious
Confidence Circles, and other community engagement
programmes to build social trust. Our goal is to build
a strong web of trust among our various racial and
religious groups, so that there is greater community
resilience to deal with “the day after” a major incident.
For those led astray, Singapore has emphasized
rehabilitation and reintegration. In 2003, a religious
rehabilitation group was formed by respected religious
teachers and scholars to counsel detained extremists
and correct erroneous religious teaching. Further,
we continue to educate Singaporeans on the dangers
of online threats to security and social harmony.
Increasingly, the social media enable us to live in
fragmented echo chambers, filled only with people
who agree with us. It is vital to continually remind
our people of the need for diversity and tolerance,
both online and offline. Only then can we keep our
community bonds strong.
Secondly, it is important to cut off financial resources
for terrorism. Singapore takes a serious approach
to protecting the integrity of our financial system
against money-laundering and terrorism-financing.
We are an active member of the Financial Action Task
Force and a founding member of the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering. Singapore has a strict
legal and regulatory framework to safeguard against
terrorism-financing through our financial system.
We have required financial institutions and relevant
non-financial sectors to implement comprehensive
monitoring and due diligence procedures in line with
international standards. Those controls are overseen by
sectoral supervisors for compliance. The threat posed
by ISIS requires that we remain vigilant, and continue
to work closely with industry to detect and deter such
illicit flows.
Thirdly, effective international cooperation and the
sharing of best practices will strengthen the first two
pillars of our fight against terrorism. Bilaterally, our
security agencies have established close cooperation
with their counterparts. Regionally, Singapore
participates actively in counterterrorism initiatives
undertaken by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Asia-Europe Meeting, and the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation Forum. We believe that
the international community needs such platforms to
discuss and share our experiences. Working together
will amplify our individual efforts. That was why

16-1054125/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Singapore convened the East Asia Summit Symposium
on Religious Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration
in 2015. This year, we organized the tenth Asia-Pacific
Programme for Senior National Security Officers,
and will host another workshop later in the year to
develop a cross-regional perspective on best practices
and policies for promoting religious tolerance and
strengthening resilience.
Multilaterally, Singapore supports the efforts of the
United Nations to develop a framework for collective
action to counter violent extremism. We co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014) on arresting the international
flow of terrorist fighters, and we therefore welcome
this timely open debate convened by China.
Given the continuing threat posed by terrorist
groups, we believe that a successful framework for
collective action must take a holistic approach. It
must address the key drivers of terrorism, including
the propagation of extremist ideologies, which distort
religious concepts, and the role played by the social
media in spreading and amplifying such ideologies. To
be truly effective, the framework must take into account
domestic and contextual factors, and put national action
plans at the heart of our collective endeavour to address
the terrorism challenge.
Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to
international peace and security. But if we work together,
we can translate national resilience into global unity and
strength. Singapore will remain committed to playing
its part in the fight against international terrorism.

14/04/2016

In the light of the current events — and the facts are
before us — we must work together to combat terrorism,
as it is a dangerous phenomenon that endangers all of
humankind. We must recognize the fact that terrorism
has not emerged in a vacuum. It grew and developed
in fragile environments where the conditions were
conducive to the growth of extremism and terrorism;
such environments might include policies that dealt
with popular grievances using repressive force alone,
without taking up the root causes of those grievances.
That has enabled terrorist groups to claim that they
are defending the rights of the people. They play the
sectarian and religious cards. We must, therefore,
respond to the aspirations of peoples of various groups
for social justice. We must strengthen cooperation in
order to reach the objective that we have sought for
so long.
The State of Qatar believes that terrorism is a
scourge for all societies. When confronted with all the
events that have taken place, we do not hesitate to express
our position and condemnation of the use of violence,
whatever its nature. We also believe that combating
terrorism requires a comprehensive approach in order
to prevent terrorist acts and to address the root causes
of terrorism, which are economic, social and political
in nature.

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in your task. I
thank you for holding this open debate, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

We renew our commitment to international
cooperation aimed at combating the scourge of terrorism.
We shall spare no effort to cooperate in international
efforts in that regard, and we commit to all agreements
arrived at by the international community to combat
terrorism. Personifying the vision of the leadership
of the State of Qatar, represented by His Highness
Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, my country has
committed to making efforts at all levels, in particular
within the framework of the United Nations and
regional mechanisms, to uproot terrorism and address
its root causes, as well as the factors that have led to
its development, because terrorism threatens national
unity and societies.

This meeting is being held in the shadow of
continuing challenges to the world, resulting from
terrorist acts. No entity, whether State or community,
can handle the phenomenon of terrorism alone. Current
international developments have shown that terrorism
has no religion, nation or identity. It comes in different
forms and with different levels of severity, and it
disturbs and threatens international peace and security,
unless efforts to combat it continue at all levels.

Cooperating with the international community in
this regard, my country has continued to strengthen
national legislation on combating terrorism in
order to adapt to the new challenges presented
by the phenomenon. We have set up specialized
national institutions that have an effective role to
play in implementing mechanisms approved by the
international community in order to uproot terrorism,
dry up sources of financing and facilitate cooperation

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

26/50

16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

with United Nations bodies. Based on this vision, we
give special attention to combating violent extremism
because it leads ultimately to terrorism. On 3 June, we
will be holding a high-level thematic conversation on
children and youth affected by violent extremism, with
a view to reintegrating them into society.
The State of Qatar stresses the importance of
respecting religions and civilizations as well as the
importance of tolerance. Religions fundamentally do
not call for terrorism. In religious texts there are many
teachings on peace, tolerance and coexistence. We must
choose our words carefully when confronting terrorists,
terrorism and extremists. We must avoid generalized,
erroneous nomenclatures. We must not link individual
acts of violence and extremism to a particular religion.
Also, defaming religious symbols gives extremists a
pretext to violence.
In conclusion, the success of the international
community in uprooting the causes of terrorism will
not only be of benefit to the very States confronting the
challenge. It will also reflect directly on strengthening
international peace and security. The international
community as a whole will reap its fruits. My country
will remain an effective party to international efforts
devoted to achieving this objective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). The full text of my statement is
available, but due to time constraints I will present a
shorter version.
At the outset, I would like to welcome and thank
the Chinese presidency for its initiative in convening
today’s open debate on an important issue. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I would like to underscore the validity and relevance
of NAM’s principled positions on terrorism, which
are reflected in the Algiers Final Document of the
seventeenth NAM Ministerial Conference and include
the following points.
Terrorist acts constitute one of the most flagrant
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, in particular the
right to life. They lead to the lack of the full enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples and

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

endanger the territorial integrity and stability of States
as well as national, regional and international security,
destabilize legitimately constituted Governments or
the prevailing constitutional order and political unity
of States, affect the stability of nations and the very
basis of societies. Terrorist acts also create adverse
consequences for economic and social development
and cause the destruction of the physical and economic
infrastructure of States.
NAM strongly condemns and rejects terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, as well as all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism wherever, by
whomever, against whomsoever committed, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
which are unjustifiable whatever the considerations or
factors that may be invoked to justify them.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
and these attributions should not be used to justify
terrorism or counter-terrorism measures that include,
inter alia, the profiling of terror suspects and intrusion
on individual privacy.
At the same time, terrorism should not be equated
with the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial
or alien domination and foreign occupation for selfdetermination and national liberation or in order to
prolong occupation and oppression of innocent people
with impunity. In this regard, and in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the struggle
of peoples under colonial or alien domination and
foreign occupation for self-determination and national
liberation does not constitute terrorism.
The financing of terrorism is a matter of grave
concern that must be fought with determination. In this
regard, NAM strongly condemns criminal incidences
of hostage-taking with resultant demands for ransom
and/or other political concessions by terrorist groups
and calls upon all States to cooperate actively in order
to address this issue in all its aspects, including its
legal aspects. NAM invites Member States to take
the necessary measures to prevent terrorists from
benefiting from hostage-taking, including ransom
payments and political concessions.
Finally, I reaffirm the Movement’s principled
position on combating international terrorism,
while stressing the need to respect international law,
including the respect for the sovereignty, territorial

16-1054127/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

integrity and political independence of all States. In
the light of the previous initiatives and considerations
adopted by NAM and of our conviction that multilateral
cooperation, in conformity with the United Nations
Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions, and under United Nations auspices, is
the most effective means to combat international
terrorism, I reiterate the Movement’s call for an
international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations to formulate a joint organized response
by the international community to terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including identifying its
root causes.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, I would like
to extend my congratulations to you and the People’s
Republic of China for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council during the month of April and
to express my gratitude for organizing this highly
important debate. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation shares the concerns expressed by
many delegations at the Council today. Every day, we
are faced with images of violent extremism and terrorist
action. The self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and its horrendous crimes are menacing peace,
stability and human security worldwide. The Royal
Government of Cambodia firmly condemns every act
of violence that this terrorist organization has visited
on religious and ethnic minorities, and in particular on
women and children, including its brutal executions of
the innocent.
The rapid spread of terrorist threats is indeed
disturbing. While the scourge of terrorism has spread
too fast and too far, it can be defeated by a sustained,
comprehensive approach. The unpredictability,
frequency and potency of terrorist attacks demand
increased international solidarity and cooperation,
with the United Nations taking a central role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As we work together on that, the Royal Government
of Cambodia would like to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The principles of
respect for territorial integrity, sovereign equality,
28/50

14/04/2016

independence and non-interference in domestic affairs
must play an integral role in the global fight against
terrorism. This is essential if we are to ensure universal
respect for the principles of justice as outlined in the
Charter, and it is very important for the three pillars
of the Organization’s work — peace and security,
development and human rights.
Counter-terrorism
action
must
follow
a
comprehensive approach. In line with resolution 2178
(2014), the global community must focus on combating
radicalization and terrorist recruitment by countering
terrorist propaganda and preventing terrorists from
exploiting social media and Internet communications
technologies for incitement and the propagation of violent
extremist messages. To fight terrorism successfully,
we must eradicate the root causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination, a
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence. We can undercut the
recruitment of terrorists and terrorism’s global spread
through the adequate and stable improvement of social,
political and economic conditions. We must all take this
on board, because we can never succeed in attaining our
sustainable development agenda without first securing
a safe and prosperous future for our children.
In that connection, it is absolutely essential that
we safeguard and preserve the cultural heritage
of humankind for future generations. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is deeply disturbed by
terrorists’ deliberate destruction of cultural heritage
sites and thefts of priceless ancient artifacts. Such
unspeakable practices erode the historic fabric of our
society. Cambodia will stand with the international
community in our global efforts to keep our ancient
history alive. My delegation therefore fully supports
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), which aim to
suppress terrorist financing and thus prevent terrorist
groups and their supporters from compromising
international peace and security.
The spread of terrorism undermines our efforts to
strengthen the global economy and ensure sustainable
growth and development for all. In order to fight it, the
international community must act decisively and in a
unified and well-coordinated manner. The fight against
terrorism must be consistent with international law and
conducted in full accord with the purposes and principles
of the Charter. In that regard, I would like once again
to stress that the principles of the Charter are vital to
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

global peace and security, economic development, the
rule of law, social progress and the protection of human
rights. In that context, my delegation looks forward
to the review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy to be conducted in June. We will
work productively with other Member States and United
Nations agencies in our efforts to further strengthen the
global counter-terrorism response.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation would like
to thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for convening today’s open debate on a critical subject.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the topic this morning.
Acts of terrorism are an issue that currently
besets the entire world and threatens to shatter the
very foundations of international peace and security.
The alarming increase in the number and lethality of
organized terrorist attacks over the past year makes it
clear that assertive and expeditious measures must be
taken to eliminate this threat before any more innocent
lives are lost. On behalf of the Government and the
people of the Maldives, I would like to extend our
sincere condolences and sympathies to all the countries,
communities and families that have fallen victim to
terrorist attacks recently and in the past. It is with great
concern that we note the incidents of terrorist activity
that now occur with increasing frequency all over the
world. We recognize that some countries may never
recover from the physical, social and economic wounds
that such attacks leave behind.
The Government of the Maldives strongly condemns
and denounces all acts of terrorism committed by any
terrorist group or individual. Whether indiscriminate or
targeted, they are horrifyingly misguided and completely
lacking in basic morality and respect for humankind.
In no way, therefore, should they be associated with
any specific religion, nationality or ethnic group, and
that approach must be strictly observed when it comes
to making policy decisions, formulating preventive
measures and sharing information, both domestically
and internationally. Any failure to do so will not only
isolate and unfairly condemn a large fraction of the
world’s population, it will also destroy the unity and
trust that the United Nations was built on. Terrorism is
a common threat to us all and can be eliminated only
through solidarity, mutual trust and understanding.

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

In that spirit, almost 10 years ago we all came
together to adopt the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The Strategy, which recognizes
the multilayered complexities behind the root causes
of terrorism, is supplemented by various General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions as well as
initiatives targeting specific aspects of terrorism. The
Maldives welcomes one of the most recent of those
initiatives, the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism, which resulted in the
Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism held in
Geneva last week and demonstrates that all countries
are united in denouncing and condemning violent
extremism and terrorism in all forms.
Although terrorist attacks are a global issue, the
preventive solutions to them lie in domestic action
within our countries. We must accept that no country
is immune to the threat and ensure that we have robust
legislation in place to address terrorism’s root causes and
prevent its spread — legislation that must be effectively
implemented and diligently enforced. In that regard, in
2015 Maldives enacted a revised and comprehensive
anti-terrorism law and launched a number of initiatives
at the national level to prevent the spread of terrorism
and terrorist attacks. This includes the Government’s
establishment of a multi-agency counter-terrorism
centre in February this year.
Recognizing that cutting off the channels for
terrorist financing is one of the most crucial steps
in combatting international terrorism, the Maldives
adopted the Prevention of Money Laundering and
Terrorism Financing Act in 2014. I wish to emphasize
the importance of having comprehensive laws on this
matter in each and every country to ensure that no
State inadvertently falls victim as a channel of terrorist
finances. Both of these national legislations arise from
the landmark resolution number 2178 (2014), which
demonstrates the important role that the Security
Council plays in the interaction between international
and domestic law.
From the recent attacks that we have seen, it is clear
that the methods, strategies and targets for terrorist
attacks have evolved over time. Technology, social
media and other resources are being exploited not only
to plan and conduct these attacks, but for recruitment
and public outreach as well. Therefore, it is important
to ensure that the preventive measures and responses
to these attacks are dynamic as well. We must use our
collective resources, intelligence and power to ensure

16-1054129/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that we are always one step ahead until this threat is
eliminated. International and regional networking
for the sharing of information and best practices
would be extremely beneficial in dealing with postmodern terrorism and technology used to commit acts
of terrorism.
For instance, although the Maldives gives the
highest priority to issues relating to terrorism, it is also
important to recognize that the Maldives is a small and
widely dispersed island country with limited resources
and capacity. We need to recognize that each and every
country has unique challenges and vulnerabilities, and
we need to ensure that all countries have the assistance
they require to prevent acts of terrorism from taking
place on their soil.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that we must
continue our battle against terrorism with deepened
resolve and determination. These terrorist attacks are
aimed at bringing down not only buildings and homes,
but also our spirits and hope. As long as we do not allow
that to happen, we shall win thie war.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya
congratulates you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April and
commends you for your skilful conduct of the affairs
of the Council.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
illuminating remarks. My delegation also appreciates
all the reports that have been shared with us, including
the concept note for this meeting (S/2016/306, annex).
Please allow me reiterate the solidarity of our
Government and delegation with the Governments and
peoples of countries who have suffered and continue
to suffer unnecessary loss of life perpetrated through
cowardly, backward and evil terrorist attacks by
retrogressive forces in various parts of the world.
The threat posed by international terrorism is the
greatest challenge to sustaining peace and sustainable
development. It is a global challenge requiring
concerted international efforts to eradicate. Terrorists
have become more sophisticated, globalized, cruel
and brutal as they continue to proliferate. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham/Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and other groups are emerging in
30/50

14/04/2016

various parts of the world and continue to pose a real,
daily threat.
Kenya welcomes the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism as a basis for
each Member State to put its political will into concrete
action against terrorism. We are aligning our counterterrorism strategy and national action plans with the
Plan of Action in order to enable us enhance preventive
actions, particularly through early warning systems at
the local and grassroots levels, as that is one of the most
effective ways to snuff out the terrorist supply chain
of new recruits. Prevention will also delegitimize the
radicalization and violent extremist narrative online
and offline before it gains ground anywhere. The Plan
of Action focuses on and calls upon Member States
and the entire United Nations system to cooperate,
collaborate and work together to conclusively address
this problem. The international community must fully
unite in order to succeed.
The Kenya delegation is of the view that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
has an important role to play in order to positively
advance the war against terror. Yet, it has not fully
brought its immense convening power to bear on this
matter. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy alone, without a binding legal instrument
against terrorism, cannot yield the dividends that we
all aspire to.
At the national level, Kenya has established the
National Counter-Terrorism Centre, an inter-agency
organization that coordinates the implementation of the
national counter-terrorism strategy and action plans.
With the enhanced coordination of national efforts, we
have realized a reduction in the number and intensity
of terrorists acts in our country. Through increased
public engagement at all levels, the war against
terrorism is being prosecuted and executed by both the
law enforcement agencies and the citizenry and local
communities, as it is now seen as a call to defend their
national values, democracy, freedom and, of course,
Kenya’s way of life.
Kenya’s efforts to counter violent extremism take a
threefold approach.
First, prevention measures target individuals and
communities at risk and exposure to recruiters into
violent extremism. These prevention measures focus
on investments, for example, in education to counter
terrorism and violent extremism ideologies. We also
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

focus on smart immigration and border-control systems,
effective pubIic service delivery, the protection of
liberties and freedoms, and the enhancement of
democracy in our country.
Curative and rehabilitative measures to deal with
those already radicalized and the affected communities
are a second, important measure. The Government plans
to set up a prison and rehabilitation centre dedicated
to the rehabilitation of terrorists to help them transit
and be reintegrated into the community as reformed
and productive members of our society. Training and
continuing education for both the investigative and the
prosecution arms of law enforcement on best practices
investigations and evidence collection, the protection
and promotion of the rule of law, and training in other
other criminal justice aspects to enhance and consolidate
the war against terrorism are another strategy. A
financial reporting centre is now also fully operational,
The centre enhances the capacity of the banking and
financial services sector to prevent, detect and counter
terrorism financing through Kenya’s economy.
Capacity-building to build the resilience of
communities, including initiatives to assist them in
preventing and addressing threats and in rehabilitating
and reintegrating their members who have been
radicalized or are reformed terrorists, is the third
strategy. This helps these communities to reject violent
extremist narratives and to recover from acts of violent
extremism. That is why the Government is fully
committed to the devolution of budgetary resources to
the county level for development initiatives, because
we have come to realize that this helps to create jobs,
deliver services and delegitimize the narratives of
marginalization by extremist groups. The Kenyan
Government is also heavily invested in youth and
women. Development funds to enhance and facilitate
financial inclusion have been set up and help to ensure
that all segments of society are engaged in productive
economic activities.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
commitment to international solidarity in the war
against terrorism, and we look forward to the review of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June
2016, subsequent to which we expect that we shall be
able to adopt a more progressive strategy that is able to
address current and emerging challenges and realities
to help us achieve our collective aspirations of ending
terrorism and violent extremism. The 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development (General Assembly

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

resolution 70/1), provides us, as we all know, with a
collective standard and a transformative framework
to address economic inequalities within and among
nations. That will help all of us address alienation and
exclusion, intolerance and violence, as those are the
challenges that are driving and enablisng terrorism and
violent extremism to advance everywhere throughout
the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua wishes to congratulate the
presidency of the People’s Republic of China for its
outstanding work during this month and for having
convened this debate on this very important topic, which
deals with a threat to international peace and security.
Our delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Nicaragua reiterates in the strongest terms its
condemnation of terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism, of which
Nicaragua, its people and Government have been
victims. Terrorism cannot and must not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group, and those attributions should not be used to
justify terrorism.
Similarly, Nicaragua condemns the double
standards practiced by some countries that claim
to promote the eradication of terrorism but shelter
terrorists within their territories, send terrorists to
other States and finance their actions with the aim
of changing regimes and subjugating their people.
Clearly, many who claim to promote human rights and
the rule of law are the same ones who most egregiously
violate human rights and international law, which
they seek to justify in the name of fighting against
terrorism. The same parties have financed, organized
and created existing terrorist groups, in particular in
the Middle East. Nicaragua expresses its condemnation
of the ongoing hostilities that have been waged under
the banner of the war on terror. Entire nations, which
were once enjoying development and prosperity, are
today mired in ruins and destruction, with millions of
victims. Entire families and millions of human beings
are now looking for refuge, fleeing a situation that we
claim to be combating, using the same old methods.

16-1054131/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The fight against the scourge of terrorism must
be an open and coordinated fight, waged within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, ensuring that all Member States
are participating on an equal footing with regard to
their rights and the respect for their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Much remains to be done on
the issue of terrorism, and we strongly support the
development of a convention on terrorism and call on
all Member States to show flexibility in that regard.
Nicaragua reaffirms its desire to contribute in the best
way possible to ensure that that convention is finalized.
At the same time, we are committed to continuing to
work to promote and support the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In the words of the President of Nicaragua, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra,
“The increasing greed of global capitalism,
particularly in the Middle East and Africa, has
caused wars and created, fostered, cultivated and
exploited fanaticism and terrorism, which have,
in turn, spread insecurity and destruction, and
caused all kinds of crises — crises of infinite
proportions and ramifications with war, food, the
environmental, labour and humanitarian matters at
their heart” (A/70/PV.23, p.11).
Terrorism has become a threat to international
peace and security. Once again, I return to the words of
President Ortega:
“Our Organization should promote respect, peace,
sovereign security, justice and solidarity among
human beings. The Organization must respond
in the face of that barbaric intervention in and
interruption of the tranquillity and the right to
prosperity in the lives of millions of families of
countries and entire populations” (ibid., p. 11).
It is our responsibility to put an end to that threat.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the presidency of the People’s Republic
of China in the Security Council this month and, in
particular, its leadership of our work. Cuba strongly
supports the collective efforts of the United Nations in
its fight against terrorism, and therefore accords great
importance to this debate.
32/50

14/04/2016

Cuba rejects and condemns all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism in all of their forms and
manifestations committed by whomever, against
whomever, wherever they are committed and whatever
their motivations, including State terrorism. Any
Government involved in an act of State terrorism must
be held accountable at the international level.
It is impossible to eradicate terrorism, however, if
only some terrorist acts are condemned while others
are ignored, tolerated, justified or reinterpreted, an
approach that seeks to to promote narrow political
and economic interests. It is unacceptable that double
standards, political bias and impunity prevail in
addressing such a sensitive issue. Cuba is a country that,
in seeking to defend its independence and sovereignty,
has suffered for decades from the consequences of
terrible terrorist acts that were organized, financed and
planned from abroad, resulting in a toll of 3,478 dead
and 2,099 injured. Our people have suffered in their
own flesh because of that scourge, and we will always
fight against it.
One such concrete example of our fight against
terrorism is our Law No. 93 against terrorist acts. It has
been in force since 20 December 2001 and is part of our
penal code, with specific provisions for defining efforts
to respond to criminal conduct of a terrorist nature. We
are also party to 18 international conventions relating
to terrorism, pursuant to which legal and institutional
measures have been put in place to effectively confront
the phenomenon. Cuba has never allowed nor will it
ever allow the use of its national territory for carrying
out, planning or financing terrorist acts of any kind
against any State, without exception.
The international community must not accept the
fact that the fight against terrorism is being used as
a pretext to justify interference in the internal affairs
of other States, carry out acts of aggression, or allow
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, such as torture, kidnapping, illegal
detentions, disappearances or extrajudicial executions,
thereby undermining the national sovereignty of a State.
Those actions are in contravention with the Charter
of the United Nations and the principles and norms
of international law. Wherever those legal and ethical
principles are violated, the legitimacy of our struggle
against international terrorism will be undermined.
Today, the question of terrorism is made up of a
number of important issues, tied in to the threat to
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international peace and stability. Some of them were
included in the last review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is, with its
four pillars, the guiding framework for the global fight
against terrorist acts.
Information and communications technologies
must be used in strict accordance with international
law. Access to such technologies should be blocked for
recruitment activities of terrorists and for the financing
and carrying out of terrorist acts. States also have the
obligation to refrain from resorting to those tools to
undermine the exercise of sovereignty of other States.
In that regard, we ought to condemn the practice of
certain States in funding, supporting and promoting,
through the Internet, radio or television, acts that
violate the self-determination of other peoples, as well
as messages of intolerance against cultures or political
and socioeconomic systems that do not agree with the
imposed prescriptions for their models of hegemonic
power.
Justice and reparations for victims must be at the
heart of our course of action. States are responsible for
meeting their international obligations and securing the
achievement of victims’ rights, including the numerous
victims of State terrorism.
Cuba reiterates the duty of States to fulfil their
obligations to prosecute and extradite all terrorists
without exceptions, such as the notorious terrorist Luis
Posada Carriles, responsible for the first terrorist attack
against civil aviation in the Western Hemisphere. In
that crime, he instigated the mid-air explosion near
the coast of Barbados of a plane of the commercial
airline Cubana de Aviación on 6 October 1976, with the
resulting loss of 73 passengers.
Cuba actively participates in the actions and efforts
of the United Nations aimed at combating international
terrorism. We firmly believe that the Organization is
the appropriate setting for confronting this scourge
with determination and energy and without double
standards. The fight against terrorism requires the
cooperation of everyone, with full adherence to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law. Cuba has demonstrated
its commitment to and full support for the call of the
United Nations to States, international organizations
and the international community to refuse, as a whole,
to finance or encourage terrorist activities, to support
them by other means or to provide training for them.

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Cuba believes that we can do much more in the
matter of the fight against terrorism. The Council
and all Member States can count on our unwavering
commitment to combating this scourge in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever it occurs and
independently of whomever the perpetrators of terrorist
acts may be. Multilateral efforts to consolidate the full
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy assuredly have our support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you for organizing this
debate, Mr. President.
Since the last time the Estonian Minister for Foreign
Affairs spoke at the United Nations, in September 2015
(see S/PV.7527), terrorist aggression has, tragically,
continued around the world, including in our region,
in Europe and in its neighbourhood, where hundreds of
people have been killed and injured in heinous terrorist
attacks. Estonia remains vigilant and committed to our
common fight against terrorism.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon, and the
international community must act together to
prevent and counter terrorism in a comprehensive
and sustainable way. The United Nations is the most
appropriate framework for shaping international
counter-terrorism measures. In that regard, let me point
out the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014)
and, most recently, 2253 (2015), as well as the Plan of
Action on Preventing Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
presented by the Secretary-General.
As a European Union member State, Estonia fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered in the Council
today by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU).
To enhance the fight against terrorism, we support
closer cooperation and the exchange of information,
both inside the EU and with other countries and
organizations. We participate in the EU work in
progress, including the fight against terrorist financing
and stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Estonia has signed and will ratify the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism, and our first cases on terrorist
financing have been brought to justice.
In the long term, we must focus on prevention.
Radicalization is a social phenomenon first, and then

16-1054133/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a law-enforcement issue. Education, integration,
employment and eventually deradicalization and
rehabilitation must be provided to prevent violent
extremism. Online and offline, we must stop terrorist
propaganda and develop counter narratives, in publicprivate partnerships. In broad terms, democracy, the rule
of law and respect for human rights remain essential in
preventing and countering terrorism. Estonia takes that
into account in its activities on a national level as well
as in its international cooperation and development aid.
Ultimately, the solution lies in addressing the
conflicts and assisting the fragile States where
violent extremism breeds. To counter one of the most
menacing terrorist organizations of our time, Da’esh,
Estonia supports the Global Coalition to Counter the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to which we are
contributing, in accordance with our capacity, through
military and humanitarian aid.
At the same time, we must not forget that terrorism
and violent extremism are not limited to radical Islam
and specific regions. No manifestation of terrorism
can be tolerated wherever it emerges, regardless of its
religious, political, historical or ethnical background
and motivation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
convening today’s meeting.

14/04/2016

organizations in territories controlled by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In a technological
age, recruitment no longer requires face-to-face
communication. ISIL terrorists are using modern,
encrypted networks, and for law-enforcement agencies
that poses a huge obstacle in the process of combating
terrorism.
No single State can have full access to the
relevant data. T counter those challenges, Georgia
has significantly streamlined its procedures for
intelligence-sharing, and our special agencies have
demonstrated good practices in successful international
cooperation.
Bearing in mind the rapidly increasing ISIL
propaganda, relevant frameworks should be considered
in which influential religious and youth leaders can play
a key role. More must also be done to address the root
causes conducive to the spread of violent extremism,
including elaborating relevant policies aimed at social
and economic development, fostering education
and youth employment, women’s empowerment and
inclusive national ownership. Georgia has taken
steps towards fuller integration of certain vulnerable
communities into society, with the participation
of civil society and advocacy groups. It should be
emphasized that criminal prosecution without a proper
resocialization strategy It should be emphasized that
criminal prosecution without a proper resocialization
strategy can only further aggravate radicalization.

The violence and brutality inflicted by terrorism
on humanity is of grave concern. Egregious attacks
on innocent civilians in different parts of the world
make it obvious that terrorism, one of the most
pressing challenges for the contemporary world, has
become transnational and cross-border in nature. The
situation in the Middle East overtly demonstrates how
inhumanely terrorists can abuse the opportunities
opened by modernity, modern technologies and
growing globalization.

Increasing threats emanating from various terrorist
groups make the possibility of exploiting security
vulnerabilities with criminal intent highly likely. It is
not a secret that some terrorist groups have already
demonstrated acute interest in acquiring weapons of
mass destruction to terrorize the world. Hypothetically
speaking, terrorists can unlawfully obtain weapons
of mass destruction or technologies and materials
necessary to assemble them. Therefore, one day, the
threat of weapons of mass destruction terrorism might
shed its blurred lines and acquire quite a clear shape. To
effectively prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, we will have to enhance the existing
security architecture and reinforce the physical security
of sensitive materials.

Conflicts in Syria and Iraq have prompted violent
extremists to travel to those countries from all over
the world. The citizens of Georgia are also targeted
for recruitment to serve the interest of terrorist

The risks posed by the illegal military occupation
of 20 per cent of our sovereign territory by the
Russian Federation are our most serious problem. The
occupied regions of Georgia, like any other grey zone

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In addition,
I would like to make some comments in my national
capacity.

34/50

16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

throughout the world where legitimate national and
international mechanisms are nonexistent, have been
used for various sorts of illegal activities, including
smuggling and terrorism. In this connection, I would
like to remind this audience that over the past years
there have been a number of recorded and prosecuted
attempts to smuggle nuclear and radioactive materials
through the Russian-occupied Georgian regions, and
the international community has been duly informed
about them.
Full compliance with the obligations under
relevant international arrangements, such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, Council resolution 1540 (2004),
among others, must stand out as the top priority for the
international community. In this regard. I would like to
remind the Council that, in coordination with the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, the Government of Georgia organized
high-level side events in October 2014 and 2015 on
topics related to chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear — CBRN — risk reduction. In December 2015,
Georgia, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic of
the Philippines, as co-Chairs, established the United
Nations Group of Friends of CBRN Risk Mitigation and
Security Governance to promote various CBRN-related
topics in the United Nations by actively engaging with
Member States and the United Nations Secretariat.
The Group of Friends will help integrate the CBRN
component in the international security architecture and
foster regional and subregional cooperation on CBRN
challenges. When we held our second meeting at the
ambassadorial level on 6 April, we again encouraged
the other Member States participating in the European
Union’s CBRN Centres of Excellence Risk Mitigation
Initiative to join the Group.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Georgia’s
resolve and determination to further engage with our
partner countries and international organizations
with a common objective of reducing threats posed by
terrorism and violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Chinese presidency in the Council for organizing this
open debate.

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Terrorism and violent extremism are direct affronts
to what the United Nations stands for. As the main
custodian of the mandate of the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security,
the Security Council must continue to counter these
threats in a visible manner.
The tentacles of terrorism continue to grow and
engulf more and more territories and communities. As a
series of barbaric incidents from Paris to Ougadougou,
from Istanbul to Lahore make it evident, no one
nation among us is immune to terrorists’ reach. We
may have a different set of readings of the underlying
drivers of terrorism, yet we must all subscribe to
certain fundamental concerns. While going into a
firefighting mode about some immediate challenges,
we must address the larger, accumulated grievances that
terrorists tend to use as staples to increase their ranks.
We also lose focus when we try to find scapegoats
instead of being somewhat self-reflective. This leads to
scare- and hatemongering about others, whose identity
may vary depending on the context. The action of some
aberrant individuals cannot be apportioned to an entire
community or a nation in an indiscriminate fashion.
That kind of generalization leads to further polarization,
disrupting the unity of purpose that is a must to defeat
and degrade terrorists. For us, a terrorist is a terrorist
and does not have any religion, belief or creed. No faith
in the world justifies or condones unwarranted violence
and attacks against innocent civilians in the pretext of
righting any wrong.
Based on this, in Bangladesh, Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina has avowed a zero-tolerance approach
to terrorism and violent extremism in all their forms
and manifestations. Our Government has done much to
dismantle fringe terrorist groups and their offshoots.
We remain vigilant so as to obviate the possibility
of our nationals being recruited as foreign terrorist
fighters in the Middle East and elsewhere. We have
made sure that our territory is not used by any terrorist
entity working against the interest of our neighbour
countries. Bangladesh has joined the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund as a pilot country to
strengthen community-based responses against the
spread of violent extremism leading to terrorism.
We remain concerned over the targeted terror
tactics being used by certain banned terrorist outfits,
especially a group of online activists. This outfit
primarily operates through splinter cells, with

16-1054135/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

14/04/2016

indoctrinated individuals working within a disparate
network system. This poses a challenge to investigation
and prosecution, considering our resource constraints.
Matters get further compounded by generally unfounded
claims of involvement of certain international terrorist
groups. Our Government remains firmly committed
to overcoming these threats and challenges and to
preserving the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all citizens within our democratic and pluralist
social fabric.

Fourthly, it is crucial for the Council to make an
objective assessment of terrorist threats and linkages
based on evidence and to discourage reporting or
analyses that are not necessarily backed by a sufficient
understanding of the realities on the ground.

There are added challenges posed by the growing and
sophisticated use of the Internet by terrorists. Alleged
financial support flows largely through informal
means, including from abroad. Against the backdrop of
our efforts to reduce the digital divide, there remain
loopholes within the system that cyberterrorists can
take advantage of at any time. Perhaps these challenges
are not unique to Bangladesh, but they need to be
addressed with the participation of all relevant domestic
actors and the support of our international partners. In
this context, we appreciate the work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Financial
Action Task Force, among others, in strengthening the
capacity of our judiciary, law enforcement agencies and
financial institutions, broadly in line with our national
counter-terrorism strategy.

We look forward to continuing this dialogue with
all Members, including during the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy review upcoming in June.

To conclude, we wish to share some thoughts for
the Council’s consideration.
First, the Council must remain seized with its
efforts to address the fundamental root causes of
international terrorism, including through facilitating
the resumption of the Middle East peace process
towards its logical conclusion.
Secondly, the Council should — as it has done
today — periodically take stock of its contribution
to a holistic and balanced implementation of the four
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
further calibrate its response in light of the strengths
and gaps identified.
Thirdly, we expect the Council to provide
continued guidance to the concerned counter-terrorism
committees and expert panels under its remit to conduct
their work in regular consultation with the wider
membership and to effectively contribute to needsbased capacity-building at national and regional levels.
36/50

Fifthly and lastly, the Council must take an informed
and cautious approach in mandating peacekeeping
missions with counter-terrorism operations for which
the troops deployed on the ground are generally not
equipped.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the People’s Republic of China for organizing
this debate on counter-terrorism. This is not just another
debate, as we are talking about a topic that requires that
we intensify our common efforts to more effectively and
rapidly react to the growth of this unprecedented threat.
The geographic scope of the terrorist attacks
carried out in recent months — I am not going to name
cities and countries, because the list has, sadly, become
far too long — shows the magnitude of the threat. The
number of foreign terrorist fighters has reached 30,000,
from more than 100 countries. Why is violent extremism
so attractive? Why has the international community
not been able to foil the use for nefarious purposes of
information and communications technologies, which
has certainly contributed to globalizing terror?
Some are even wondering whether freedom of
expression should be placed above the right to life. The
debate on this issue is not without interest and, in our
view, deserves in-depth consideration.
Tunisia, thanks to the commitment of all
stakeholders to dialogue and compromise and to the
participation of civil society, has been able to overcome
the difficulties inherent in the transition to democracy.
This approach won it, inter alia, the 2015 Nobel Peace
Prize. Although these advances are significant and
honourable, they cannot mask the challenges that we
are facing and, in line with today’s debate, I would cite
in particular the challenge of fighting terrorism.
Tunisia is endeavouring to try to effectively meet
the challenge of terrorism by adopting a comprehensive
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

long-term approach. This is not an easy fight; it has a
cost and takes a heavy toll. Tunisia has paid a price:
the valiant men and women, to whom I would like to
pay warm tribute today, who helped us to defend its
democratic advances and its commitment to human
rights and fundamental freedoms, to ensure respect for
its social choices, to preserve the anchoring of its society
in its Arab Muslim identity, and, lastly, to translate the
success of its democratic transition into socioeconomic
benefits for the most vulnerable segments of the
population and thereby prevent the radicalization of
those persons who are most disadvantaged materially
and intellectually.
The task will not be easy in the short term. No
one can argue this point so long as our environment
remains fragilized by the repercussions of strong
tensions and conflicts that sometimes seem not to have
any real prospects of a lasting solution. We are resolved
to combat this phenomenon through the power of the
law, and that is why we adopted a new organic law for
fighting terrorism and money laundering in August
2015, in line with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolution 2178 (2014). We also
recently developed, in close cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
a holistic, multisectoral national strategy on fighting
terrorism and violent extremism that rests on four
pillars: prevention, protection, follow-up and response.
A panoply of measures has been put in place in
that respect. I will simply mention here the launch
by the Ministry of Religious Affairs of a campaign
in 2016 with the slogan “Tomorrow will be better”,
which is aimed at young people and promoting the
true face of moderate Islam through art, culture and
communication. The strategy brings together various
stakeholders; this is a fight that we all must wage. It is
not just a fight for a better life; it is a fight for life itself.
It is a fight against a common enemy. That is why “We
the peoples of the United Nations”, to quote the famous
phrase from the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, must strengthen our support for the efforts of
those countries that require it in order to do away with
this transnational threat.
We welcome in this context the development by the
Counter-Terrorism Task Force of a plan to help build
the capacity of countries to combat the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. This plan offers a more
concerted and coherent approach to the issue. We wish
also to state that sufficient support for the list of related

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

priority projects is critical if we wish to help countries
deploy the efforts necessary to strengthen border
control, which is a very sensitive area and which I am
citing as an example. It is within the framework of this
support and assistance that we will be able to assess
whether our actions have lived up to our talk.
Before concluding, I should like to touch upon the
strategic guiding role that the United Nations must
play in order to face up to the terrorist challenge. In
this context, I wish to echo the appeal launched today
by many speakers regarding the need to take a more
holistic approach to preventing this phenomenon by
complementing measures to fight terrorism, which
remain critical, with systematic measures for the
prevention of violent extremism. I would like also to
underscore the relevance of the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which
aims to strengthen our joint efforts at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address
the underlying causes of violent extremism in all of
their complexity.
Finally, we look forward to being able to continue
substantive discussions on the plan so as to arrive at
a consensus on measures that will help us advance on
issues of such urgent priority.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I wish
to thank the Chinese presidency for having convened
this timely and important debate.
The recent appalling terrorist attacks in Pakistan
and Belgium were a painful reminder of the deadly
nature of the threat posed by extremist terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Ten years after the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the role of the
United Nations in preventing and combating terrorism
remains ever more critical.
In recent years, the Security Council has adopted
a series of resolutions aimed at tackling the dangerous
new trend of the terrorist threat posed by extremist
groups such as ISIL. These resolutions have effectively
bolstered the existing global counter-terrorism
framework by imposing new measures to cut off
financing of terrorists, prohibit terrorist incitement,
stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and confront
the broader question of preventing violent extremism.

16-1054137/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Republic of Korea appreciates the active role played
by the Security Council in countering terrorism and
is fully committed to working with the international
community to promote the full implementation of these
resolutions by all Member States.
Recently the Republic of Korea took a significant
step towards strengthening its national counterterrorism legislation by enacting a law on the prevention
of terrorism for the protection of the people and public
safety. This new legislation criminalizes a broad range
of terrorist and other related activities, including the act
of joining terrorist groups abroad as foreign terrorist
fighters and the financing of terrorist activities. The
new law also contains strong preventive measures,
including information-gathering, immigration-control
measures and the suspension of financial transactions
vis-à-vis high-risk individuals, and envisages the
establishment of a counter-terrorism centre to act as a
control tower for all counter-terrorism measures.
The Republic of Korea is committed to faithfully
implementing Security Council resolutions related
to terrorist financing, including the recent resolution
2253 (2015). Furthermore, the Republic of Korea is
actively taking part in international efforts to combat
the financing of terrorism through its presidency of the
Financial Action Task Force. The Republic of Korea is
also strengthening the monitoring of online terroristrelated messages and activities with the relevant
agencies. Recently, the Korea Communications
Standards Commission detected several cases of
malicious online content and has taken measures to
mitigate the risk of such content.
Through our past efforts to combat terrorism, it
has become increasingly evident that security-based
measures alone cannot defeat terrorism. A more
comprehensive approach is needed to address the
deeper underlying drivers of violent extremism. In
that regard, the Republic of Korea fully supports the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and stands ready to actively engage with the
international community for its effective implementation
at the global, regional and national levels. The Republic
of Korea also welcomes the adoption by consensus
of General Assembly resolution 70/254 last month,
pledging to give further consideration to the plan and
hopes that it will make a positive contribution to the
upcoming United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review in June.
38/50

14/04/2016

On a final note, as our delegation emphasized
the importance of youth and education in countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism at the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism
on 8 April, I would like to point out the fact that a large
majority of foreign terrorist fighters joining extremist
groups are young people, many of them teenagers. If we
are to ultimately defeat violent extremism and prevent
these young people from falling prey to the poisonous
ideologies and propaganda, it is crucially important to
teach them the values of human dignity, peace, diversity
and tolerance, as emphasized in the concept of global
citizenship education. Through such global citizenship
education on our universal values and ideas, we should
be able to convince our young generation that it is
our free and diverse societies, not hate and violence
preached by the extremists, that will offer the lofty
path to true dignity, hope and happiness for all. The
Republic of Korea will continue its efforts to promote
global citizenship education as a fundamental solution
to the phenomenon of violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I would like to thank China
for convening this open debate today. Recent terrorist
attacks in many parts of the world have reminded us of
the urgent need for concerted international efforts to
address this growing threat. That is why today’s debate
is highly relevant, offering an opportunity for a sharing
of views prior to the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June.
In our resolve to eliminate terrorism, all States
must be unified in the firm belief that any act of
terrorism is unjustifiable and should be condemned,
regardless of its motivations. The Kingdom of Thailand
firmly believes that terrorism is not associated with any
one religion, nationality or civilization. As experiences
have shown, terrorism does not discriminate against its
victims. Its impact is felt by people from all walks of
life. Against that backdrop, permit me to share with the
Council Thailand’s perspective on how we can address
terrorism in a concerted manner.
At the national level, robust legislation is required
to prevent and to prosecute terrorism, as well as to
effectively and implement, in a timely fashion, the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
those related to funding of terrorist activities. In
the Kingdom of Thailand, terrorism offences have
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

been incorporated into our penal code since 2003. In
2013, the new Transnational Organized Crime Act
was promulgated to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

information, which sought to establish an understanding
of the issue of foreign terrorists fighters and the efforts
required from the international community to address
that threat.

Social media can be an effective tool for terrorists
to rapidly reach out to young people and marginalized
groups seeking political, social and economic
opportunities. While ensuring the protection of freedom
of expression, we must put in place effective national
regulation of the cyberspace and electronic media to
prevent abusive use and promote a constructive role
for social media in countering the dissemination of
terrorist propaganda and violent ideologies.

We strongly believe that the world needs a
comprehensive, international legally binding instrument
to fight terrorism. We therefore advocate finalization
of the pending draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. Countries must actively work
together to overcome the current deadlock, and in
particular find a compromise on a clear and precise
definition of terrorism.

Closer regional cooperation is also required.
The Kingdom of Thailand continues to see the value
of participating actively in international counterterrorism forums, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation, the Asia-Europe Meeting and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In many
regions, economic integration allows freer flows of
peoples and goods. It is important that States cooperate
on intelligence-sharing, countering terrorist financing
and building capacity, particularly on border security.
At the same time, freedom of movement of people and
trade must be maintained, an imperative that makes the
task at hand even more complex.
At the international level, we must work together
to gain momentum and support for the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the work of
United Nations agencies involved in counter-terrorism.
The upcoming review in June will be a timely
opportunity for Member States to examine synergies
between various United Nations agencies, thereby
leading to a more efficient fight against terrorism.
Member States must also be totally committed to
implementing related Security Council resolutions
aimed at disrupting the financing, recruitment and
movements of foreign terrorist fighters. For our part,
the Kingdom of Thailand has been doing its utmost to
implement its obligations in that regard, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Most recently,
in accordance with relevant Council resolutions,
we started implementing the Advance Passenger
Processing System to ensure more effective border
control. Last month in Bangkok, we were able to share
our experience in that field with Member States at the
United Nations regional workshop entitled on raising
awareness and building capacity on advance passenger

Along with intensive efforts against terrorism at
all levels, we must continue to effectively address its
root causes. Poverty, lack of education, weak rule of
law, inaccessibility to justice and political and social
exclusion create desperation and grievances that may
lead to violence. Equality, tolerance and understanding,
including interfaith and intercultural dialogue, must be
promoted to help prevent incitement to terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset allow,
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on China’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank you for organizing this open
debate to consider the important issue of terrorism and
its impact on the maintenance of peace and security. I
would also like to thank and commend the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing this morning.
This meeting is taking place at a time when the
world, especially the Arab world, is at a historically
dangerous crossroad as a result of terrorist acts whose
causes are varied and whose hotbeds are on the increase.
That means that we, as the international community,
must consider seriously and decisively how to strengthen
international cooperation and coordination in order to
combat the phenomenon of terrorism and put an end
to its destructive activities, which threaten all of our
civilizational, cultural and historic foundations. That is
why it is important to pool global efforts in this respect
in order to cut off terrorism financing, in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
The world today is deeply concerned as we
continue to see an escalation in terrorist activity. The
wave of terrorist acts that began in the late 1980s was
not adequately addressed at the time. The phenomenon

16-1054139/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

therefore spread like cancer throughout the world,
across continents and borders. The extremist ideologies
and practices of those groups can in no be associated
with any religion, ethnicity or civilization. The most
damning evidence of that are the heinous acts that were
committed in France, Brussels and other countries
in North Africa and in our region, and that bear the
signature of a societal phenomenon that is foreign to
our cultures and civilization.
Terrorist groups use every possible means
to threaten international
peace and security by
terrorizing and killing peaceful civilians. We are
meeting here today in the Security Council in order to
figure out how to combat extremist terrorist groups and
their ideologies and practices. Agreement among the
international agreement on the concept of terrorism has
become an absolute necessity, given that the United
Nations has to date failed to agree a clear definition of
terrorsim, which has led to the spread of this destructive
phenomenon. The concept of terrorism cannot be
linked to the legitimate right of peoples living under
occupation to resistance and self-determination.
This meeting reflects the resolve of the international
community to continue to promote international peace
and security, which I mentioned at our last meeting on
the subject. Today’s meeting also serves to emphasize
the need to change many international concepts and
working methods. It is essential that the Council put
in place new policies to implement its own resolutions
concerning combating threats to peace and security, so
as to ensure that the implementing mechanism is more
effective.
We also hope that the United Nations review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June will
contribute to strengthening serious international
efforts in order for national and regional strategies
to complement national ones while avoiding double
standards, reaffirming the importance of not
associating terrorism with any specific religion,
nationality or civilization and strengthening regional
and international cooperation in combating terrorism,
without prejudice to the rights of peoples living under
occupation to self-determination or their legitimate
fight against foreign occupation. We must also
endeavour to cut off the means and sources of funding
for terrorist activities of those entities designated in the
various relevant Security Council resolutions.
40/50

14/04/2016

The League of Arab States and its bodies place the
fight against terrorism and the protection of people’s
rights at the core of our priorities. That has been
reaffirmed on several occasions at League summits
and ministerial meetings, and expressed in its relevant
resolutions. At the most recent meeting of the League’s
Ministerial Council, all acts of terrorism and all forms
of terrorist activity were denounced in all their shapes
or forms, perpetrated by whomever — including foreign
terrorist fighters — and regardless of the motivations.
It affirmed the need to refrain from providing any form
of support, active or passive, to those entities or persons
involved in terrorist acts. I would mention, in particular,
paragraph 11 of the League’s resolution No. 8018,
promulgated on 11 March, which invites Arab States to
criminilize the movement of its citizens and the transit
of foreign terrorist fighters across their territories
for the purpose of joining terrorist organizations, as
well as to put in place the appropriate legal systems
and administrative measures to punish those fighters
and limit the threat they represent to their countries of
origin, transit countries and destination countries.
It is unfortunate that the international
community — with all of its mechanisms and
resources, including military — remains powerless
against non-State actors and to put an end to acts of
terrorism, which challenge the whole world through
the destruction of peoples and State structures. The
diversity of the techniques used by terrorist entities
and associated individuals have provided them with a
flexibility of movement. That requires the international
community to step up its efforts to develop a media,
technical and technological network to confront the
ideas of these terrorist entities and to prevent them from
being able to recruit or engage the minds of people via
the Internet.
The League of Arab States, at its most recent
Ministerial Council during the one hundred and fortyfifth session, via paragraph 14 of the same resolution,
renewed its invitation to Arab States to
“cooperate in order to prevent terrorists from using
information and communication technologies and
the Internet to incite support for terrorist activities,
financing and planning, and to put in place a
national mechanism to deal with electronic sites
related to terrorist organizations”.
That is in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions on measures to combat terrorism and to
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

counter this phenomenon through social media. I would
point in particular to resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2178
(2014), in which the Council refered to this threat in
three paragraphs..
The non-implementation of various Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, especially
the inability to put an end to or to limit the aggravation
of the problems and conflicts in the Middle East in order
to re-establish stability, would without a doubt lead to
an increase in the frequency of terrorist operations
around the world, which was evident in the recent
terrorist events in Brussels.
Recognizing the role that can be played via
communication and social media, the League of
Arab States, in the framework of its cooperation with
the United Nations to preserve international peace
and security by following up regional and global
development and its impact on the Arab world, organized
the first Arab media forum on on the theme “The role
of media in combating terrorism”, in cooperation with
the United Nations and its bodies, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task force, held in New York on 3 June
2015. The conclusions of that forum underscored the
importance of continuing dialogue with all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, regional organizations,
all Member States and private sector communication
and technologies companies, on the need to address the
misuse of media to propagate terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate following the presentation
of Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, and less than a week after the Geneva
conference on the same topic.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU). I would like to
underline that my country is an active contributor to the
EU’s counterterrorism policies. I will now make a few
remarks in my national capacity.
More than half of the Security Council resolutions
adopted over the past year focused on this topic. And
yet, terrorists still continue to spread fear in many parts
of the world. Terrorism is a constant and diffuse threat
to humankind. Recent terrorist attacks, which have

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

killed hundreds of people in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Libya, Lebanon, Mali, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire,
Belgium, Turkey, Pakistan and other parts of the world,
remind us that no country or region is immune from
their impact.
Since the start of the war and violence in Syria,
Iraq and Libya, we have been confronted with the
phenomenon of foreign fighters. They also pose a
serious threat to security when they return to their
home countries. The effect is multiplied by an
aggressive social media campaign for equipment and
logistical connections. Even though some countries
have integrated measures into their counter-terrorist
responses to monitor the spread of violent extremism via
the Internet, preventing use of the Internet for terrorist
purpose remains a major challenge for most States.
Counter-terrorism must be part of our response.
Network analysis, cutting financing, deradicalization
and special- operations strikes are all necessary. But
terrorism cannot be tackled by security or military
measures alone. Speaking last Friday in Geneva and
here this morning, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
reiterated the need to focus more on the root causes
of terrorism, saying that when one has to counter
terrorism, it is too late, and that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other radical groups are now
spreading like a cancer around the world. Therefore, in
fighting terrorism both a long-term vision and a shortterm response unnecessary.
We need a broader integrated strategy that considers
the full range of activities including humanitarian
assistance. Plans of action to fight terrorism have to
improve measures to counter ISIL propaganda on
the Internet, the trafficking of illegal firearms and
the financing of terrorism and violent extremism,
including, for instance, controlling the online virtual
currency trade platforms, and the effective cooperation
among financial intelligence units. Positive engagement
of young people, better education, teaching respect
for human rights, diversity and gender equality,
employment facilitation to counter poverty and social
marginalization all have to be part of our strategy.
Fighting ISIL must also include targeting its
affiliates, which are franchises and supporters in a
larger space than the area controlled by Da’esh itself,
because they enable ISIL to expand its reach. If the
international community wants to defeat ISIL than it
has to work against the group as a whole, not just against

16-1054141/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the most visible part. Equally important, terrorism and
violent extremism should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. We
must not allow terrorists to exploit the refugee situation
and manipulate and polarize public opinion against
migrants who are themselves fleeing from territories
occupied by terrorists in order to save their lives.
Last but not least, the legal definition of terrorist acts
continues to remain a major matter of concern, affecting
international cooperation in hunting down perpetrators
and bring them to justice.
Taking inspiration from Montesquieu, we should
put the rule of law first because the rule of law is
the foundation of all elements of society. The United
Nations is uniquely positioned to advance this effort. It
provides the necessary forum for building a universal
coalition and ensures global legitimacy for the longterm response to terrorism. United Nations conventions
already provide a legal framework for many of the steps
that must be taken to eradicate terrorism. The review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
this June will be another step forward. Romania firmly
supports this process.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Belgium thanks you for organizing
today’s debate, which is on a subject that concerns the
entire international community and which hit Belgium
with full force on 22 March, as it did recently in France,
Lebanon, Pakistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Turkey and many
other countries as well. I would like to associate our
debate in spirit with all the victims of these atrocities.
I would also like to thank the many States and regional
and international organizations that offered their
moral or practical support in those difficult times.
These gestures are a sign of the commitment of the
international community as a whole to keep a united
front against international terrorism.
Belgium was not waiting for these tragic events
to occur on its territory before shouldering its
responsibility. The attacks showed us that we have
to continue pursuing our efforts with determination
and in close collaboration with our partners. For
several years now, many measures have been taken
to strengthen our capabilities, be they legal, judicial,
police, military or in terms of intelligence. Belgium,
which, like many others, has been affected by the
42/50

14/04/2016

foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon, is giving priority
attention to implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and
has taken the steps needed to vigorously fight against
it. The Belgian penal code specifically criminalizes
trips for the purposes of training in conflict areas and
for participation in conflicts abroad.
In tackling terrorism and violent extremism,
the response must be integrated, comprehensive and
coordinated. The complexity of the phenomenon
requires us to treat it in a preventive, punitive and
remedial manner. Having become aware of the problem
of radicalization at an early stage, my country drafted
its first action plan against radicalism in 2005. In April
2013, the my country’s Government adopted its first
national programme for preventing radicalization,
which was based on improved understanding of
radicalization processes, the promotion of preventive
social measures, strengthening the resilience of the
most vulnerable groups and raising awareness at the
local and regional levels.
Addressing terrorism and violent extremism on a
global scale requires multiple responses. I would like to
discuss three in the context of today’s debate.
First, with respect to the defence of our societies’
shared values ​​and resilience, if we do not address the
root causes we will be condemned to see resurgent
violent extremism elsewhere, wherever chaos allows
it to settle. Security and respect for democratic
principles, the rule of law and individual freedoms
are complementary and mutually reinforcing. This is
a message that we express with force, be it within the
United Nations, the European Union or the Council
of Europe.
The holistic approach that Belgium is committed to
is underscored in the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), published in
January. We welcome this and support it. Besides calling
for each State and region to shoulder its responsibility,
the Plan of Action pertinently emphasizes the linkages
to be made with the Sustainable Development Goals
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the upholding
of human rights, rule of law, good governance, the fight
against impunity and the promotion of tolerance. In this
regard, we are convinced that young people, women,
education and access to decent employment will play
a key role in the success of this strategy. The all-ofUnited Nations approach is, in this regard, key.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, with regard to prevention and political
resolution of international conflicts, we cannot defeat
the scourge of terrorism if we allow terrorists to take
control of territories from which they can develop their
capacities, spread their ideology and prepare their
attacks. It is essential for international community
to stay united to resolve conflicts peacefully and
politically, particularly those conflicts that create the
chaos that allows terrorist groups to come in.
Syria is the first hotbed of crisis to be extinguished.
In that context, we pay tribute to the tireless work
being carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura. But the work does
not stop there. Unfortunately, other regions of the world
are experiencing significant problems that do not cease
to provide terrorist groups with opportunities to expand
their networks. Belgium supports the United Nations,
which, by its mandate, legitimacy and capacity, has a
role to play that is more crucial than ever in the fight
against this new world disorder.
Finally, with regard to the security response, in
an integrated approach, such a response is crucial.
That is why we must continue to unstintingly fight
against the pseudo-States of the Islamic State and
Al-Qaida. Belgium is therefore actively participating
in the international coalition against Da’esh. It is
also the reason why Belgium is firmly committed to
strengthening its own means for responding to the threat
and continue working towards for closer cooperation
with its partners. Such international cooperation
becomes increasingly necessary as the threat of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
evolves and continues to pose new challenges. I have
in mind, for instance, links to organized crime, the use
of simple chemicals for making bombs, the use of new,
unregulated virtual spaces such as the Darknet or the
trafficking of illegal weapons. It is therefore vital to
work together to adapt and react instantly.
In that regard, implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects will help to counter the
acquisition of such weapons by criminal gangs or
terrorists. Many initiatives aimed at promoting better
data and information exchange have been undertaken,
particularly by the European Union and INTERPOL.
Many steps have thus already been taken in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, and it is now
our duty to focus on implementing them and to remain

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

vigilant in order to ensure that they can help us deal
with these constantly evolving threats.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for organizing today’s debate and
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU), and
I will now make a statement in my national capacity.
The recent terrorist attacks across the globe
have shown once again that no country is immune to
the threat of terrorism. Turkey is also being targeted
by terrorist organizations, notably Da’esh and the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and People’s
Protection Units (YPG). The most recent bomb attacks
in Ankara and Istanbul took the lives of 184 innocent
people and left hundreds wounded, but they have only
intensified the Turkish Government’s determination to
fight the scourge of terrorism and underlined the need
for international cooperation and solidarity in our fight
against it.
Terrorism is a multifaceted and transnational
phenomenon and dealing with it demands effective
bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation.
International cooperation is key, particularly in efforts to
defeat Da’esh or the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which Turkey views as a direct national security
threat. Halting the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
joining the ranks of Da’esh/ISIL is an indispensable
part of our individual and collective efforts. In that
regard, Turkey has taken necessary administrative,
physical and technological measures, such as starting
a no-entry list, which now includes more than 37,700
names; establishing a risk-analysis unit at airports and
transport hubs that has so far checked 9,000 people and
denied entry to more than 2,000. Since 2011 Turkey has
deported more than 3,000 people.
In fact, since the beginning of the crisis in Syria,
and long before the adoption of resolution 2178 (2015),
of which we were a sponsor, Turkey has appealed
numerous times for greater international cooperation
and information-sharing with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters. I would like to take this opportunity
to emphasize once again that in accordance with that
resolution, foreign terrorist fighters should be prevented
from travelling from their countries of departure in the

16-1054143/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

first place. If that fails, timely and actionable sharing of
intelligence is essential.
Turkey is fighting Da’esh/ISIL on multiple fronts,
and curbing its finances is another priority. In that
context, Turkey collaborated in 2015 with the United
States Financial Action Task Force typology project
on Da’esh’s methods and scope of financing. In
addition, Turkey’s financial intelligence unit, MASAK,
cooperates with other such units. Even before the issue
of curbing the finances of Da’esh/ISIL was on the
international agenda — not to mention its capture of
major airfields in Syria — Turkey had been enhancing
its efforts to counter smuggling networks and other
activities out of Syria. In accordance with resolution
2199 (2015), of which we were a sponsor, Turkey
regularly provides information to the relevant Security
Council Committee, and our efforts are ongoing. Today,
we are in the process of establishing a Syrian border
physical security system. Here, too, it is important to
do more in terms of denying Da’esh/ISIL access to
the international financial system, particularly at the
front end of transactions — that is to say, the source
countries. It is worth mentioning here that under the
coalition against Da’esh/ISIL, Turkey is a co-leader of
the working group on foreign terrorist fighters and also
takes part in the working group on countering financing.
We have also reinforced our existing measures for
preventing the illegal transfer of historical artifacts
from their country of origin and have mobilized all the
relevant institutions and agencies in accordance with
our obligations under international instruments. The
Turkish authorities are maintaining constant vigilance
in this regard and have been handling the issue with
all possible care and diligence. Turkey deplores and
firmly condemns attacks resulting in the destruction of
cultural property that is part of the common heritage
of humankind. In sum, Turkey is at the forefront of
the Da’esh threat, and our priority is making every
possible effort to counter it. We are therefore extremely
dismayed by recent speculation questioning Turkey’s
determination to combat Da’esh/ISIL and other terrorist
groups in Syria and Iraq.
The allegations made about Turkey today by the
Russian Federation are baseless, and we reject them.
Anyone making such ill-intentioned allegations should
take into consideration the fact that Turkey has been
attacked by Da’esh terrorists three times in less than a
year. Through such allegations, the Russian Federation
is trying to distract public attention from the enormous
44/50

14/04/2016

harm that its air operations have done to civilians in
Syria, as well as from its involvement with individuals
and companies linked to financing for Da’esh in Syria.
It is certainly regrettable that Russia has tried to abuse
today’s meeting in order to advance its ill-intentioned
political agenda against Turkey. Deliberations in
the Security Council should abide by principles of
responsibility and political maturity.
We agree that there is an imperative need to
avoid double standards in the fight against terrorism.
There can be no room for moral relativism in that
fight. Whether the organization in question is the
Al-Nusra Front, Da’esh, Boko Haram, the PKK, the
YPG or Turkey’s Revolution People’s Liberation PartyFront, we must be united in stance against terrorism’s
threat. Our counter-terrorism efforts are directed at
all groups that resort to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. At the same time, terrorism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or ethnic group.
As thousands of young people are radicalized by
the extremist narratives of Da’esh and other groups,
leaving their home countries to travel to conflict regions
to fight along such terrorist organizations, we fully
support the view of the Secretary-General, in his Plan
of Action for Preventing Violent Extremism, that the
international community should adopt a comprehensive
approach that encompasses not only security-based
counter-terrorism measures but also those that address
the drivers of violent extremism at the local, regional
and global levels.
In the Global Counterterrorism Forum, which
Turkey co-chaired from 2011 until yesterday, when the
chairship passed to Morocco, the issue of radicalization
has been our primary focus from the very beginning,
and the Forum has developed a number of documents
on good practices, some of which were referred to
in the statement delivered on behalf of the EU. In
doing so, we have tried to formulate and put in place
durable solutions to the problems in our region. We
cannot eradicate Da’esh or the Al-Nusra Front without
addressing all the grievances and factors that have led
to the emergence of those groups.
In that regard, we should not forget that the regime’s
suppression of the democratic aspirations of the Syrian
people, its divisive sectarian policies and its perpetration
of war crimes and massive violations of human rights
have created fertile ground for radicalization, extremism
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and Da’esh’s recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
It is regrettable that the representative of the regime,
which long ago lost all its legitimacy, has once again
chosen to misuse this platform to distort the facts. The
international community should bear in mind that the
ongoing atrocities and humanitarian disasters in Syria
can be addressed only by tackling the root cause of the
problem, which is the violent repression of Syrians’
democratic aspirations.
Turkey perceives the United Nations as the primary
platform for promoting a united stance against terrorism.
As we approach the ten-year review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, I reiterate
that Turkey is determined to maintain a decisive and
consistent approach to combatting terrorism of any
kind in cooperation with its partners and allies.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): Before
I begin, I would like to say that it is an honour and a
privilege for me to take the floor for the first time in
the Council and herewith to proudly represent Canada.
Allow me, in the name of Canada and the women and
men of Canada, to offer to all of the recent victims of
terrorism and their families our sincerest sympathies
and expression of support and friendship during their
difficult time.
I will treat two aspects of the topic before us: on
the one hand, the values that inform our policy and
actions and, on the other, the nature of Canada’s efforts
to counter terrorism concurrently at the national and
international levels. First, on the subject of our values,
let me say that in Canada, we aspire to create a society
that is characterized by inclusive and accountable
governance, peaceful pluralism and respect for diversity
and human rights. Our fight against extremism is,
after all, at its core, a battle of values. We do not
seek divisiveness but rather diversity and a society in
which everyone feels that they belong, all rights are
respected, and every individual is treated with dignity.
We seek to build accountable institutions within
a framework providing opportunities to everyone.
Societies that pursue such goals are, we believe, more
resilient in dealing with extremism. We do not claim
to have achieved those goals. Much remains to be
done. Nevertheless, we are convinced that efforts in
that direction are an integral part of building a more
secure society and of countering terrorism. Moreover,

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

it is essential to promote critical thinking through
education, to support the empowerment of women and
to ensure the active participation of our young people in
society, thereby establishing peaceful and prosperous
societies and preventing violent extremism.
(spoke in English)
Countering terrorism is not only about law
enforcement and security measures. It is also about
engaging with local communities in many ways.
(spoke in French)
Efforts carried out locally have shown promising
results. For example, the Centre for the Prevention
of Radicalization Leading to Violence, which is in
Montreal and which the Secretary-General visited
during his recent visit to Canada in February, and the
ReDirect programme, under the aegis of the Calgary
Police Service, are two local initiatives that have the
potential to inspire the international community.
I will also talk about our strategy for combatting
terrorism. Canada believes that the only way to ensure
that our efforts in the fight against terrorism bear fruit is
through collective action aimed at ending the activities
of terrorist groups. Canada believes that the United
Nations has a crucial role to play in that approach. The
Organization is uniquely placed to increase coherence
and coordination in international efforts aimed at
fighting violent extremism. Canada fully endorses
the work of the Security Council directed towards
establishing a unified approach to countering terrorism.
Accordingly, we co-sponsored resolutions 2178 (2014)
and 2253 (2015). Our support is also demonstrated by
Canada’s intention to seek a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council for the 2021-2022 term. As a country
for which the greatest strength resides in its respect
for diversity and pluralism, Canada believes that it
can benefit other countries by sharing its experience
in building a peaceful and resilient society, especially
given the present need to prevent violent extremism.
Canada fully supports in its entirety the approach
set forth in the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), as well as his
call for improving regional cooperation in that area.
Ensuring coherence throughout the United Nations
system will be essential to the effective implementation
of the Secretary General’s Action Plan.

16-1054145/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(spoke in English)
In order to protect Canadians from the evolving
threat of terrorism, the Government of Canada has,
over the past few years, enacted legislation that has
provided new tools that allow law enforcement and
national security agencies to take appropriate measures,
including addressing the issue of extremist travellers.
The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring
that our tools strike the appropriate balance between
our collective security and our rights and freedoms.
Canada strongly supports ongoing efforts to cut off
terrorists’ access to funds. Terrorist organizations
and other criminals have proven themselves to be
adaptable and opportunistic. They exploit weaknesses
in international regulatory systems that allow them to
finance their illegal activities undetected. In order to
mitigate terrorist-financing and money-laundering,
all countries need to eliminate those regulatory gaps
through the effective implementation of the Financial
Action Task Force’s global standards. We continue
to work closely to build upon the Task Force’s recent
review of countries’ implementation of measures to cut
off terrorist financing. Countries should immediately
take action in areas where gaps have been identified.
Canada is committed to a strong and comprehensive
regime that is at the forefront of the global fight against
money-laundering and terrorist-financing.
Canada is also working to combat terrorists’ use of
the Internet. At the same time, however, we recognize
that free speech needs to be protected. Canada is working
with a number of countries to counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant’s (ISIL) propaganda on the
Internet and thwart its ability to recruit members and
finance its operations through online appeals. Canada
is also working with a number of countries to counter
ISIL on the Internet through strategic communications
and counter-narrative activities. Those activities help
thwart ISIL’s ability to recruit members, finance
its operations through online appeals and spread its
ideology. Canada welcomes efforts aimed at supporting
third parties as they counter ISIL messages and promote
positive and realistic alternative narratives in the region
and beyond.
As we embark upon the ten-year review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
we are mindful of the new challenges but also believe
that there is reason to be hopeful. We are aware that
terrorism has evolved, and we are seeing new methods,
tactics and tools exploited by terrorist groups. We are
46/50

14/04/2016

cautiously optimistic, however, because we have seen the
international community move towards a coordinated
and comprehensive response. We need to keep moving
in that direction and strengthen our approach through
working together. Canada looks forward to being part
of the solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and would like to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
Today is a holiday in Sri Lanka. It is the Sinhala
and Tamil New Year, and our Permanent Mission is
closed for the holiday. That is why I am alone without
anybody sitting behind me in the Chamber.
Today, every Sri Lankan is celebrating the New
Year, but only a few years ago, the situation was
very different. As a country that suffered under the
oppressive yoke of terrorism for nearly three decades
until 2009, Sri Lanka understands the related challenges
and encourages genuine efforts to strengthen the
United Nations system and its role and effectiveness
in addressing the issue. Sri Lanka wholeheartedly
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
It is a scourge that is not exclusive to any one country or
region and is spreading across national borders.
We continue to be deeply concerned over the acute
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters. This
phenomenon has assumed serious proportions, given
the death and destruction caused by such organizations.
We have also to look at new and innovative ways to
counter this growing threat.
Today, terrorism targets vulnerable and marginalized
communities, children, minorities, women and girls. It
is therefore imperative that we proactively include and
engage those entities of the United Nations system that
deal with children, minorities, women and girls. The
eradication of poverty, in concert with increased social
and economic opportunities, is essential to countering
human frustration and the threat of radicalization.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to
enhance national, regional and international efforts to
counter terrorism.
16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We must also recognize that the building blocks
for enhancing international cooperation in these areas
are already contained in the efforts undertaken by the
General Assembly, in particular the Ad Hoc Committee
on International Terrorism. I must mention in this
context that, despite the support of most Member States
and a mandate of the General Assembly to come up
with a comprehensive legal framework to fill possible
gaps in the existing sectoral conventions on terrorism,
there has been a failure to muster the necessary political
will to break the current impasse surrounding the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It is pertinent at this time to recall that the
conclusion of such a comprehensive convention was
one of the key components of the 2005 plan of action
to combat terrorism. While acknowledging these
continuing efforts, my delegation urges Member States
to cooperate fully in resolving any outstanding issues
that remain in order to ensure that a comprehensive
convention may be concluded successfully. Given the
threats we face today, there is no time more urgent than
now to do so, and we are already seized of the building
blocks to formulate a comprehensive response to these
threats to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council for the invitation
to participate in this open debate on an issue of such
importance to the international community, and the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this debate.
Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and believes that terrorist acts constitute
a threat not only to international peace and security, but
also to human dignity, peaceful and civilized coexistence,
the stability and consolidation of democracy, and the
economic and social development of nations. Terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
Terrorism must be fought within the rule of law and
respect for fundamental rights, which demands organic
and ongoing cooperation, with legal legitimacy and
in conformity with international law, international
refugee law, international humanitarian law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We are convinced that the response to terrorist

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

acts cannot and should be one-dimensional, but must
be based on a comprehensive approach, as reflected in
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
National, regional and international efforts in this area
must be built upon the balanced implementation of the
four pillars of the Strategy.
We must recognize that the emergence of such
extreme violence is due in many cases, among other
factors, to root causes linked to racial, religious, cultural
and economic motives, the violation of human, civil
and political rights, inequality, corruption, poverty and
poor governance. We must therefore deepen prevention
activities. In this sense, the crucial importance of
education in combating discrimination, xenophobia,
racism and other forms of intolerance cannot be
overemphasized, as well as in promoting a culture of
tolerance, dialogue and diversity. In this context, too,
the role of the media is essential.
That is why Argentina supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
given its preventive nature, which seeks to provide a
comprehensive framework in the fight against violent
extremism leading to terrorism, within full respect
for international law, international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.
Argentina agrees that foreign terrorist fighters
pose a severe threat to international peace and security,
and reiterates the need for States to comply with their
obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005),
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), among others. Indeed, the
severity and complexity of the current threat, which
includes an unprecedented flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and facilitation networks that fuel many
conflicts in various parts of the world, undoubtedly
increase the risk of terrorist attacks.
The problem of the emergence and participation of
foreign terrorist fighters is also based on underlying
issues, including social exclusion, discrimination,
religious, ideological and ethnic intolerance, among
other factors. It is therefore necessary to adopt a
comprehensive, multidimensional and multidisciplinary
approach based on international cooperation, which
requires commitment and interdependence among
security agencies and organizations dealing with
development, social policies and public education.
For our region, although far from the conflict zone,
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters is still a concern

16-1054147/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that requires preventive actions. In this sense, the issue is
being followed by the Specialized Forum for Terrorism
of the Southern Common Market and Associated
States, in which Argentina stresses the importance of
strengthening cooperation with countries of the region
through cooperation and effective border control.
It is essential to redouble our efforts to prevent and
suppress the financing of terrorism, which requires
following financial trails; coordinating the work of
police, investigators and prosecutors; obtaining and
preserving tangible evidence; and strong and agile
multilateral and bilateral international cooperation. In
this regard, it is worth highlighting the Argentine decree
No. 918/2012, which provides for the administrative
freezing of assets or money from individuals designated
by the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and from third countries, in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001)
The terrorist phenomenon has mutated in recent
years, particularly in the stages of propaganda and
recruitment, using new technologies and taking
advantage of communication tools, including the use
of the Internet and social media. Social networks are
an important means for spreading propaganda and
recruitment. The sophistication and propaganda style
of terrorist groups are deliberately aimed at young
people from different societies and present an attractive
combination of idealism, enthusiasm, membership and
sanguinary content.
It is necessary to work closely with providers of
these services to address the rising numbers of foreign
terrorist fighters, not only to detect and stop their
recruitment but also to neutralize mass propaganda
that justifies and glorifies crimes. Another important
issue is assistance to the families of the victims, not
only to alleviate their needs, provide psychological help
and keep the memory of the victims alive, but also so
that they can play the important role of reaffirming a
counternarrative to terrorism.
Our country, which has been the victim of
bloody terrorist attacks, follows this issue with the
utmost attention, as evidenced by Argentina’s recent
ratification of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism of 2005 and
its participation in the recent Geneva Conference on
Preventing Violent Extremism. Similarly, Argentina
will actively participate in the fifth biennial review of

48/50

14/04/2016

the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
to be held in June.
Finally, we reaffirm the central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, as a pillar
of the multilateral system and an organization of
universal membership with primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We are
convinced that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in accordance with the principles of the
Organization, will allow us to confront the threat of
terrorism in full respect of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law and achieve a
more secure world for everyone.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. What the terrorist attacks we
are witnessing all too frequently in various parts of the
world indicate is that terrorism and violent extremism
are indeed a common peace and security threat to all
of us, and they require our common and collective
response.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
Secretary-General for the initiative that he has taken
to mobilize international action in countering terrorism
and violent extremism, and I wish to join others
in expressing appreciation to him for his briefing
this morning.
There is no lack of formal commitment to the
fight against terrorism because we all profess to be
so committed. What has been seriously lacking is, of
course, coordinated and effective action at all levels.
And yet, the nature of the threat we face has evolved
and expanded over the past decade. Terrorists groups
and their affiliates have established better coordination
among themselves than we Member States have
managed to do. They have also become much more
adept in effectively utilizing the Internet and social
media to spread their extremist ideology and recruit
foreign fighters. The issue of foreign fighters has a long
history and there were times when countries such as
mine had difficulty being understood when we called
for vigilance.
It is impossible to counter the growing threat posed
by these terrorists and extremists without forging

16-10541

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

practical cooperation and coordination, including
in the sharing of intelligence, the enhancement of
border security, the establishment of mechanisms for
cooperation and the exchange of valuable experiences
between and among our Member States. Nevertheless,
we have to admit that the hypocrisy and double standard
manifest in our approach so far has been undermining
our efforts to respond to the threat posed by terrorism
in an effective, coherent and coordinated manner.
I am glad that the concept note (S/2016/306, annex)
has rightly recognized this challenge and I cannot
agree more on the need to avoid these shortcomings
if we really want to achieve a tangible impact on
the ground. What all this means is that we should
thoroughly reflect on our counter-terrorism efforts, and
I hope that the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June will shed more light on the challenges
encountered in its implementation and make appropriate
recommendations on the way forward.
Finally, let me reiterate Ethiopia’s strong
commitment to combating the scourge of terrorism and
its firm determination to forge effective regional and
international cooperation in this regard. Ethiopia finds
itself in one of the most volatile regions of Africa, which is
facing increasing levels of terrorism and radicalization.
The situation has been further compounded recently by
the impact of the Yemeni conflict and some Al-Shabaab
elements pledging allegiance to the Islamic State.
This has made it absolutely necessary for us
to have effective mechanisms for joint security
cooperation, and that is why States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
agreed to establish a regional security cooperation
framework and a platform for regular security dialogue
and coordination to address common security threats
and challenges. It is only through such cooperation and
coordination that our counter-terrorism efforts will
have a meaningful impact, and we believe the United
Nations could contribute a lot by supporting these
regional mechanisms and building their capacity.
Let me conclude my remarks by expressing hope
that we will move from rhetoric to action in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. This is indeed
what the situation demands, and we should all rise up
to the challenge.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Several
delegations have requested the floor to make further
statements. It is my intention to accede to these requests;

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

however, I would ask each delegation to limit itself to
one additional statement.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): I wish we did not have to
make a further statement, but today several States have
once again revealed their true intentions. They do see
today’s debate not as a forum for combatting terrorism,
but as a platform to single out Israel with baseless
accusations and inflammatory remarks.
The fact is that Israel is on the front line of combating
terror. It may be convenient to point a finger at us, but
it does not address the heart of the problem. Rather
than obsessively focusing on Israel, representatives’
condemnation should be aimed at the real terrorist
perpetrators. It has been evident throughout today’s
debate that some States have much to say when it comes
to my country. I would suggest that these countries first
take a look at their own internal issues before spreading
baseless accusations about others.
I am sure we will hear in just a moment, once
again, Iran trying to direct attention away from its true
colours, but in the Middle East where there is terror,
there is Iran. It is at the helm of destabilization and
radicalization. It is sponsoring terrorism in Lebanon,
Gaza and Yemen, to name just a few examples, and
with Hizbullah as its proxy, it is exporting it around
the world.
In particular, I also want to comment on the
remarks made by the Saudi representative. It is odd that
Saudi Arabia is so confident in its rebuke of others.
Saudi Arabia’s own approach to conflict management
seems to be to launch large-scale, indiscriminate aerial
bombardments in utter disregard for the lives of men,
women and children on the ground. Thousands have
been killed in these bombings. In one incident, they
killed over 70 civilians when they directly bombed a
wedding party in Yemen.
The accusation of the Saudi representative that the
actions that my country takes to protect its citizens fuel
terror demonstrates a complete lack of understanding
of what terror is, what causes it and how to counter it.
Since the Saudi representative seems to be confused
on the subject, allow me to extend a warm invitation
to him and his advisers to attend one of Israel’s many
international expert training sessions on counterterrorism. I am sure that will be helpful for him.

16-1054149/50

S/PV.7670 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Security Council today heard the representative of a
main sponsor of State terrorism, the occupying Power
in the Palestinian territory, make some unacceptable,
fake remarks addressed to my country, the same
baseless remarks that have been repeated here ad
infinitum. Indeed, it should come as no surprise that
the representative of a terror regime that has been well
known as such from its very inception has accused a
nation that has witnessed the loss of more than 17,000
of its citizens during the past 35 years, a large number
of whom have fallen victim to heinous terrorist attacks
directly sponsored by elements of that regime. We
all remember the well-known example of the Iranian
nuclear scientists brutally killed before the terrified
eyes of their family members.
The brutalization of peoples under foreign
occupation constitutes the gravest form of terrorism.
We do not believe that there is any doubt that this
regime is responsible for aggression; occupation; the
killing of civilians, including women and children;
the crime of genocide; crimes against humanity; war
crimes and other criminal acts, as well as for turning
millions of Palestinian inhabitants into refugees, far
from their homeland. Its network of State terrorism has
a long list of deadly operations all over the world, and
they continue to threaten more killing.
I should like also to react to the unfounded
allegations levelled against my country by the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia this morning at this
meeting of the Council, allegations that I categorically
reject. This was an attempt by Saudi Arabia to distract
international attention from the main source of the
threat in our region, namely, terrorists and extremist

50/50

14/04/2016

groups inspired by the takfiri ideology, especially
Da’esh. Saudi Arabia’s rhetoric against Iran can only
serve the perpetrators of crimes against the Palestinians
and those committed by violent extremists.
The Ambassador of Saudi Arabia falsely accused
Iran of destabilizing the region by interfering in the
domestic affairs of the States of the region, but, in fact, it
is the exclusionist ideology projected across the Islamic
world for decades from within Saudi Arabia that has
inspired the most destructive forces in the Middle East.
We know who supported the Taliban and who the many
elements are who make up the leadership and the rank
and file of Al-Qaida and Da’esh, and from whom they
have received financial assistance for many years.
Another destabilizing factor is the attempts by Saudi
Arabia to marginalize certain population groups. We
see this approach both within Saudi Arabia and in some
countries of the region, which leads to sectarianism.
This approach has led to Saudi military intervention in
Yemen, with severe humanitarian consequences, and an
attempt to impose its will on certain other countries to
marginalize the population groups that they do not like.
While Iran has never invaded any country, Saudi Arabia
has invaded two of its neighbours over the past several
years to put down uprisings. Saudi Arabia should halt
its sectarian policies and work towards re-establishing
security and stability in the region.
Iran has been present and active in the fight against
terrorist and extremist groups in the region. We have
first of all secured our borders to prevent any movement
to or from the areas controlled by these groups. In many
cases, Iranian officials have stopped and apprehended
individuals who tried to use Iranian territory to cross
over or send material assistance to terrorists. We will
continue our resolute fight to help stop this threat.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

16-10541
