32

General Assembly-Twenty-first SeHion

Monetary Fund, the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and such other organizations as he considers necessary, a study on:
"(i) Economic factors affecting the ability of developed
countries to transfer maximum financial resources to
the deyeloping countries in accordance with the
relevant recommendations contained in the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly its annex A.IV.2, taking into
account the increase in the national income of the
developed countries ;
"(ii) The progress made by individual developed countries
in the implementation of operative paragraph 3 (b)
(ii) above;
"(c) To report to the Economic and Social Council at its
forty-third session on the implementation of the present
resolution, with particular emphasis on the objectives relating
to the volume and the terms and conditions of the flow of
external resources to developing countries ;
"6. Expresses the wish that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development continue to give special attention,
within the field of its competence, to the problems of
financing economic development in developing countries.",

1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1183 (XLI);
2. Decides to consider at its twenty-second session
the reports to be prepared by the Secretary-General in
response to paragraph 5 of that resolution.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2171 (XXI). Conversion to peaceful needs of the
resources released by disarmament
The General Assembly
Takes note with approval of the decision of the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1154 (XLI)
of 4 August 1966, that reports concerning the economic
and social consequences of disarmament should in future
be submitted to the Council on a biennial basis, unless
developments warrant additional reports.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2172 (XXI). Resources of the sea
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the need for a greater knowledge of the
oceans and of the opportunities available for the utilization of their resources, living and mineral,
Realizing that the effective exploitation and development of these resources can raise the economic level
of peoples throughout the world, and in particular of
the developing countries·,
Taking into account with appreciation the activities
in the field of resources of the sea at present being
undertaken by the United Nations, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and,
in particular, its Inter-governmental Oceanographic
Commission, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and, in particular, its Committee
on Fisheries, the World Meteorological Organization,
the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science
and Technology to Development, other intergovernmental organizations concerned, various Governments,
universities, scientific and technological institutions and
other interested organizations,
Considering the need to maximize international cooperative efforts for the further development of marine

science and technology and to avoid duplication or
overlapping of efforts in this field,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1112 (XL) of 7 March 1966 requesting the SecretaryGeneral to make a survey of the present state of
knowledge of the resources of the sea beyond the continental shelf, excluding fish, and of the techniques for
exploiting these resources;
2. Requests the Secretary-General-in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and, in particular, its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and, in particular, its Committee on Fisheries, the
World Meteorological Organization, other intergovernmental organizations concerned, and the Governments
of interested Member States, and utilizing, inter alia,
such voluntary services as may be offered-to undertake, in addition to the survey requested by the Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive survey of
activities in marine science and technology, including
that relating to mineral resources development, undertaken by member·s of the United Nations family of
organizations, various Member States and intergovernmental organizations concerned, and by universities,
scientific and technological institutions and other interested organizations ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and, in particular, its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and, in particular, its Committee on Fisheries and in
the light of the above-mentioned comprehensive survey,
to formulate proposals for :
(a) Ensuring the most effective arrangements for an
expanded programme of international co-operation to
assist in a better understanding of the marine environment through science and in the exploitation and development of marine resources, with due regard to the
conservation of fish stocks;
( b) Initiating and strengthening marine education
and training programmes, bearing in mind the close
interrelationship between marine and other sciences ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to set up a small
group of experts to be selected, as far as possible, from
the specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations concerned, to assist him in the preparation of
the comprehensive survey called for in paragraph 2
above and in the formulation of the proposals referred
to in paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests that the survey and proposals prepared
by the Secretary-General be submitted to the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development for its comments ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
survey and proposals, together with the comments of
the Advisory Committee, to the General Assembly at
its twenty-third session, through the Economic and
Social Council.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.

2173 (XXI). Development of natural resources
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1113 (XL) of 7 March 1966 and 1127 (XLI) of

SS

Resolution11 adopted on the reportll of the Second Committee

26 July 1966 regarding the development of natural
resources,
Expressing its appreciation of the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General in submitting to the Economic
and Social Council a five-year survey programme for
the development of natural resources, comprising nine
selected natural resources surveys, as outlined in his
report dated 18 January 1966,18
1. Notes wi,th satisfaction the progress made by the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, the group of experts consulted by the Secretary-General and the Economic and
Social Council in the evolution of a long-term survey
programme in the field of natural resources ;
2. Endorses .the continuing study by the Economic
and Social Council of the means of implementing a fiveyear survey programme for the development of natural resources, intended to strengthen the economic
base and the economic independence of the developing
countries;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to study the technical and financial implications of carrying out surveys
of petroleum and natural gas resources in the developing countries and to submit specific proposals on this
subject to the Economic and Social Council.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2177 (XXI). Special session of the Trade and
Development Board
The General, Assembly
Invites the Trade and Development Board to hold a
special session to be convened in New York for one
day, on 21 December 1966, in order to review the
calendar of meetings of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development for 1967 which the Board
adopted at its fourth session. 19
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2178 (XXI). International Symposium on
Industrial Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1940 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1030 C (XXXVII) of 13 August 1964 and
1081 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 on the holding
of international and regional symposia on industrial
development,
Recognizing the importance of the results and recommendations of the regional symposia held at Manila,
Cairo and Santiago and of the Conference on Industrial
Development in the Arab States held in Kuwait,
Noting wi,th approval the recommendations contained
in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1180 (XLI)
of 5 August 1966 and 1185 (XLI) of 15, 16 and 17
November 1966 concerning the preparation and organization of the International Symposium on Industrial
Development,
Considering that the Symposium, as the first worldwide forum on industrialization to be held under United
18 Ibid., Fortieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 7, document
E/4132, chapter V.
19 See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board
F011rth Session, 115th meeting.
'

Nations auspices, is likely to play a significant role in
focusing attention on policies and measures aimed at
strengthening international co-operation in the field of
industrial development and accelerating the industrial
development of the developing countries,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to convene the International Symposium on
Industrial Development at Athens in December 1967;

2. Invites the Governments of States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to take an active interest in the preparatory
work for the Symposium and to ensure their effective
participation in it;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to devote all the necessary attention to that preparatory work in order to ensure
the success of the Symposium;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut and the intergovernmental organizations concerned to co-operate actively in the preparatory
work for the Symposium;
5. Expresses the hope that the recommendations of
the Symposium will give an added impetus to international co-operative efforts aimed, in particular, at
achieving the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries ;
6. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
study in due course the recommendations of the Symposium and to take appropriate follow-up action.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2179 (XXI). Provision of operational personnel
under the Technical Assistance component
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1946 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 authorizing the use of funds from the
Special Account of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the
request of Governments, on an experimental basis for
the years 1964-1966,
Noting the actions taken by the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme at its
second session and by the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session, in response to the General
Assembly's invitation to review the results of the experimental provision of operational personnel,
Decides to authorize temporarily the continued use
of the funds of the Technical Assistance component of
the United Nations Development Programme for the
provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the request of Governments,
for the years 1967-1968.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
