P

UN.C!-ED NAT’ONS

TWEENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
MEETING: 21 DECEMBER 197 1

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 162 1) ..............................
Adoption of the agenda ......................................
The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent ......................

Pa;
1
1

?

S/W.1621

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OfJLicial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

-.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-FIRST

Held in New York on Tuesday, 21 December
f+esider?t: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone).

Pvesent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Relgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
ProvisionaI agenda (S/Agenda/l421)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent.
Adoption

of the agenda

712e agenda was adopted.
The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the previous
decision
of the Council [160&h meeting] I invite the
representatives
of India and Pakistan to participate in the
debate on this item, without vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swaran Singh
(India J and Mr, A. Shahi (Pakistan) took places at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Also in accordance with previous
decisions
of the Council (1607th and 1615th meetings] I
invite
the representatives of Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and
Ceylon to take the places reserved for them in the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is their turn to
address the Council.

MEETING
1971, at 8. pm.

4. The proposed draft resolution is factual and is capable
of commanding the support of all members around this
table. It is non-partisan and to a considerable extent
represents a compromise of the multiplicity of draft
resolutions that have been presented to the Council or
discussed in the corridors during the past two weeks. It has
been voided of all controversial aspects and therefore it is in
a position to command the support of all.
5. The draft resolution before the Council this evening
takes account of the realities of the existing situation. It
calls upon both sides to the conflict to make the cessation
of all hostilities durable and provides for withdrawals of all
armed forces from the troubled zones. To this end it
stresses the need for the preservation of peace in the
subcontinent. Lasting peace in the area cannot be achieved
unless the Geneva Conventions of 1949 are respected and
meticulously observed.
6. A point in this connexion is the rumoured retaliatory
measures now taking place in Dacca and elswhere. We are
aware that feelings are high and the danger of reprisals foi
sufferings meted out by the troops of the Pakistan
Government since March is imminent.
7. The draft resolution also calls for concerted efiorts
from the international community for the rehabilitation of
the millions of refugees who would better serve their land
by returning to their ancestral homes.
8. The efforts devoted by all of you towards the achievement of a fruitful solution to the problem confronting the
India/Pakistan subcontinent since the Council started meeting on 4 December /1606rh meeting] have been prodigious.
We have all laboured hard and long and we look forward to
a realization of our efforts. The way in which this could be
achieved would be by the speedy adoption of the draft
resolution now before the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia)
am2 Mr. ff. S. Amerusinghe (Ceylon) took the places reserved far them in the Council chamber.

9. I call on the representative of Pakistan.

3. The PRESIDENT:
As members of the Council will
recall, there were a number of draft resolutions before it
when it adjourned for consultations. I am now pleased to
inform
you that after intensive consultations with the
parties
concerned-India
and Pakistan-it
has now been
possible,
due mainly to the untiring efforts of the representative
of Somalia, Ambassador Farah, to reach agreernent on an acceptable draft. It is contained in document
S/10465
and is sponsored by Argentina, Burundi, Japan,
Nicaragua,
Sierra Leone and Somalia.

10. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I have listened with close
attention to the statement made by you just now, Sir. It
was the understanding of my delegation that first the
sponsors of the draft resolution in document S/10465
would present that draft resolution and make introductory
statements. Consequently, I take it that the statement you
have just now made does not have any bearing of an
interpretative character on the draft resolution before us
and that you have made that statement perhaps in your
capacity as the representative of Sierra leone.

conflict, but that withdrawals should take place of all their
armed forces to their respective sides.

11. We are considering a matter of utmost gravity and
therefore we have to weigh every word that is uttered
because the proceedings of this Council touch upon some
of the most fundamental principles of the Charter and any
interpretation which departs from the spirit of those
principles can have profound consequences and is bound to
reflect on the prestige and the efficacy of this Council.
Therefore, my delegation would prefer to listen to what the
sponsors have to say in regard to the draft resolution.

18. In the eastern theatre, since fighting has stopped,
foreign armed forces should be completely withdrawn as
soon as practicable. In the western theatre, the resolution
just adopted would call for the commencement of the
process of disengagement leading without delay to with.
drawal of the armed forces of both parties,
19. To summarize, where the resolution speaks of with.
drawals of all armed forces, it is in the foregoing context
that the sponsors wish the terms to be interpreted,

12. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The agreement reached between me, on behalf of the sponsors, and the two parties
was that the draft resolution would first be put to a vote by
you, Sir, without any kind of introductory statement and
that immediately the vote on the draft resolution had been
taken, my delegation, on behalf of the sponsors, would
make an interpretative statement on certain of its aspects. I
trust that you will proceed accordingly.

20. The sponsors of the resolution have noted the declaration by the Government of India that it has no territorial
ambitions. In the implementation of this resolution, it is
the view of the sponsors that the parties may make any
mutually acceptable arrangement or adjustment that they
may deem necessary.

13. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual
custom, I have only tried to appeal to members to proceed
on this matter with all seriousness and to see that
something is done. If Ambassador Farah had not made his
statement, I had intended to suggest that the draft
resolution now be put to the vote and that, after the voting,
members be given an opportunity to make statements in
explanation of their votes and then, lastly, the partiesIndia and Pakistan-be given an opportunity to make their
statements.

21. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation of
course supports every solution agreeable to India and
Pakistan, countries equally friendly to us, as I have had
many occasions to state. Indeed, we are very happy that an
amicable settlement, as reflected in the resolution we have
just adopted, has been agreed upon by both. But on a point
of principle, supported by bitter experience of which the
whole world is aware, it was with serious reservations that
we voted in favour of the draft as a whole, more specifically
in favour of paragraph 1I I say this because any clause that
projects withdrawal into the uncertain future, regardlessof
where the withdrawal takes place, and leaves things hanging
on unpredictable factors is a matter that we take with very
serious reservations. Our stand, as has been explained
several times during my brief interventions, especitiy
during this debate, is: cease-fire, withdrawal, full enjoyment
by refugees of their inalienable rights. It wasmainly on this
basis and on the basis of the interpretation given by the
representative of Somalia concerning paragraph 1, but with
our reservations, that we voted for the draft resolution.

14. There being no objection to that suggestion, I propose
to put draft resolution S/10465 to the vote, in the hope
that it will be adopted unanimously.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In fmour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Against: None.
Abstaining:

22. It goes without saying that in our sincere wishes for
India-Pakistani friendship and a future of happy relations
between the two countries, we can be second to none.

Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The draft resolution
with 2 abstentions. ’

was adopted by 13 votes to none,

23. I wish to state, in conclusion, that it wasthe intention
of my delegation to introduce a very brief amendment to
paragraph 1 that would have made it read as follows:

15. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Now that draft resolution
S/10465 has been adopted by 13 votes in favour, two
abstentions and none against, I wish to make a brief
statement on behalf of the sponsors in explanation of
certain aspects of the resolution.

“Demands that a durable cease-fire and cessation of all
hostilities and any retaliation on an individual or collective scale in all areas of conflict be strictly observed . . .‘I.

But, Mr. President, having noticed from your statement
that the sponsors of the resolution did not wish any change
in the draft resolution as submitted to us, but that we
should proceed immediately to vote on it-which we
did-nothing was left for me but to appeal most sincerely
and genuinely to both sides, asking that the amendment
that I had intended to introduce-namely that any retalia.
tion on an individual or collective scale be stopped,
especially on the lines of the sad and tragic news we have
been hearing-be heeded by the two parties, to whom I
equally appeal.

16. First, I should like to make clear that this resolution
was formed after very intensive consultations with both
parties, and both parties have subscribed in general to all
thaL is included in the text of the resolution,
17. In paragraph 1 the Council demands of India and
Pakistan that not only should there be strict observance of
a cease-fire and a cessation of all hostilities in the areas of
1 Seeresolution 307 (1971).
2

1

24. I thank you, Mr. President, and I wish both countries a
very excellent and friendly future.

and Pakistan in narrowing’ down their differences for the
sake of restoring peace in the India-Pakistan subcontinent,

25. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has just voted in favour of the draft
resolution. However, we are’ highly dissatisfied with this
resolution. It has failed to draw a line of distinction
between right and wrong and failed to point out who is the
aggressor and who is the victim of aggression. It does not
contain a single word of condemnation of the open
‘aggression against, and dismemberment of, a sovereign State
by the Indian expansionists with the support of the Soviet
Government.

31. As this resolution has now obtained the endorsement
of the Council, we should very much like ‘to see its
provisions fully implemented by the parties concerned, thus
leading to the normalization of the situation in the
India-Pakistan subcontinent. With goodwill and a genuine
desire for peace by the parties concerned as well as the
countries directly or indirectly interested in the problem,
the steps embodied in the resolution should have a fair
chance of opening up a vista for a durable peace in the
subcontinent.

26. In the past two weeks and more, the Security Council
has remained helpless and unable to act in face of the
Indian expansionists’ aggression against, and trampling
upon, Pakistan. This is a big mockery of the Security
Council,

32. Japan, as an Asian country and a friend of both India
and Pakistan, is ready to co-operate in whatever capacity
and by whatever means in facilitating the restoration of
peace and alleviating the suffering of the people in the area.
33. Mr. LUDWICZAK (Poland): In the course of the
debates on the question of the Indo-Pakistan conflict heard
in this Council for over two weeks now, my delegation has
several times presented its position. We have been stressing
the fundamental character in the conflict of the internal
situation in East Pakistan and the urgent need of its
political solution in accordance with the expressed wishes
of the people as the only right road for bringing about the
cessation of hostilities in all areas and the withdrawal of
armed forces to their respective territories. This has all
along been our attitude. We have expressed it in the draft
resolution which we submitted fS/lU453/Rev.l].
We fully
maintain this posit,ion of principle.

27. At present, the social-imperialists and Indian expansionists are overjoyed at their so-called successes.They
fancy that they can be immune from resistance and
punishment
when, in broad daylight, they subject a
sovereign State to wilful aggression and dismemberment.
However, it is too early for them to become elated! The
fall of Dacca is by no means a so-called milestone of victory
for the Indian aggressors, but a starting-point from which
they are heading towards defeat, The military occupation
Of East Pakistan will lead to greater upheaval and intranquiiiity
in the south Asian subcontinent, The Pakistan
people will not cease their heroic resistance. Nor will the
Indian people be driven about like sheep by the socialimperialists
and Indian expansionists. The people of the
world will not pardon the monstrous crimes they have
committed
against the Pakistan people. They will surely eat
the bitter fruits of their own making and will be censured

34. Lack of agreement on an action by the Security
Council that would have taken into consideration all
elements of the situation and their close interconnexion
and lack of understanding for the primary importance of
the factor of political settlement in East Pakistan was
decisi,ve in the Council’s inability to exert any influence on
the events. We have all along opposed a one-sided approach
to the problem, both in the Security CounciI and in the
General Assembly. That is why we cannot but express our
reservation on the reference to General Assembly resolution
2793 (XXVI) in the second preambular paragraph of the
resolution that the Council has just adopted, and we want
this reservation to be put on record,

by history.

28.

The Chinese Government and people have consistently
aggression, subversion and interference by the
imperialists,
colonialists and neo-colonialists against other
countries and firmly supported the people of all countries
in the defence of their sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity. The Chinese Government and people firmly
support the Pakistan people in their just struggle against
aggression,
subversion and dismemberment. We are convinced that no matter what difficulties and hazards may
occur, final victory will belong to the great Pakistan people
so long as they persevere in unity and struggle.
opposed

35. It is with that consideration in mind that my
delegation abstained in the vote on this resolution.
36. Today we have a situation where all hostilities have
practically stopped in al1 areas of conflict. This is a
development that all of us have certainly received with a
feeling of relief. The Council should take due note of this
fact and do everything possible to help make the cease-fire
a durable one and to favour a further reduction of the
conflict.

29. Mr. NAKAGAWA
(Japan): It is a matter of great
satisfaction
that the Security Council was at last able to
adopt draft resolution S/10465 today.
30. This resolution is the culmination of continued efforts
made by the members of the Security Council, and every
one of us contributed in one way or another to the
formulation
of this proposal. My particular tribute goes to
Ambassador
Farah of Somalia, who has done so much in
paving the way to arrive at the compromise formula. We are
happy
to see that the two parties to the conflict, India and
P&Stan,
have come to accept this formula. We appreciate
the co-operative spirit shown by the representatives of India

37. We realize that there are many problems to be solved
in order to achieve this goal, such as the withdrawal of
troops, the return of refugees and their rehabilitation, the
considerable problems of social, economic and humanitarian character and the role of the United Nations in the
solution of some of those problems.
3

rig. In the view of our delegation it is the unimpeded
process of political transformation in East Pakistan in
conformity with the political will of its people as manifested in the elections of December 1970 that provides a
decisive condition for the settlement of all these problems.
We should at all times and at all stages keep this Primary
consideration in mind and act accordingly. Only then will
this Council and the United Nations be able to contribute
to the goal that we should all pursue: restoration of peace
and security in the Indian subcontinent.
39. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The Italian delegation has cast a
positive vote on draft resolution S/10465, which was
submitted tonight for the decision of the Council. In doing
so my delegation is convinced that the Security COUnC&
even if it was not able to take action long ago, as we had
advocated when we had more time to try to prevent the
tragic events that occurred since last summer and more
recently, can still serve a useful purpose in trying to restore
and mairitain peace in the Asian subcontinent.

have paid to Ambassador Farah for the relentless
efforts he has made, with a sense of great responsibility
and
dedication, in{ order to bring about the successful OUtCOIW
of our deliberations.
speakers

45. Mr. QRTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (irzterprefafi~~~
fvom Spanish): This is not to explain the vote of 1ny
delegation since Argentina, together with the delegations of
Burundi, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia. iS a
sponsor of the resolution which the Council has just
adopted, Nor have I anything to add to the interpretation
so eloquently given of this resolution by the representative
of Somalia. The point of view of Argentina has been
repeatedly stated in this debate, Accordingly, I simply wish
to make a few additional remarks.
46. For a little more than two weeks the Security Clourtcil
considered the tragedy which the subcontinent of India tmd
Pakistan has been experiencing. As is known, despite the
efforts of many delegations, no resolution could be adopteiI
until tonight. We have arrived at a draft resolution wlkicll
has won the approval of the Council because of the
affirmative vote of 13 of its members-and here I would
wish to point out that my delegation would have preferred
to have the affirmative votes of the two other menibers
who were not able to vote in favour-so
that we ~;FVC
arrived at a compromise text. Like any compromise
solution, for one reason or another it cannot be totdty
satisfactory to the parties who had wanted their views
reflected differently; but it is in any case undeniable that
the document which has just been adopted represents
a,
positive step in the quest for a solution leading towards
peace and a final settlement of this distressing crisis.

40. As I have already stated on previous occasions, the
Italian Government followed with anxiety since March, and
even greater anxiety during the past few months, the course
of events in that area of the world. The plight of the
populations involved in the civil strife and the tragedy of
millions of refugees evoked deep concern and emotion
among both political leaders and public opinion in my
country. Later events increased that concern and emotion.
41. I believe that the records of the Security Council
indicate clearly the essential motives that have been behind
all the initiatives taken by my delegation. We are gratified
to note that the text we have voted on took its inspiration
from a working paper we drafted with other non-permanent
members and which was practically embodied in the draft
resolution introduced by Japan and the United States.

47. We understand the emotions and grief caused by the
conflict between the adversaries and yet these two countries, with which Argentina maintains close and traditional
bonds of friendship, are destined by geography to live
together. It is our ardent hope--and we express every wish
that it will be so-that for this reason, minimal though it be,
these two countries will seek the basis for co-operation
to
replace confrontation which will enable both India and
Pakistan to live in peace and overcome the problems af
underdevelopment which afflict them both equally, At any
rate, the delegation of Argentina most ardently hopes that
these two friends of ours in Asia will within a short tim
extend the hand of friendship and jointly embark on a new
course.

42. My delegation welcomes the final text adopted tonight
and the declaration made by Ambassador Farah, which-we
were given to understand-both meet the consent of the
main parties concerned. We are gratified by this positive
development, convinced as we are that only by negotiation
is it possible to solve the many serious problems with which
India and Pakistan are confronted, and we are confident
that such a process will be encouraged by our present
decision.
43. The resolution which has been adopted just now by
the SeCUritY
Council covers the main problems which
remain open and unsolved. In fact, on one side it clearly
expresses the need for a durable cease-fire and cessation of
hostilities in all areas of conflict and at the same time
reiterates the urgent need for a solution of humanitarian
problems in which millions of people are involved. There is
no doubt, anyway, that the draft resolution represents only
a first step, and certainly the Security Council will need to
consider the matter again in order to explore what else
could be done in order to restore peace in the area, and also
to alleviate the misery of all the displacsd persons who we
hope may soon go back to their homes, as well as to take
care of other civil populations.

481 In conclusion, I belieie it is a matter of elementan;
justice to pay a heartfelt tribute to Ambassador Farall, ok&
friend and colleague from Somalia, for his tireless efforts h
seeking a solution acceptable to the parties. All delegations
seated round this table have made their contribution, but It
believe that it is fair to emphasize that the delegation of
Somalia in the final phases of consultation had a decisi\T
influence which made it possible to take this important
step. SO to my friend, Ambassador Farah, I extend my
sincerest congratulations,
49. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MOIIIZET
(France) (irzrerL)rerarioro
from fimchl: Since the outbreak of this tragic affair we
have always thought that there could be no peaceful
solution unless all elements were taken into consideration,

44. I cannot conclude my statement without associating
mY delegation with the tribute which you, Sir, and previous
4

same of which go back many months. We indicated that we
could not in the interests of peace support any resolution
other than one which would, regardless of the difficulties,
meet with the agreement of the parties and delegations here
in the Council and, if unanimity were not possible, at least
a resolution which would not give rise to any fundamental
hostility.
50. Finally such an agrement was reached. We approve it,
we are grateful to the sponsors, and we pay tribute to the
tireless endeavours of Ambassador Farah who is entitled to
the fullest appreciation of the Council. This resolution is
the result of all the efforts exerted by all members of the
COLIIM. It is also the result of failures which were not in
vain for they reflected the essential concern of the Council.
1 am ~SO bound to say that events had:their weight and
made US more acutely aware of realities which thus led to a
compromise.
51. This resolution obviously cqmes late, We recognize
that, but after all the Security Council was seized very late
of a difficult situation, for some months earlier it might
perhaps have been possible to prevent what has occurred. In
any case, this is a lesson to us for the future. It is up to the
Security Council, not only to heal but to try to prevent,
ad this while there is still time.
52. Even though this resolution comes late it is not
without value for the future and it is for this reason that we
voted in favour of it because in fact for nine months in that
area of the worId there have been too many victims, too
many refugees; too many homes have been destroyed; there
have been too many violations of human rights, and we
should like draw the attention of all the parties concerned
to their responsibilities, not only in regard to the international community but above all in regard to themselves.
That is the purpose of certain paragraphs of the resolution,
in particular paragraphs 3 and 4.
53. We are convinced that the parties concerned will abide
by their commitments to apply the Geneva Conventions
and that they will refrain from any reprisal because no
atrocity,
no killing, warrants further killing or atrocities;
those in authority are the ones who are responsible, after
all, We for our part, in the United Nations, have the
responsibility
of contributing to the relief of those who
have suffered, and we are sure that our Organization will
not be found wanting,
54. For the rest, it is now for the parties to negotiate. War
has given way to negotiation and we rejoice. The parties
concerned may rest assured that if they should desire it,
they may count on our friendly co-operation in their search
for peace.
TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation
fvom
Today we have witnessed three concomitant
events:
first, the accession to the Presidency of the
Pakistani Republic of His Excellency Mr. Bhutto, who a
few days ago was among us. Secondly, a few hours ago, we
agreed, here in the Security Council, on a new SecretaryGeneral
of the United Nations. Thirdly, we have just
adopted
a resolution which seems to remedy certain
previous failures of the Security Council. I should like to
55.

say: better late than never. Those three events, in the view
of my delegation, augur well for peace in the Indian
subcontinent.
56. At this point we should like to say how grateful our
delegation is for the tenacity and perseverancedisplayed by
our friend and colleague Ambassador Farah of Somalia. My
delegation, in order to make its own contribution to peace
and security, for both India and Pakistan, associated itself
with the efforts made by the Somali delegation, particularly
in recent days. We therefore subscribed to this resolution in
order to attempt, in so far as possible, to play some part in
the conciliation which should henceforth predominate
between India and Pakistan, and in Prder to ensure once
and for all respect for the principles which we have always
professed-that is, peace, security, territorial integrity and
non-intervention on the part of foreign forces; in other
words, peaceful coexistence among States which are not
only neighbours but brothers in all respects. I would even
go so far as to say that they are almost blood brothers.
57. At the present time, my delegation feels it is its duty
to appeal particularly to the magnanimity and flexibility of
all sides. Those are criteria which we believe will contribute
to the restoration of permanent peace and security.
According to various sources, the situation still does not
seem to be too bright, In the name of human compassion, it
is incumbent upon us to make another.earnest appeal for an
end to be put to the acts of brutality .and atrocities and
violations of human rights, whether it be Indians or
Pakistanis who are responsible, in the interest of the parties
concerned.
58. That is why we feel that after the constitution of the
new Pakistani Government it will be possible to settle a
number of problems which have so far resisted all attempts
at solution.
59. In conclusion, we should like to convey, on behalf of
our Government-which has already, I am certain, done
so-our warmest, most respectful and cordial congratulations to the new President of this young Pakistan which has
to be constructed on new foundations in order to become
and to remain one of the countries of the third world that
have a contribution to make to peace, both nationally and
internationally.
60. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): For the past
two and a half weeks the Security Council has closely
followed the course of events in the India-Pakistan subcontinent, with great concern and anxiety. At times we
laboured literally night and day in efforts to bring to an end
the hostilities with the agreement of all concerned, and to
hasten the day when the work of reconstruction couId
begin.

Mr.

French):

61. I do not propose to discuss tonight why it wasthat the
Security Council was unable to reach agreement at an
earlier stage, because there is never much advantage in
regretting the past. It is, however, a cause of considerable
satisfaction to my delegation that we have now, thanks to
the unremitting efforts by all concerned-and here I too
must pay my tribute to the efforts of Ambassador
Farah-been able to adopt a resolution which looked _

primaily to the future. It is our earnest hope that the
parties concerned will now be able to undertake such
negotiations and discussions as are required to create, with
the least possible delay, a situation of durable peace in the
subcontinent.

68. The provisions of the resolution testify to India’s
noble intention not to make any territorial claims whatsoever, as the Security Council learned officially from the
statement of the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi {see1616th meeting, para.S].

62. In addition, the United Nations, including all its
Members and its specialized agencies, must hold itself in
readiness to give full assistance in the humanitarian pro'oIems of the aftermath of the war. The adoption of this
resolution should enable these priority tasks to be tackled
without delay.

69. Another constructive element of the resolution which
has been adopted is the appeal to all States to refrain from
any action which might aggravate the situation in the
Hindustan subcontinent or endanger international peace.
70. Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the resolution give due
attention to the humanitarian aspects of the problem under
consideration.

63, Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I would like to
join in congratulating Ambassador Farah of Somalia for his
patience, diligence and determination. Thanks to his efforts, principally, and to the efforts of many other
delegations among us, the Security Council has at last
acted. The resolution certainly is not perfect, but it does
make important points on cease-fire and withdrawal; it does
make an important point on the preservation of human life.
While we are unhappy that this Council took so long to act
authoritatively, we are indeed pleased that it has at last
acted.

71. Despite all this, we must point out that the resolution
contains provisions with which the USSR delegation cannot
agree. For example, its second preambular paragraph refers
to the General Assembly resolution of 7 December [resolution 2793(XXvT/l. As you are aware, the USSR delegation, along with a number of other delegations, voted
against that resolution. The reasons for that are well
known. They were duIy explained by the USSR delegation
both in the course of the debate in the General Assembly
and in the course of the consideration in the Security
Council of the question of the situation in the Hindustan
subcontinent. In this connexion, suffice it to recall briefly
that the USSR delegation voted against the resolution in
question because it was one-sided. It did not take account
of the specific character, complexity and unprecedented
nature of the events which had taken place in East Pakistan
as a result of the repressive actions against the people of
East Pakistan, But it was those events which were the main
cause of the serious deterioration of the situation in that
area and which later led to the outbreak of the military
conflict resulting from the attack on India by Pakistan
armed forces. Owing to all this, the conflict took on an
international character and became the subject of discussion in the United Nations or, more precisely, in its two
main organs, the Security Council and the General Assembly.

64. When the final hietory of this short but bitter war has
been written, it will be noted that the United Nations, in
spite of overwhelming votes in the General Assembly, and
overwhelming votes in the Security Council, wasnot able to
stop the war. Let us hope that historians will indeed record
that the action we have taken here tonight proved to be
action that resulted at least in the alleviation of human
suffering-human
suffering which is now plaguing the
subcontinent.
65. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Repubhcs)

(translation fvom Russian): The USSR delegation considers

it necessary to make the following statement in explanation
of vote in connexion with the resolution which has just
been adopted by the Security Council. The resolution
contains an important and constructive provision concerning a cease-fire by the two parties in the Hindustan
subcontinent. It provides for a cease-fire, a cessation of
hostilities, an end to the war. It is an indication that reality
has triumphed and that the main cause of the conflict has
become obvious.

72. To the Soviet Union it had been obvious from the very
outset that the conflict could not be settled by,means of a
one-sided approach. To solve the problem in a just and
effective manner it was necessary to adopt a Security
Council resolution, and when, because of the unwillingness
of several delegations to face reality, this question was
transmitted to the Assembly for consideration, it became
necessaryin the Assembly, too, to adopt precisely the kind
of resolution in which the question of the cessation of
hostilities was closely, inseparably and organically linked
with the solution of the question of the need for a political
settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of recognition of
the will of the East Pakistan population through the
transfer of power to its lawful representatives, the representatives of the political party which received a majority of
votes in the elections of December 1970.

66. The operative part of the resolution which has been
adopted contains a pro’vision to the effect that there should
be a durable cease-fire and cessation of all hostilities. It also
contains a provision concerning the withdrawal, as soon as
practicable, of all armed forces to their respective territories
and to the permanent appropriate cease-fire line in Jammu
and Kashmir.
67. As you know, the preparation of the resolution which
has been adopted by the Council was the result of lengthy
and complex consultations among the members of the
Council and the parties to the conflict. The very constructive role played by the distinguished Ambassador of
Somalia, Mr. Farah, has already been mentioned here and
we should like to associate ourselves with the words of
appreciation concerning his efforts, which have led to a
successful outcome.

73. These essential conditions have not been reflected in
the Assembly resolution. Subsequent developments have
made it abundantly clear that the approach of the Soviet
Union and of those States which share the same viewpoint
with regard to ways of speedily ending the conflict in that
area wasperfectly correct and sound.
6

L
74.

The USSR delegation cannot ignore the recent state-

Pakistan to a cessation of hostilities, which has also been
reflected in the resolution adopted by the Council, creates
the necessary conditions for completely ending the armed
conflict in the Hindustan subcontinent’ and for consolidating the political means of settling the problems connected with that conflict.‘It wasprecisely those goals which
the Soviet Union has consistently and sincerely striven to
attain since the events first began to happen in East
Pakistan. We are convinced that the ending of the war in
the Hindustan subcontinent corresponds to the vital interests of the peoples of the region, creates the necessary
conditions for their advancement along the path of national
development and progress, and eliminates an existing
hotbed of serious tension in the world.

ment by the new President of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto, with
regard to the problem being discussed by the Council. As

far as can be judged from the dispatches of foreign agencies
and the press, in his first statement, despite the clearly

expressed political will of the people of East Pakistan, the
President has attempted to stress the religious affiliations of individual groups of the population. The statement
was bellicose and unrealistic. The President even said that
he intended to “take revenge”, Such intentions can only
put US on our guard and cause us the most profound
regrets. We shall, however, hope that this is not the last
word of the new President of Pakistan on such an
important problem as the need to normalize the situation in
the Hindustan subcontinent.
new

80. In this connexion, the Soviet Union appeals to all
countries to assist in every possible way in the speedy
restoration of peace in the Hindustan subcontinent and to
refrain from any steps which might make it difficult to
normalize the situation there.

75. The whole world has been horrified by the tragedy
and sufferings in East Pakistan, the death of hundreds of
thousands of people and the unprecedented flight from
their own country of 10 million people. All the members of
the Security Council, except one, have commented on this
tragedy. Even the current President of Pakistan, speaking at
a Security Council meeting [1611th meeting], a&now
ledged that a mistake had been made in East Pakistan, and
afterwards
he added that it had been a tragic mistake. Only
one permanent member of the Security Council, China, and
its leaders have remained blind and deaf to this tragedy and
tee sufferings of millions of people. They have followed the
course of giving unreserved support to tyranny, terror and
violence in East Pakistan, Neither condemnation of those
who have done this nor pity for the victims has been
expressed
by Peking or by the representative of China in
the Security Council.

81, In conclusion, I should Iike to draw the attention of
the members of the Security Council to the statement of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union of 18
December in connexion with the present situation in the
Hindustan subcontinent. The text of this statement has
been issued as an official document of the Security Council
[see S/10463/Rev.l] and the members of the Council will
have an opportunity to study it.
82. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua co-sponsored
the draft resolution which we have just adopted in the
certainty that its wording was satisfactory to the two
parties directly concerned, India and Pakistan, these two
nations held in such high esteem and beloved of us ail. We
are most grateful to the representative of Somalia for his
most astute co-operation and his patient endeavors in trying
to find a text acceptable to the parties and to this Council.

76.

The statement made today by the Chinese represenonce again causes aggravation of the situation in the
Hindustan
subcontinent. What can be said about this?
People,
be on guard against the machinations of the
intriguers and provocuteurs!
tative

77.
As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it has from
tie
very outset consistently spoken from a position of
principle,
insisting that only the people of East Pakistan, in
the
person of its elected representatives who received
support
in the elections of December 1970, can decide its
fate.
This position has often been explained in the
statements
of the Soviet delegation at Council meetings and
in the General Assembly during the discussion of this
question.
It has been very clearly set out in the statements
of the leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
and
the Soviot Government and also in the official
statements
of TASS and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the USSR with which the members of the Security COUncil
are familiar since these documents have been distributed as
official
documents of the United Nations [see S/l0422 and
S/Z 0463/Rev. I].

83. We hope that peace will become a reality on the
India-Pakistan subcontinent. Nicaragua believes that it
would be unthinkable to believe otherwise. When full peace
is announced between these two nations, the entire world
will rejoice. My country, which is such a good friend of
theirs, will wholeheartedly share in this rejoicing. India and
Pakistan are twin brothers because of geography and
history. This is how they should continue to live; they
should forget their bitterness and differences, and give
proof to the world that while it is true that the heart has
feelings, it is also true that the heart can forget.
84. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) /interpretution from
French): By voting in favour of the resolution that has just
been adopted, my delegation wished to show its determination to find a rapid and peaceful solution to the serious
crisis which has overtaken the Indian subcontinent.

Because of all these considerations, the Soviet delegawhile noting the real significance of a number of the
provisions
of the resolution which the Council has adopted,
could
not support it and abstained in the vote.
78.
tion,

85. The appeal for a durab!e cease-fise, as well as the
withdrawal of foreign forces, are we believe essential and
immediate prerequisites to safeguard peace in the area.
Furthermore, we should like to express the hope that all
the parties, withou? ?xceptirin, will scrupulously respect the
Geneva Corventions.

The Soviet delegation also considers it necessary to
79.
stress that the official consent of India and subsequently of
7

conflict from physical sufferings or extermination, or any
reprisals or acts of brutality.

86. However, my delegation will not disguise its dis’ appointment at the inactivity of the Council when there
was a breach of the peace and when the hostilities caused so
many innocent victims among the very people who because
of their nature and affinities are destined to live in peace. It
will be up to the Council to draw a conclusion from this
paralysis, and we must all study the ways and means of
restoring its authority and increasing its effectiveness.

94. My delegation has been concerned over reports which
have reached it since the war began about reprisals and acts
of vengeance wrought on the innocent people, andit is the
hope of my delegation- that the two Governments son.
cerned will use their good offices and will indeed abide by
the obligations which they have accepted as signatories to
the Geneva Conventions to assure that adequate .measures
are taken to ensure that people do not become the victims
of acts of brutality or of reprisal. It is the hope of my
delegation that if such acts do not cease this Council will
again be seized of the problem and will consider the
adoption of a resolution which would call upon all States to
observe scrupulously the Geneva Convention of 1949
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War,2 and in particular articles 3 1,32 and 33,

87. If it is true that our Organization, and more particularly the Security Council, will have to follow the evolution
of the situation closely and take the necessary steps to
intensify programmes of assistance and rehabilitation,
mainly for East Pakistan, it is nevertheless true that the real
peace-making efforts will have to be undertaken by India
and Pakistan themselves.
88. We firmly believe that the dooT( to dialogue is not
closed, and we have confidence in the statemanship, the
wisdom, and the generosity of the Indian and Pakistani
leaders in their search together for a lasting political
solution taking account of the aspirations of the peoples Of
East Pakistan, their economic interests, and their religious
and spiritual bonds. At the same time, we hope that foreign
powers will refrain from interfering in Indo-Pakistani affairs
in order to profit from a particularly confused and
emotional situation.

95. My delegation is conscious of the appeal made by the
International Committee of the Red Cross. It is our hope
that that organization will increase its efforts and that both
parties will allow representatives of the Red Cross to use
and apply its good offices for the sake of humanity.
96. Finally, I should like to say that I have beep deeply
touched by the generous statements that have been
addressed to my delegation for the role it has played in
what I might call the finalizing of a resolution which has
been able to secure such a wide acceptance among the
members of the Council-and, more importantly, by the
delegations of India and Pakistan. But, as several represen.
tatives have pointed out, the approved draft was not the
result of the efforts of one or two delegations but the
culmination of the efforts of practically all the delegations,
I do not think that any one delegation can claim authorship
of any particular proposal. The role of the Somali delegation was purely that of putting the finishing touches to the
draft resolution, and I am glad that it is in that spirit that
the Council has accepted it.

89. Once again, we should like to reiterate our conviction
that the two parties will get together to seek a realistic
settlement of the crisis so that peace can be restored in the
Indian subcontinent.
90. Finally, I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to
associate myself with others who have emphasized the
untiring efforts of Ambassador Farah and thanked him for
everything he has done to produce this compromise text.
91. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The decision by the Council
to adopt a resolution has come as a matter of great
satisfaction to my delegation. The only unfortunate part
about the whole process is that it did not come about
earlier. But, as the representative of the.United Kingdom
pointed out, we must not live by recrimination. We must be
able to learn lessons from the past, and see that the next
time we are faced with a situation of this dimension, this
organization and this Council must be a place to which
people and nations can turn in hope and from which they
will not be driven away by despair.

97. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I call on the representative of

98. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): The fact that the Security
Council has at long last adopted a resolution on the
situation in the India-Pakistan subcontinent does not
detract from the greater fact that the Co,uncil failed signally
in dealing with that situation in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

92. The position of my Government on this whole
situation has been quite clear. It has always been for an
immediate cessation of hostilities, for an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from the territories of other States,
unconditionally. It has always been that in matters of this
kind a solution must be sought through political means and
not through military means.

99. Pakistan was subjected to open and unconcealed
aggression: the Council failed to prevent it. There was a
blatant breach of the peace: the Council failed to suppress
it. War engulfed the subcontinent: the Council failed to
extinguish its flames. An untold number of lives werelost:
the Council did nothing to savethem.

93. Furthermore, my Government has been most concerned about the sufferings of people in the region, and it is
the hope of my Government that effective and energetic
measures will be taken to secure the protection of all those
persons who now find themselves prisoners of war, and
adequately to protect the civilian population in the areasof

100. Even at this stage the Council has succeeded in doing
nothing more than adopting a resolution which is as weak
as the situation is grave and of manifold dangers.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
8

101. It is a disturbing truth-disturbing not only to the
Council but to all Members of the United Nations, but true
nevertheless-that in this unparalleled situation the General
Assembly should have shown a much greater sense of
urgency and displayed a closer fidelity to the Charter than
the Security Council. That, of course, was due to the
arbitrary use of the veto by’one permanent member of the
Council, which frustrated the efforts of the majority of the
COLIIIC~~. There is not the slightest doubt that this will
cause-indeed,
has already caused-a reappraisal of the
relevance of the Security Council to issues of war and
peace, which cannot but have a far-reaching impact on the
attitude of all Powers, great and small alike.

United Nations ‘Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan is empowejed to supervise is that which was
established by the Karachi agreement of 27 July 1949,3 to
which the Governments of India and Pakistan and the
United Nations are parties and which was concluded under
the provisions of part I of the resolution of 13 August 1948
of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan4
Any departure from that line is a violation of it and not an
act establishing a new cease-fire line.
108. Fifth, the observance of the Geneva Conventions of
1949 called for in paragraph 3 of the resolution is a
responsibility devolving particularly on the Government of
India, whose armed forces are occupying the eastern part of
Pakistan. The Council is no doubt aware of the violations of
these Conventions which have been committed since the
fall of Dacca on 13 December. Even as I speak, acts of
savagery and genocide are being carried out in East Pakistan
despite the undertakings of the Indian occupation forces.

102. NOW that the resolution has been adopted, and an
interpretative
statement has been made about it by the
representative of Somalia on behalf of the sponsors of the
resolution, the delegation of Pakistan regards it as wholly
improper to attempt to alter the intent of it or give it a
construction different from the plain meaning of the words
of the resolution and the interpretative statement, taken
together with the other provisions of the resolution and the
purposes and principles of the Charter,

109. Sixth, the appointment of a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to lend his good offices for the
solution of humanitarian problems envisaged in paragraph S
is not dependent upon the agreement of the parties.

103.

I should like, however, to point out those features of
resolution which govern the attitude towards it of my
Government,

110. Seventh, the Pakistan delegation attaches due importance to paragraph 7 of the resolution. It trusts that until
the aggression is terminated the Council will do what it says
and not relegate the situation to oblivion.

the

104. First, the resolution has been adopted by the exercise
of the powers of the Security Council under Chapter VII of
the Charter. The first preambular paragraph and paragraph 1 of the resolution leave no room for doubt in this
regard.

111. I have once again to say that we regard it as totally
wrong to construethe interpretative statement made by the
representative of Somalia on behalf of the sponsors as
drawing any kind of legal distinction between the withdrawals of Indian and Pakistan armed forces in the eastern
theatre and those in the western theatre. If the wording of
his statement with respect to the two theatres conveys a
sense of difference, it is only because in the eastern theatre
there are no Pakistan forces on Indian territory but there
are Indian forces on Pakistan territory, while in the western
theatre forces of both sides are on each other’s territory. In
the eastern theatre withdrawals have to be one-sided and
that means that withdrawals will apply only to the Indian
occupation forces while in the western theatre they have to
be mutual.

105. Second, the resolution cannot be divorced from, but
has to be read together with, General Assembly resolution
2793 (XXVI) of 7 December 1971. The second, third and
fourth preambular paragraphs would have no place in the
resolution if it had been conceived in a different framework
frown that of resolution 2793 (XXVI).

106.

Third,

the word “territories”

in paragraph 1 of the

resolution
cannot mean anything but the national territories as constituted when the State of Pakistan came into

existence

in 1947. Since the United Nations is not a

nation-m&ing
or a nation-breaking agency it cannot, in any
situation involving two or more organized States, distinguish between territories except in the national sense.In no
circumstances can the Organization violate the principle of
the territorial integrity of Member States: consequently, it
is precluded from according even implicit recognition to the

112. This, and considerations of the time factor, constitute the only points of difference with regard to the two
theatres mentioned in the interpretative statement of the
Ambassador of Somalia.
113. I must also make it clear that the resolution does not
embody any amicable settlement of the conflict between
the two parties. It only denotes agreement on the principles
of cease-fire and withdrawal. It does not dispose of the
fundamental issues created by Indian aggression, nor does it
show any awareness of its consequences both for Pakistan
and the world.

result of any attempt, by aggression, subversion, or other
trse of force, to dismember Pakistan. Paragraph 1 can
therefore mean nothing other than that the armed forces Of
India must withdraw from Pakistan to Indian territory, in
both the east and the west, and that the armed forces of
Pakistan
must withdraw from Indian territory. No distinction can be made between one area of Pakistan territory
and another, any more tl;an a distinction can be made in
the case of Indian territory.
107.

114. As President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto has stated, there can
be no real peace between India and Pakistan until the

there is no ambiguity whatsoever in the
to the cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir,
in paragraph 1. The cease-fire line which the

Fourth,

reference
mentioned

3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special SupplementNo. 7, docunrent S/1430/Add.l, annex 26.
4 Ibid., document S/14.30, para. 132.

9

Indian armed forces withdraw from both East and West
Pakistan and there is a just settlement of the problem of
Jammu and Kashmir in accordance with the aspirations of
its peoples.
115. Turning now to some of the observations made by
the members of the Security Council, I would first refer to
the statement of the Ambassador of Burundi. May I say
how deeply moved I am by the cordial reference made by
him to the accession to the leadership of Pakistan by
President Bhutto. For us this is a new beginning. All
Member States we trust wiI1 appreciate that no new
beginning is possible without ending national humiliation
and redeeming national honour and integrity.
116. Turning to the statement made by the representative
of the Soviet Union in explanation of his vote, my
delegation must express a deep sense of disappointment
that even at this stage Ambassador Malik reiterated his
observations in regard to the General Assembly resolution
which represents the will of 104 Members of the United
Nations and is frustrated by the will of one Member State.
With reference to his observations on President Bhutto’s
statement, I would once again request him to read that
statement, the President of Pakistan’s statement, in its
context. The new President of Pakistan did refer to the
need for negotiations, to making a new beginning. How
could he forget his solemn duty as President of the State of
Pakistan to safeguard its territorial integrity and national
honour, to which he is sworn, despite the successful use of
force by India and the occupation of the greater part of
Pakistan? I would have expected that the representative of
the Soviet Union who referred to the acts of repression of
the previous regime would now-at least in this new
context, in the context of the accession to power of a new
popular leader, pledged to negotiations with the genuine
representatives of East Pakistan-make some reference to
the acts of savagery and genocide which are taking place in
Dacca and elswhere in Pakistan under the occupation of the
Indian armed forces.

principle taken by the representative of the United States,
Ambassador Bush, in this most flagrant case of aggression,
occupation and attempted dismemberment of a sovereign
State. A word of gratitude, even to a super-Power, is not
out of order on this occasion.
120. To you, Mr. President, I should like to express my
admiration for your patience and for your determination to
bring all points of view together. You considered the
situation as one in which some other country of Africa or a
country of the third world could be placed on another
occasion and we are @deed moved that under your
leadership the non-permanent members of the Security
Council did not cease and desist, despite all the discouragement and pressure brought to bear on them, and did salvage
something out of the wreckage.
121. As to the People’s Republic of China, we have no
words to express sufficiently what we feel towards them.
Their stand has been honourable. They have stood by their
word. No element of calculation entered into the posture of
the People’s Republic of China, whether it should be on the
winning side or whether it should not be on the losing side,
It espoused a position of principle regardless of considerations of so-called geopolitics and balance of power, China
and Pakistan are not countries which have anything in
common ln terms of ideology or social system; but yet
where great principles were at stake, the great People’s
Republic of China, under the leadership of Chairman Mao,
stood by a weak country against the whole world. The
people of Pakistan, despite whatever may be said by others,
will not forget what China has said and done in this terrible
hour for my country.
122. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Ambassador cfP&stan for the kind words he addressed to me.
123. I now call on the Foreign Minister of India.
124. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): The resolution whichbas
just been adopted by the Council is, we understand, the
result of almost continuous discussions among various
members of this Council. We are most appreciative of the
efforts made by. the Ambassador of Somalia, ably supported by many of his colleagues in the Council, to work
out a draft resolution which has found general acceptance
in the Council.? should like to take this opportunity to
make a few observations on the resolution and to mention
some basic points.

117. Finally, my delegation would like to express its
gratitude to Ambassador Farah of Somalia for his unremitting efforts to salvage the honour and prestige of the
Security Council even at this late hour, and for the support
given to him by the representative of Argentina. Argentina
and Pakistan are at opposite ends of the world but my
delegation has been moved by the eloquent manner in
which the representative of Argentina, speaking as a
country of the third world, has upheld principle and tried
to salvage the situation for the United Nations.

125. The second preambular paragraph refers to General
Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) of 7 December 1971.
My delegation had voted against that resolution in tkn:
General Assembly. The position of the Government of
India has already been stated in its communication [,S/
1044.51, dated 12 December 1971, to the SecretaryGeneral, and we stand by that position. The substance of
the General Assembly resolution was introduced soon after
in the Security Council in a different form, but the Council
did not adopt it. We are, therefore, entitled to question the
relevance of the reference to that resoIution in the
resolution which the Council has just adopted.

118. Our gratitude is also due to Ambassador Vinci of
Italy who for many months has agonized over this
situation. Also, to the Ambassadors of Japan, Belgium,
Nicaragua and to the Ambassador of Syria who can
understand the poignancy of our situation because his own
country has been the subject of invasion and occupation,
119. On many occasions in tne past, speaking in the name
of the Pakistan delegation, I have been constrained to
disagree with the position of the United States on many
issues and we have found ourselves on opposite sides, I
must therefore acknowledge the courageous position of

126. The last preambular paragraph of the resolution
states that a cease-fire and a cessation of hostilities prevail.
10

We are glad that the initiative taken by the Prime Minister
of India led to a response from Pakistan and that a
cease-fne became effective, We are willing to arrive at
agreed arrangements with the parties concerned, to settle
not only withdrawals but also other problems which have
arisen as a result of this conflict, by mutual negotiation.
This
point has been stressed by several members of the
Security Council.
127. AS regards the eastern theatre, the existence of
Bangla Desh and of the Bangla Desh Government cannot be
ignored. We have always taken the view that the Bangla
Desh representatives must be heard. Unfortunately, in spite
of our protests, the Council did not respond to this
suggestion.
128.

We have made it amply clear that the Indian armed
will
be withdrawn from Bangla Desh as soon as
practicable. With the independence of Bangla Desh and the
surrender
of Pakistani troops there, their earliest possible
repatriation
from the eastern theatre has to be arranged.
They are under our protection and we have undertaken to
treat them in accordance with the Geneva Conventions. The
presence of the Indian forces in Bsngla Desh, is, therefore,
necessary for such purposes as the protection of Pakistani
troops who have surrendered to us and for prevention of
reprisals and the like. We shall withdraw our troops from
Bangla Desh as soon as these tasks have been accomplished.
The Government of Bangla Desh has already set up a civil
administration
which will, we hope, relieve us in the nearest
possible future of the necessity of being present there. We
have no desire to stay there a day longer than necessary.
forces

129.

I must add that Pakistan has no longer any right to
any troops in Bangla Desh, and any attempt by
Pakistan
to enter Bangla Desh by force would create a
threat to peace and security and could endanger peace and
stability
once again. This is a reality which the international

The Government of India will be glad to keep the
Secretary-General informed. of all important and significant
developments. However, it is our hope that negotiations
between the parties themselves will start in sll seriousness
and with speed, and resolve all the problems that have
arisen.
133. The Ambassador of Somalia has been kind enough to
mention the unilateral declaration by India that India has
no territorial ambitions. While we adhere to this declaration, we regret that no similar declaration has yet been
made by Pakistan.
134. I have made these observations on the resolution in
order to make our position clear s6 that there may be no
doubt about it in any future discussions on the subject. The
Government of India will give due consideration to the
resolution of the Council and make further comments if it
deems any necessary.
135. I would have liked to conclude on a note of hope. At
last in Pakistan a democratically elected leader, who was
with us only a few days ago,-has become President of that
country. We welcome his coming to power and we look
forward to working with him to improve our bilateral
relations, When he was here he spoke of the need for a
vision of the future. However, we are disappointed at the
tone and content of his very first statement after becoming
President. India regrets that there is so far no visible change
in Pakistan’s policy of conflict and confrontation. We had
hoped that Mr. Bhutto would make a fresh beginning. While
we still hope that second thoughts will prevail, we cannot
ignore the r’eclaration made by him as President and Martial
Zaw Administrator of Pakistan.

keep

cOmmUnity

130.

CdmlOt

136, Perhaps after making a careful assessment of the
situation, and keeping in mind the interests of his own
people and the peace and progress of the whole subcontinent, Mr. Bhutto may in the near future adopt a more
objective and far-sighted attitude.

ignore.

As regards the western theatre, the international
137, I agree with the representative of France that this
tragedy could have been prevented if the international
community had acted earlier, particularly when atrocities
were being committed in what was at that time East
Pakistan. We agree with the representative of Belgium that
real efforts will have to be made by India and Pakistan
themselves, and the door for dialogue should remain open.
That is our approach to Finding a satisfactory solution of
our problems with Pakistan,

frontier
between India and Pakistan is well defined.
However,
as a result of hostilities, certain areasof Pakistan
are now under the control of Indian troops, and a much

smaller
troops.

area of India is under the control of Pakistani
We accept the principle of withdrawals. This is a
problem
we wish to negotiate and settle with Pakistan as
early as possible, and we look forward to co-operation from
Pakistan in this regard.
13 1. The State of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part
of India. However, in order to avoid bloodshed and to
preserve
peace, we have respected the cease-fire line
supervised
by the United Nations Military ObserversGroup

by making some adjustments in the cease-fire line in order
to make it more stable, rationa and viable. This we propose
to discuss and settle with Pakistan.

138. This is not an occasion to indulge in recrimination or
poletics. It is more important to think of- steps to
consolidate the cease-fire and arrive at a durable peace in
our area. Therefore, I do not think it necessaryor desirable
to reply to the slanderous allegations and baseless charges
made by a certain country. We should not like to interpret
its views as an indication of a desire to interfere in our
affairs. I believe it is the wish of this Council, as much as
that of the people of the subcontinent, that we should
work out our own solutions.

132. Paragraph 6 of the resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral
to keep the Council informed of developments.

139. We have no feelings of animosity against the people
of Pakistan, We wish them well. We want to work in

in India and Pakistan. In the course of this conflict, as ah
in 1965, it was crossed by troops of, Pakistan at various
places.
India had ‘herefore to cross this line then, as now.

There

is thus need to avoid the repetition of such incidents

11

co-operation with them for our mutual benefit. As many
representatives have said, we are blood brothers, to use the
words of the representative of Burundi, or twin brothers, to
use the words of the representative of Nicaragua.
140. I agree with the representative of Pakistan that an
untold number of lives were lost and that the United
Nations failed to take timely action. If the international
community had taken action on the basic causes of the
conflict before it started, it could perhaps have been
avoided, The representative of Pakistan used a dangerous
word-genocide-in
speaking of what is happening now in
Bangla Desh. Would he not call the killing of 1 million
persons on grounds of differences of race, culture and
language a genocide?
141. The will of 104 Members expressed in the General
Assembly has been misinterpreted by the representative of
Pakistan. We share the desire and the anxiety of the General
Assembly for peace, for a cease-fire and withdrawal, but
there can be no durable peace unless the root cause of the
problem-respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the 75 million persons of Bangla Desh-is
recognized.
142. Not only Pakistan but India too has gone through a
most difficult time. Bangla Desh has had a most tragic and
traumatic experience, resulting in 1 million persons being
killed and 10 million driven out of their homes. We regret
that no reference has been made to that in the resolution.
Now that hostilities have ceased, it is our earnest hope that
the three countries of the subcontinent-Bangla Desh,
Pakistan and India-will co-operate and usher in an era of
peace, progress and prosperity.
143. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I call on the representative of

144. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Although the hour is late, I
feel it necessary to take the floor once again because the
statement we have just heard from the Foreign Minister of
India calls for a reply.
145. First, the Pakistan delegation emphatically rejects the
contention of the Foreign Minister of India that Pakistan
has no right to keep troops in so-called Bangla Desh. East
Pakistan is an integral part of the territory of Pakistan, and
the juridical status and the inalienable rights of the people
of Pakistan cannot be altered in any manner by an act of
aggression and military occupation. The proclamation in
the capital of India of the independence of a territory
which is part of Pakistan was not an act of self-determination of the people of East Pakistan, but an act of
dismemberment of a sovereign country by military aggression.
146. Secondly, I should like to state that the withdrawal
of occupying armed forces cannot be conditional upon
negotiations. It is only after withdrawal that negotiations
can really take place which would lead to a settlement of
the confhct. It must also be added that these negotiations
do not require any recognition of any entity not accepted
by the Government of Pakistan.

147. With reference to the statement of the Foreign
Minister of India about the absence of a declaration by
Pakistan renouncing territorial ambitions, let me state here
and now that we have had no territorial ambitions. Au we
have tried to do is to defend our territory. We have no
territorial claims on Indian territory. But we do not
consider Jammu and Kashmir to be part of India, It is
disputed territory, whose future is to be settled jh
accordance with an agreement arrived at under the aegisof
the Security Council.
148. It is extremely gracious on the part of the Foreign
Minister of India to say that he wishes Pakistan well. He
said that, after his country has invaded East Pakistan and
occupied it militarily. And in the same breath he talks of
three countries in the subcontinent. We would much rather
not be the recipient of such good wishes.
149. In regard to the statements made by the new
President of Pakistan, let me say that a fresh beginning cse
be made only on the basis of the withdrawal of Indian
occupation forces and a renunciation. of the attempt to
bring about the dismemberment of Pakistan. The people ef
Pakistan must be left to themselves to evolve their own
political solution in accordance with the aspirations of the
people through the genuinely elected representatives of the
people.
150. If India is genuinely interested in peace in the
subcontinent, the first thing it should do is to ceaseits
aggression against Pakistan,
151. As for his reference to President Bhutto, I can assure
the Foreign Minister of India that the President of Pakistan
cannot be expected to bow to force.
152. At this grave moment I do not wish to enter info an
acrimonious argument with the Foreign Minister of India
about genocide. He has mentioned the figure of 1 million,
On what basis were a million people killed? I can
unhesitatingly state that any killing of innocent men,
women and children is a damnable, abominable and
condemnable act, irrespective of which side does it. And we
would have liked to see some recognition th’at innocent
persons by the tens of thousands were massacredbetween2
and 25 March and subsequently. However, what we now
hope would be that in accordance with the undertaking
given by the military occupation authorities, they would
act to stop the savagery and the killing which are going on
and which are being reported in the press.It will not do to
suppress the dispatches of foreign correspondents. Wehave
heard a great deal in these debates during the last months
about the censorship imposed by the Government of
Pakistan, but there is censorship now by the Indian
occupation authorities to prevent the truth from being
revealed to the world, and we would hope that in
accordance with their responsibilities the Indian occupation u
authorities will stop this bloodshed in East Pakistan.
153, The PRESIDENT:
There being no other names
inscribed on the list of speakers, I propose to adjourn tllc
meeting sine die, subject to the approval of the Council.
Another meeting will be called after due consultations with
members. However, if I receive a request for an emergency

meeting I. am ready and willing to give members three
hour? notice before such a meeting is held.

consultations with members before fixing the date for
another meeting.

154. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, I am not clear
whether you have confined your remarks purely to the
situation in the India-Pakistan subcontinent or whether you
are speaking generally about our work. There are a number
of items which deserve to be brought up quite urgently,
particularly the item on Southern Rhodesia, and it is my
hope that immediately after we have relaxed during the
Christmas holidays, we could take up the question of
Southern Rhodesia-on or about 28 December.

156. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I just wish to inform
members of the inclination of my delegation towards
calling for a meeting of the Security Council on or about 28
December. Perhaps members might take this into account
in planning their Christmas and New Year programmes.
157.. The PRESIDENT: Subject to what members may
have to say, I shall arrange for a meeting on 28 December.
Six hours’ notice may be sufficient, since it is not an
emergency meetrhg-that is, if members give me the power
to determine when the meeting is to be held.

155. The *PRESIDENT:
I was referring generally to the
work of the Security Council. If there is a request that I
should call a meeting at any time, I would within three
hours arrange for a meeting; otherwise I will have to hold

aS”zemeeting rose at 10.35 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
dea Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
deposit&es
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
RAIC

HOJIYPNTI5

H3JIAHHJE

OPrAHli

BAHHN

OB’HE~NHEHHhIX

H3namiff
Opranusaqsu
CWbe~zuienubi~
HanuR l~omuo ~ynnrh
BHH&X H &~~HT~TB&X DO BC~X patioaax
hnupa. HaBoRaTe
cnpa
samem xmi*noiu
Marasnrie
mm nm.mxTe no agpecy : Oprafiusaqus
HaqrrR,
CeKqua no nponaxe
wsqaaufi, Hr.&Mopn
mm ZCenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

HAHNH
B KHU*HL*X
SaraKU 06 WB~&HURX B
06’beflmxeanbrx

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
es&
en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82280-3~1~

1974-2,050
