A/66/PV.14

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

14

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 22 September 2011, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
Agenda item 67
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/66/L.2)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I declare open
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. This
meeting is being held in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 64/148 of 18 December 2009,
65/240 of 24 December 2010 and 65/279 of 13 June
2011, and under sub-item (b) of agenda item 67,
entitled “Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action”.
I warmly welcome all to this High-level Meeting.
We meet here today to reaffirm that we, the peoples
and nations of the world, make up one family rich in
diversity. It is our diversity that enriches humankind
and steers its progress. It is through the celebration of
this diversity as well as through the promotion of
tolerance and dispelling fears of the other, that we will

build a more peaceful world, a world based on the
fundamental principles of equality, trust and mutual
respect.
I should like to thank the co-facilitators, Her
Excellency Ms. Isabelle Picco, Permanent Representative
of Monaco to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Tommo Monthe, Permanent Representative of
Cameroon to the United Nations, for having very ably
led the preparations for this High-level Meeting. In that
connection, I wish to express my gratitude to them for
their excellent efforts.
Today’s meeting is an opportunity for world
leaders to speak with one voice on one of the most
critical global challenges of the twenty-first century —
the continuing scourge of racism and xenophobia
worldwide. It is also an opportunity to recommit to the
full and effective implementation of the actions
outlined in the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, adopted by consensus in 2001. Together with
the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action is the most comprehensive framework for
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance. It highlights issues faced by
victims of racial discrimination, particularly people of
African and Asian descent, migrants, refugees, and
specific vulnerable groups, such as indigenous peoples
and other minorities. It also emphasizes that we must
remember the crimes or wrongs of the past, wherever
and whenever they occurred. We must unequivocally
condemn these racist tragedies and tell the truth about
history. These are essential elements for international

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-50859 (E)

*1150859*

A/66/PV.14

reconciliation and the creation of societies based on
justice, equality and solidarity.

can be every bit as destructive as outright aggressive
behaviour.

Unfortunately, despite progress made since the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action was
adopted in 2001, instances of xenophobia, racism and
intolerance have increased in severity and frequency.
Racist attitudes and hate speech can be found in many
countries, and the Internet provides a new vehicle for
their proliferation. While countries have come a long way
in removing obstacles to the realization of the
fundamental principles of equality and non-discrimination,
much more remains to be done on this score.

Yet we must acknowledge that intolerance has
increased in many parts of the world over the past
decade. The resurgence and persistence of such
inhumane attitudes and detrimental practices indicate
that we have not done enough to stem the tide.
Members have before them a global action plan that
includes
recommendations
for
combating
discrimination against Africans and persons of African
descent, Asians and persons of Asian descent,
indigenous peoples, migrants, refugees, minorities, the
Roma, and others. Let us do more to embrace diversity
and safeguard the dignity of these groups.

I wish to encourage all countries, individually
and collectively, to intensify their efforts to reduce
instances of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance. It is the responsibility of States
to enact the necessary legislative measures to prevent
the occurrence of discriminatory practices and to grant
justice to the victims. Governments, in collaboration
with other stakeholders, including civil society and
business, should intensify awareness-raising initiatives
and enhance education in order to combat ignorance
and effectively address the root causes of prejudice and
negative stereotypes.
This High-level Meeting is an opportunity for all
of us to reaffirm our collective responsibility for
combating racism and promoting equality and
non-discrimination. It is also an opportunity to come
together in unity to address the critical challenges
before us. I wish us all a successful meeting.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Ten years, ago in
adopting the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action against racism, the international community
acknowledged that no country could claim to be free of
discrimination and intolerance.
Ten years later, that is still the case. Certainly we
have come a long way. We have seen new laws
enacted; new institutions pursuing justice; new
initiatives promoting dialogue; and new mindsets
taking hold. We are better prepared to prosecute and
protect against grave crimes such as genocide,
apartheid, ethnic cleansing and contemporary forms of
slavery. Our antennae are better attuned to see the
insidious forms of discrimination — the subtle, faceto-face interactions and institutionalized prejudice that

2

I welcome this year’s observance of the
International Year for People of African Descent and
the many constructive initiatives it has generated. Let
us stand firmly against anti-Semitism. We must oppose
Islamophobia and reject discrimination against
Christians. Bias based on religious identity has no
place in our world. Let us defend the rights of all,
without distinction of any kind, as the Universal
Declaration proclaims. Neither race, colour nor
language; neither political nor other opinion; neither
property, birth nor other status should be a barrier to
the enjoyment of rights and freedoms.
Let us also stay in the vanguard against bigotry
and commit to fighting discrimination based on gender
and sexual orientation. Victims of prejudice must be at
the centre of our efforts, as the theme of this event
rightly indicates. Our battle for mutual respect and
understanding is no feel-good exercise.
The stakes are high indeed. Ignorance and
intolerance are among the root causes of conflicts.
Racism and discrimination are major obstacles to
development. All too often, we see a vicious cycle in
which discrimination leads to deprivation and poverty
deepens discrimination. A marked characteristic of
virtually all extremely poor communities is that they
lack equal access to State institutions and services.
Hard economic times such as these only exacerbate the
situation. Competition for jobs and other difficulties
often trigger hostility towards migrants and minorities.
Governments have to ensure that unemployment and
deteriorating living standards do not provide excuses
for attacks on vulnerable groups. We must resist
polarizing politicians who play on people’s fears and
use stereotypes to gain electoral advantage.

11-50859

A/66/PV.14

We are all aware that the original Durban
Conference and its follow-up two years ago caused
immense controversy. On this anniversary, let us
restate some basic principles. This process is meant to
further the world’s essential fight against racism. We
should condemn anyone who uses this platform to
subvert that effort with inflammatory rhetoric, baseless
assertions and hateful speech. Our common
commitment must be to focus on the real problems of
racism and intolerance. Let us strive to ensure dignity,
equality and justice for all. Let us work hand in hand
with the civil society groups that are so central to this
cause. Let us work in harmony to promote harmony.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Navanethem Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Pillay (United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights): Today we commemorate the
adoption by consensus, in September 2001, of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. I salute the vast majority of Member States
that are showing their support for this important
achievement, intended to combat racism and make a
difference in the lives of so many victims worldwide.
The lead-up to this commemoration has been
undoubtedly challenging, in no small part because the
issues are complex and sensitive. No country can claim
to be free of racism, but we must be resolute in finding
the courage to unite and move ahead together.
The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, together with the outcome document of the
2009 Review Conference, provide a comprehensive
framework to address the scourge of racism. Crucially,
both documents place victims at the centre of our
efforts
against
racism,
racial
discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. They contain a
genuinely universal condemnation of racism which
acknowledges the injustices of the past and forewarns
against both resurgent manifestations and new forms of
racism and intolerance.
The Declaration lists a wide range of victims and
grounds. Among the former, it speaks of the plight of
minorities, such as the Roma, of people of African and
Asian descent, of migrants and indigenous peoples.
Among the latter, it includes condemnation of stigma
and discrimination on the basis of HIV/AIDS,

11-50859

discrimination based on descent and the multiple forms
of discrimination and exclusion faced in particular by
women. In sum, the document encompasses victims,
sources, causes and forms. It deals with racism in
media and new information and communication
technologies, trafficking, migration, conflict, poverty
and internal displacement. It covers discrimination
both in the private and the public sphere. It considers
legal assistance and the provision of effective remedies
for victims and those affected by racism.
Another important feature of the Declaration is
that it not only reminds Governments of their core
human rights obligations, but details further actions
that States should take in collaboration with
parliaments, national institutions, civil society and
other partners. It also contemplates strategies of
enhanced international cooperation which involve the
United Nations and other international mechanisms.
The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action and the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference make clear that the anti-discrimination
agenda concerns and belongs to all of us irrespective of
our race, colour, descent, ethnic or national origin,
affiliation, religion or belief. Their principles are the
reliable foundations of our action, and they continue to
provide firm guidance in the face of changing
circumstances and new challenges.
Although 10 years ago, the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action presciently provided a
comprehensive framework to address contemporary
challenges, today we must confront the regrettable gap
between the commitments made at that time and the
concrete and effective action actually undertaken.
Some States have made incremental progress in
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, largely through the enactment
or amendment of constitutional protections and
domestic legislation. The importance of solid legal
regimes to protect rights and provide avenues for
remedy and redress is indisputable.
Yet, tangible progress cannot be attained without
the political will to implement and enforce such laws.
Let us pledge here and now to revitalize our efforts
nationally, regionally and globally to combat the
scourges of racism. We can begin by showing
leadership here today by underscoring that equality and
non-discrimination are fundamental principles of the
international community. They give hope to victims.

3

A/66/PV.14

We must all commit to actions at all levels that address
underlying and often structural causes of racism.

framework within which to translate this sentiment and
this recognition into action.

The road to a world free from racism is not an
easy one. Anti-discrimination work needs careful
planning and a long-term focus. It requires
commitment and persistence. In this respect, I wish to
highlight the importance of developing the national
action plans that the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action envisage, with the participation
of victims and affected groups. National action plans
are proving to be an important tool to address racism at
the domestic level. My Office has been providing
training and technical assistance in this area, and we
stand ready to assist more States in this endeavour. We
will also continue to serve as a forum for dialogue,
exchange and research on anti-discrimination issues
because we believe that informed, credible exchange
and dialogue among States, United Nations experts,
academics, parliaments, civil society and other partners
on these issues can create greater understanding and
build trust.

Looking ahead there is much more work to be
done to combat racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. I urge everyone to
summon the political will to unite on this issue of
central importance in the lives of countless victims. So
far, we have done too little too slowly. We have
allowed the global response to racism to be clouded by
politics. We must do better. The victims of racism
demand and expect this of us.

As mandated by the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights will continue to
support key mechanisms such as the Working Group of
Experts on People of African Descent, the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
Finally, we are determined to continue enhancing
anti-discrimination efforts across the United Nations. It
will be important to ally with our sister agencies to
improve
our
system-wide
coordination
on
anti-discrimination issues affecting women, children,
indigenous peoples, migrants, trafficked persons,
people living with HIV/AIDS, and others.
I wish to conclude by noting that few people in
the world today would openly deny that human beings
are born with equal rights, as the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights proclaims. We all agree that far too
many people are still victimized because they belong to
a particular group — whether national, ethnic, or
religious, or defined by gender or by descent. The
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, through
the perspective of victims, provides a comprehensive

4

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa.
President Zuma: Ten years ago, South Africa
had the honour to welcome to its shores States
Members of the United Nations and people from across
the world to attend the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance. Just under a decade before that, it
would have been inconceivable that a gathering of that
nature, discussing racism, would have taken place in
South Africa. The Conference was testimony of the
success of humankind against the scourge and demon
of racism and racial discrimination. It was also a
confirmation of the success of the international
community, represented by the United Nations, in the
struggle against the evil of racism, which the United
Nations boldly and correctly declared a crime against
humanity.
It was also symbolic that the Conference was held
on African soil, given that, in the preceding two
centuries, the African peoples had experienced untold
sufferings, brutality and inhumane treatment during the
course of colonialism, occupation and apartheid. In
Africa, the legacy of all these ills is still visible and is
part of our daily efforts to improve the lives of our
people. In Durban, the world spoke with one voice and
reaffirmed its commitment to continue to fight against
the scourge of racism and to do everything to eradicate
it. The world collectively agreed on the need for and
the significance of a comprehensive framework to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.
In this regard, the Durban Declaration and its
Programme of Action were unanimously adopted. The
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action provided
a comprehensive assessment of the state of racism,

11-50859

A/66/PV.14

racial discrimination, xenophobia and other related
intolerance in the world at the time, and offered a
collective set of actions to be undertaken to address the
challenge. South Africa appreciates the decision the
General Assembly has taken to mark the 10 years since
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action.

our political commitment at the national, regional and
international levels fully and effectively to
implementing the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action. We encourage all Member States to continue
to adopt measures at the national level to fight the
scourge of racism and effectively implement the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.

We note the progress made in the implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
and the fight against racism. However, as we meet
today, racism continues to pose a challenge in the same
way that it did in 2001. Racism and racial
discrimination continue to be a brutal attack on human
dignity and an affront to the self-worth of individuals
and have a prolonged and negative impact on their
victims.

In conclusion, racism and racial discrimination
continue to pose a challenge to humanity today, and we
need a collective effort to rid the world of this scourge.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
declaration (A/66/L.2) at the end of this plenary
meeting, renewing our political will to continue the full
and effective implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action.

We continue to reaffirm our strong conviction
that racism and racial discrimination are a negation of
the United Nations Charter and its principles. The
prevalence of racism, xenophobia and other related
intolerance would therefore be an indictment of the
Organization itself and its Member States. In this tenth
year, we must reflect with openness and honesty on the
issues that continue to divide us. There is no need to
have detractors on this question when we have all long
agreed that racism is an affront to humanity and a
negation of the principles of the United Nations.
We urge the world not to be distracted in this
noble struggle against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and other related intolerance. We should
continue with the same resolve and determination that
led to the end of slavery, colonialism and apartheid. We
welcome some of the initiatives taken to redress. We
have since 2001 seen authorities make public apologies
to victims of racism and racial discrimination in some
countries. Cultural artefacts have been returned to their
places of origin in some instances, and in some cases
reparation has been paid. However, there is still a lot of
outstanding work that must be done. Therefore, we
support the initiative to erect a permanent memorial to
honour the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade as being among the important interventions
that are urgent and necessary.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action as a
comprehensive United Nations framework for the
eradication of racism. We call on all States Members of
the United Nations and the world in general to reaffirm

11-50859

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Rahamtallah Mohammed Osman,
Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the Sudan, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Osman (Sudan): It gives me great honour to
address this High-level Meeting on behalf of the
African Group to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption by consensus of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action at the 2001
World
Conference
against
Racism,
Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in
Durban, South Africa.
The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action is the most comprehensive, action-oriented
global framework to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
The Group welcomes the progress made at the national,
regional and international levels in conformity with the
obligations and commitments of Durban. This event
undoubtedly provides a timely opportunity to assess
the progress made in implementation of the outcome of
the Conference, to identify the obstacles and
challenges encountered, and to find the appropriate
solutions they require.
Today, we not only commemorate Durban but
reaffirm and renew our firm global political
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and
the outcome of the Durban Review Conference in
2009. We are also encouraged by those Governments
that, since the adoption of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, have adopted landmark and

5

A/66/PV.14

progressive legislative and administrative measures
effectively to combat racism and racial discrimination,
to protect the rights of migrants and racial, national or
ethnic and linguistic minorities, and to combat
incitement to hatred based on religion or belief.
Despite these efforts undertaken by the
international community, Governments and local
authorities,
the
scourge
of
racism,
racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
persists and continues to result in violations of human
rights, suffering, disadvantage and violence. We are
also still concerned that there has been a diminishing
of civil liberties. We are alarmed by these assaults on
human rights and the recurrence of violent incidents of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance.
We also note the decisive steps to be taken by
some Member States, the United Nations system and
the international community at large to oppose the
persistence
of
racism,
racial
discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and to enhance
dialogue with the aim of understanding and promoting
tolerance and full respect for cultural and ethnic
diversity. These efforts must be complemented and
strengthened through responsible media awareness
campaigns and the promotion of the principles of
tolerance, mutual respect and understanding through
educational systems.
The African Group welcomes the tenth
anniversary commemoration of the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. The
African Group believes that this commemoration is a
unique opportunity to rebuild a strong international
consensus and mark the renewal of international
engagement in the struggle against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
In light of persistent challenges, we should
translate our commitment into action and take
appropriate measures to implement the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, which
constitute the most comprehensive international
framework in the fight against racism. Furthermore, it
is indispensable to address with greater resolve and
political will all forms and manifestations of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in all spheres of life and in all parts of the
world, including all those under foreign occupation.

6

The African Group is pleased that this
commemoration is well attended and that the draft
declaration (A/66/L.2) to be adopted by all
participating States at this High-level Meeting will
express the will of the international community to be
united
against
racism,
racial
discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
The Group emphasizes that the momentum
gained by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the
follow-up mechanisms, particularly within the United
Nations system, will further strengthen the Declaration
and create further impetus for the accelerated
implementation by States and other actors of the
laudable objectives encapsulated therein. The Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action adopts a victimoriented approach to the problems of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Specific recommendations are formulated to combat
discrimination against Africans and persons of African
descent, Asians and persons of Asian descent,
indigenous peoples, migrants, refugees, minorities, the
Roma and other groups.
The Group emphasizes that the pledges and
commitments made must be effectively implemented
by all States, which retain primary responsibility in this
respect. It reaffirms that the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
and the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
remain the basis and fundamental legal framework for the
effective elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
The Group reiterates that slavery and the slave
trade, including the transatlantic slave trade, new and
emerging forms of slavery such as human trafficking,
apartheid and colonialism, must never be forgotten,
and in this regard welcomes actions undertaken at the
premises of the United Nations in New York to honour
the memory of victims through the establishment of the
memorial commemorating the 200-year anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade and
slavery.
Furthermore, the Group recalls the adoption of
the resolution entitled “United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons” (resolution
64/293) and urges its implementation.
For the African Group this event will provide an
opportunity for heads of State and Government to

11-50859

A/66/PV.14

mobilize political will. It would like to see the tenth
anniversary celebrated in a fitting manner during the
round-table discussion, the culmination of which will
be the adoption of an outcome that encapsulates the
global resolve to end racism and place victims at the
centre of our deliberations.
Before I conclude, I should like to state that the
African Group supports the proposal made by His
Excellency the President of South Africa to adopt the
draft declaration (A/66/L.2) at the end of this
morning’s meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Raden Mohammad Marty Muliana
Natalegawa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
who will speak on behalf of the Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): On behalf of the
Asia-Pacific Group, allow me to begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your election to chair this Highlevel Meeting. I wish also to commend the
co-facilitators and the experts who have deliberated
over and negotiated the scope, modalities, format and
organization of this High-level Meeting, as well as the
draft political declaration (A/66/L.2) that will be the
outcome product of this event. I am confident that the
text that we will adopt has been drafted in a balanced
manner to reflect our many common concerns in the
areas of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.
Today we convene in this Hall of the United
Nations to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. It was
10 years ago that we gathered in South Africa at the
historic World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
not merely as Governments but as the peoples of the
world. The call we made from that World Conference
to the peoples of the world was that we must fight
against these prejudices with the greatest determination
and perseverance because they are a sad blight on our
common humanity.
The message from the World Conference against
Racism was crystal clear. The struggle against racism
is a struggle for human rights, dignity and the
eradication of poverty. The fact that we adopted a
Declaration and a Programme of Action underscored
the truth that if we have the political will to succeed we
can find consensus on all issues. As a follow-up, in
2009 we met again at the Durban Review Conference

11-50859

in Geneva to take stock of the implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to
see how far we had gone in the battle against racism in
all its manifestations. Collectively we resolved to
reinvigorate the political commitment of Member
States to pursue the anti-racism agenda in the face of
emerging challenges encapsulated in the outcome
document of the Review Conference (A/CONF.211/8,
chap. I).
A decade has passed and we must now ask
ourselves whether we have truly unified our efforts to
address the situation of the victims of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
identified in the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action. It is therefore a matter of great concern that
despite the efforts of many groups and many nations,
despite ample evidence of racism’s terrible toll, racism
still persists. That is why the eyes of the world,
especially the eyes of victims, are again upon us today.
We speak of finding a new unity, as the times
demand. There must therefore be a concerted effort by
all of us, particularly since new forms and
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance continue to emerge.
That is due to our joint realization that discrimination
does not go away by itself. It must be addressed
seriously, otherwise it can become a cause of social
unrest and violence. We must therefore resolve to
pursue our common goal of ensuring in all societies the
effective enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, including the victims of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance.
History is replete with terrible wrongs inflicted
through lack of respect for the equality of human
beings. This is manifested in colonialism and other
wars of conquest, slavery, genocide, apartheid, ethnic
cleansing and other atrocities. Despite victory over
apartheid, there nevertheless remains a plethora of
discriminatory laws and practices that affect the lives
of whole communities in many parts of the world. We
share the view that slavery, slave trading, colonialism
and apartheid are major historical sources and
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination and
related intolerance. These past practices and policies
are manifest today in the form of poverty,
underdevelopment, marginalization and socio-economic
exclusion, which have deeply affected developing
countries over the years.

7

A/66/PV.14

It is our profound belief that with the
mobilization of political will at national, regional and
international levels effectively to implement the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, as well
as the outcome documents of the Durban Review
Conference by our Governments in concert with all
stakeholders, inter alia civil society and the private
sector, will we be able truly to combat and curb the
scourge of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance in all spheres of life and in all
parts of the world, including all those under foreign
occupation.
In conclusion, we proclaim our commitment and
strong determination to make the fight against all forms
and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and the protection
of the victims thereof, a high priority for our respective
countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Representative of Romania, who will speak on behalf
of the Eastern European States.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.
The Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted 10 years ago, which we are now here to
commemorate, highlight the commitment of the
international community to focus its political will on
the global fight against the scourge of racism,
xenophobia and intolerance. They also showed that
countries can go beyond inherent political grievances
and unite around a common goal, namely, to put an end
to the phenomenon of racism.
We can acknowledge that no modern society,
irrespective of its geographical, cultural and
civilizational specificities or level of development, is
free from the complex manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
hatred. No country has a perfect record, no society is
beyond criticism. Therefore, our pledged commitments
in the fight against racism can be successful only
through concerted action taken at all levels — local,
national regional and international. To that end,
although some States in our Group are not participating
in today’s meeting, all countries in the Eastern
European Group remain stern and determined
supporters of the global fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and

8

are committed to continue to take measures to further
secure, at all levels in our societies, the utmost respect
for all fundamental rights and freedoms and for the
principle of universal equality.
Much has been achieved in 10 years, yet much
remains to be done. All of us in our countries at all
levels and in our respective societies, collectively and
individually, must make sure that our political
commitments are translated into actions. Action is
needed now since, in spite of all our rhetoric and good
intentions, many regrettably continue to be victims of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. All of us should therefore stay committed
and alert in addressing and pre-empting all acts of
incitement to violence, hatred and segregation. We
have the means, we just need to seize the momentum.
All our efforts aimed at combating racism,
xenophobia, discrimination, extremism and their
diverse manifestations must be guided by the full
respect for all fundamental rights and freedoms in
accordance with our obligations under international
human rights law. In that regard, universal accession
and ratification of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
the full implementation of its provisions are necessary
in order to ensure the effectiveness of the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. However, we can only note with regret that
we are still lagging behind not only in its universal
ratification but also in its full observance.
While we acknowledge the prime role of national
Governments in the fight against racism and the
implementation of the Convention, we must also note
the key role that the United Nations system plays in
our fight. We highlight the constant efforts of the
Human Rights Council, the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, and of
the relevant regional organizations in the field of
combating racism and racial discrimination. We must
also continue positively to engage civil society and the
media in complementing our concerted efforts in this
fight. Their contribution is essential since they work
alongside Governments in providing assistance to
victims of discrimination and contribute, inter alia, to
awareness-raising campaigns and research.
We have come a long way since the adoption of
the Declaration adopted in Durban 10 years ago, but

11-50859

A/66/PV.14

we still face many challenges and obstacles on the road
towards a world free of racism. However, we are
confident that everything can be overcome in the light
of reason. As Abraham Heschel, a great thinker from
our part of the world, once said, “racism is man’s
gravest threat to man — the maximum hatred for a
minimum of reason”.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the countries
in our Group will stay committed and actively engaged
in the complex fight against racism, intolerance and
discrimination. In doing so, we will stay united in our
determination to prevent these acts in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to The
Honourable Mr. Kenneth Baugh, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign
Trade of Jamaica, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Baugh (Jamaica): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States at this High-level Meeting to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
under the theme “Victims of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
recognition, justice and development”.
Ten years ago in Durban, the international
community courageously took a stand to eliminate
from our world the scourge of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other intolerance.
Today we take stock of the strides taken over the years
to achieve the goals and objectives set forth in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. We are
equally mindful that, notwithstanding our efforts, much
more needs to be done if we are fully to realize those
goals and objectives.
We note the progress achieved at the
intergovernmental level with the creation of the
Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent and the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism and the Independent Expert on
minority issues. We are conscious that many of our
Governments, at the national level, have sought to
protect the diverse and multicultural nature of their
societies. Some States have created specialized
national mechanisms to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and
to promote equality, justice and dignity, while in others
legislation, as well as national plans and policies,

11-50859

including affirmative action measures, have been
adopted that will ensure that minorities and vulnerable
groups can be fully integrated into society. We reiterate
our commitment to enhance the work and functioning
of national mechanisms to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
However, despite the progress made in combating
racism, the effective implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action has not been
satisfactory. We acknowledge that the Durban process
is a work in progress, which will require the combined
effort of every member of the international community
if we are to eliminate these atrocities from our midst.
To that end, we hope that this meeting will serve as a
catalyst for united action in formulating concrete
strategies to achieve our objective to recognize the
victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, and to provide them with
justice, dignity and a fair chance for realizing their full
potential, as well as raising racism as a global concern.
Member States from the Latin American and
Caribbean region have been supportive of, and have
actively participated in, the work to promote the goals
and objectives of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. We reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to achieving a world free of racial
intolerance and other injustices. We must be mindful
that victims in many parts of the world continue to
suffer from violence on the basis of their ethnic origin
or religious affiliation. Migrants and migrant workers
are still easy targets for manifestations of racism and
xenophobia and racial discrimination.
We therefore call upon Member States to develop
policies and programmes to protect the rights of
migrants and migrant workers. In that regard,
indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities also
suffer grave forms of racial discrimination and related
intolerance and require specific measures to promote
their participation in society and the full realization of
their human rights.
Negative stereotyping of persons based on their
religion or belief, and an increase in incidents related
to religious hatred, are still factors that must be
addressed, both at the national and international levels.
The proliferation of hate speech also remains a
challenge in many parts of the world, exacerbated by
the misuse of new technologies for mass dissemination
of negative and/or stereotypical information. It is

9

A/66/PV.14

therefore necessary for all Member States to promote
greater levels of social inclusion, which is essential in
order to reduce racial discrimination and related
intolerance.
The Member States of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States remain convinced that
intercultural dialogue, tolerance, education and respect
for diversity are useful approaches for the international
community to embark on a common and consensual
global programme of action to combat these scourges.
It is also necessary to address the root causes and to
take a broad range of preventive and corrective
measures,
including
legislative
action
where
appropriate, to eliminate acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Today’s commemoration of the tenth anniversary
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
presents another opportunity to mobilize political will
for global resolve to end racism and place victims at
the centre of our deliberations. In that context, the
Group emphasizes that renewed emphasis and adequate
funding for the follow-up mechanisms, as well as
sustained international cooperation, are indispensable
to addressing all forms and manifestations of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance.
We are pleased with the decision taken by the
General Assembly to erect a permanent memorial to
honour the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. We encourage Member States, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and private individuals
to support this and other initiatives that will serve to
enhance the visibility of the message of the Declaration
and Programme of Action. This year, as we celebrate
the International Year for People of African Descent,
the memorial takes on added significance, showcasing
our determination to ensure that this historical wrong
and its associated residual effects of racism and racial
discrimination will never again be repeated.
In conclusion, the Member States of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States reaffirm the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the
outcome (A/CONF.211/8, chap. I) of the 2009 Durban
Review Conference, as well as our commitment to its
full and effective implementation. We are convinced
that the Durban process, if given the necessary support
of all Member States, can result in the eradication of
all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia

10

and related intolerance, thus allowing people
everywhere to experience the full enjoyment of their
fundamental human rights and freedoms. We look
forward to the adoption of the draft political
declaration (A/66/L.2) at the end of this morning’s
meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Monaco, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and Other States.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
Group of Western European and Other States, on behalf
of which I have the honour to speak, has acknowledged
that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance undermine the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. By belonging
to the human family, we are born free and equal in
dignity and rights and should act towards each another
in a spirit of fellowship without making any
distinction.
In building on the progress already made, it is our
common responsibility to promote the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance — scourges that persist in all of our
countries and threaten the foundations of our
democratic societies, namely, the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
While a number of countries of our Group are not
participating in today’s event, and in spite of the fact
that some States do not participate in this process, we
all renew our unwavering commitment to pursue at
international, regional and national levels the
implementation of effective measures to fight these
scourges, to end impunity and to mainstream the
promotion of equality and equal opportunities into all
Government policies.
The Western European and Other States Group
reaffirms its solidarity with the numerous victims of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance who continue to be flouted and trampled
upon throughout the world. Each victim must be
recognized and receive the same attention.
Whatever
the source,
cause,
form or
manifestation, racism and racial discrimination
undermine human dignity and must be combated in
order to avoid the denial of human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the human person. We attach
the utmost importance to education, training and

11-50859

A/66/PV.14

prevention, as they allow for a better understanding of
the phenomena to be fought and to promote the
richness of our differences and respect for our
diversity.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our call for
the universal ratification and full and effective
implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, an
instrument to which all of the members of our Group
are parties as well as the main legal instrument to
prevent, combat and eradicate racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Sarah
White, Board President of the Mississippi Workers’
Center for Human Rights.
Ms. White (Mississippi Workers’ Center for
Human Rights): On behalf of the countless victims of
racial discrimination throughout the world, it is an
honour to carry these voices here today. I bring to the
Assembly greetings from the Mississippi Workers’
Center for Human Rights, where I serve as the
President of the Board of Directors.
The Center was founded by long-time human
rights activist Ms. Jaribu Hill in 1996. Located in the
Mississippi delta, the Center fights for the dignity and
human rights of low-wage African-American workers
and all those who languish in extreme poverty.
But I am here today as the voice of those who
have been excluded, marginalized, violated and denied
their basic human rights. When I sat on the Voices of
Victims panel at the World Conference in Durban in
2001 and then again at the Durban Review Conference
in 2009, I spoke about the history of the struggles of
Mississippi catfish workers and the battles we faced
every day for human rights and justice. I described
how we as black women had to stand on our feet for
12 hours a day in ankle-deep water that contained
chlorine and other harmful chemicals. That
contaminated water caused severe skin rashes and
other serious physical ailments. White male
supervisors would force us to speed up our work on the
assembly line so that the company could make
maximum profit. The bosses did not care about the
health and well-being of the workers. Supervisors
would terrorize us, making threats: “Speed up or lose
your job”. We were sexually and racially harassed on a
daily basis. We were denied bathroom privileges.
Those are some of the conditions that workers

11-50859

encounter every day today in the catfish and poultry
plants. These indignities are suffered by us as workers
because of our skin colour and economic class.
I am here today to let everyone know that we rose
up and fought to get justice and human rights. We held
labour strikes and won battles and began a workers’
rights movement all over the state. Plants began to
organize. Although we won many battles, we still must
continue the struggle. There is racial profanity,
intimidation and harassment on a daily basis. Even
today, extrajudicial killings still take place. Workplaces
are still racially segregated. Black workers are still
assigned to the dirtiest and most dangerous jobs and
forced to work in conditions that look a lot like slavery.
People are still dying to make a living.
The Center started 15 years ago by assisting lowwage African-American workers, but we help all
workers. We give workers a platform to organize
themselves to fight against racial injustices. We
educate them about their rights and about laws. We
also work on housing and other community issues. We
work through a network of lawyers, organization
educators, teachers, women’s groups, social workers
and everyday people who are dedicated to protecting
human rights. Students from all across the United
States and throughout the world come to the Center as
interns and help us to work on cases, educate workers,
put out flyers in the community, work with prisoners
and people just released from prison to make sure their
rights are not violated when it comes to jobs. They help
us to do all the groundwork in home work and
community outreach.
All kinds of people come to help: rich and poor,
white and black, indigenous, from different
backgrounds and different religions. The Center is a
space for the community to come together to educate
workers. Most importantly, we work with youth to
fight injustices and prevent discrimination in the
future. We hold town hall meetings to discuss
educational issues in the community, such as the fact
that there are not enough schoolbooks. We work very
hard with little. Funding is a big concern for us.
The World Conference against Racism and the
Durban Review Conference are experiences that I will
never forget. I saw that the work we do is very much
the kind of work that every civil society group does
throughout the world. I know that people are going
through the exact same thing, only in a different place.

11

A/66/PV.14

I remember meeting so many amazing people in
Durban, South Africa. I saw people from throughout
the world standing up for their rights. I met other
victims of racial discrimination. Their courage was so
powerful. I keep in touch with many of them and we
help each other out still today.
The Conference gave me hope that I could go
back and continue to fight in my community. I think I
have done that. I really want us to come together on the
same front to make sure that Governments have open
ears to these issues that affect us as human beings.
Politicians must be held accountable for what they do.
After we elect them, we must make sure that they
remember the needs of the victims and protect our
rights.
Most countries have not advanced very far from
where they were 10 years ago in Durban. There is still
massive
unemployment
and
problems
with
discrimination in the education and prison systems.
There are still problems with health care and workers’
rights. Today is a chance for Governments to come
together and rise up against racism. I hope that they do
not waste this chance. The Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action are important in helping give
people hope and opportunity. This fight is about our
struggle — the struggle of people of African descent,
people of Asian descent, indigenous people, women,
children, minorities — and our strength comes from
organizing and bringing our voices together on one
platform to make the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action work.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
inscribed on my list.

12

As members will recall, the Assembly decided in
its resolution 65/279 that the High-level Meeting
would adopt the draft political declaration (A/66/L.2)
at the closing plenary meeting. Members will also
recall that the President of the Republic of South
Africa and the Under-Secretary of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, who spoke on behalf of
the African States, proposed this morning that
consideration of and action on the political declaration
should take place at this opening plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft political declaration at this opening plenary
meeting?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/66/L.2, entitled “United against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft resolution A/66/L.2?
Draft resolution A/66/L.2 was adopted (resolution
66/3).
The President (spoke in Arabic): On this
occasion, I should like to express my sincere thanks to
Mr. Tommo Monthe, Permanent Representative of
Cameroon, and Ms. Isabelle Picco, Permanent
Representative of Monaco, who so ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations so as to bring them to a
successful conclusion. I am sure that members of the
General Assembly join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

11-50859
