S/PV.9022

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9022nd meeting

Tuesday, 26 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
(S/2022/330)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33094 (E)
*2233094*

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

that five foreign armies operate in different sites of
the Syrian conflict is concerning. Regular incidents
between or involving international actors are troubling.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021) (S/2022/330)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Nirvana Shawky, Regional
Director for the Middle East and North Africa, CARE
International.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/330, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Syria is a hot conflict, not a frozen
one. We have seen air strikes in the northwest pick
up again and intensified clashes around Afrin and
the northeast, and there are continuing exchanges
of rocket fire and shelling across all front lines,
improvised explosive devices, car bombs and other
security incidents.
The conflict also continues to give rise to threats
to international peace and security of the first order.
Notwithstanding their legal status, the sheer fact
2/23

26/04/2022

For instance, this month saw, once again, strikes in
Syria attributed to Israel, drone strikes in the northeast
attributed to Turkey, air strikes in Idlib and west of the
Euphrates attributed to Russia and reports of rocket fire
on United States troops in Deir-ez-Zor. I worry that any
of those flashpoints could be further exacerbated by
heightened geopolitical tensions outside of Syria.
Terrorism is still a significant threat, with at least
two listed terrorist groups carrying out operations or
holding territory. It is worrying that attacks by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are picking up once
again, following a relative low in February.
Syria is still among the greatest humanitarian crises
of our era. We should be appalled at what this means for
Syrian civilians, who continue to be killed by violence.
Humanitarian suffering is at its highest level since the
conflict began, and millions are displaced inside and
outside of the country. We should be deeply concerned
about what this scale of suffering will translate into in
terms of the fabric of Syrian society and Syrian and
regional stability if there is no political path out of the
conflict.
My message today is simple: the Security Council
must focus on Syria. The current strategic stalemate
on the ground and Syria’s absence from the headlines
should not mislead anyone into thinking that the
conflict needs less attention or fewer resources, or that
the political solution is not urgent. Indeed, a conflict of
this scale requires a comprehensive political solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
A constitutional track could contribute to such a
solution, but to do so it must build trust and confidence.
On 25 March, we concluded the seventh session of the
Syrian Constitutional Committee. The session was
under way when I briefed the Council last time (see
S/PV.9003). By that stage, the Committee had spent
four days discussing draft constitution texts, presented
by delegations on four basic constitutional principles.
The expectation was that on the fifth and final day,
delegations would submit revisions to the texts they had
submitted to reflect the content of those discussions,
and those revisions would then be discussed by the
Committee members. I can report that delegations
offered, at least, some revisions to some of the texts
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

presented. Some of those amendments indicated an
attempt to reflect the content of the discussions and
narrow differences. Still, others contained no changes.
Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar has since
been to Damascus and Istanbul for further discussions
with the two Constitutional Committee co-Chairs. I
have today issued invitations for the eighth session, to
be held from 28 May to 3 June here in Geneva. In doing
so, I have affirmed the methodology, including the
expectation that revisions will be submitted on the fifth
day, to reflect the content of the discussion, and I stress
the importance of that expectation being fulfilled.
I also appeal to both co-Chairs and their delegations,
and the Middle Third, to submit any new titles to my
Office as early as possible before the next session
and to make a good-faith effort to identify titles and
prepare texts for them for discussion during the session
and revisions on the fifth day that focus on matters
on which most Syrians could agree. That spirit would
make meaningful the commitment stated in the terms
of reference to which both the Government of Syria
and the Syrian National Coalition opposition agreed,
namely, that the Constitutional Committee’s work shall
be governed by a sense of compromise and constructive
engagement, aimed at reaching general agreement
among its members. Only with that positive intent will
the process move forward.
I have spoken of the suffering of the Syrian people
and, on the humanitarian front, I urge all concerned
to expand cross-line and cross-border assistance to
enhance efforts for early recovery to build resilience,
in line with resolution 2585 (2021) and to be generous
with the resources needed for humanitarian work.
However, we have to go beyond stemming the tide of
deepening suffering. Many of the things from which
Syrians suffer from are actually inherently political
in nature. They require difficult steps by political
actors, involving negotiations and give and take. They
ultimately require the comprehensive implementation
of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015).
Tens of thousands of Syrians remain detained,
abducted or missing, and their plight is a central element
of suffering among Syrians. As High Commissioner
Bachelet told the General Assembly this month, the
impact of that unresolved issue on women relatives
and children is particularly severe. As we are often
reminded, without progress on this file many Syrians
will be unable even to begin to think of moving on,

S/PV.9022

and sustainable peace will remain elusive. The lack of
progress is frustrating because all sides say that they
indeed agree that action is needed, and all sides stand
to benefit from progress. We need modest but concrete
steps on this file that can help build the necessary
confidence for bigger steps.
The displacement crisis that I already mentioned is
another key layer of suffering. While the displacement
caused by the war in Ukraine is tragically catching
up, Syria remains the largest displacement crisis in
the world, with 6.8 million refugees and 6.9 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs), half the pre-war
population — a whole generation born and brought
up in displacement. Yet, even as conditions worsen
in many places of displacement, we see little sign of
returns. Indeed, some data show that the rate of return
continues to decrease. We need to start to address
the fears and concerns that Syrian refugees and IDPs
express, and which prevent them from returning. That
will require concrete steps from a range of Syrian and
international stakeholders in various areas, including
on issues inherent to resolution 2254 (2015).
Syrians across the country still face a devastating
economic crisis after more than a decade of war and
conflict, corruption, mismanagement, the Lebanese
financial crisis, the coronavirus disease, sanctions and
now the war in Ukraine and its economic spillover.
The World Food Programme notes that between 2019
and 2021, the price of basic food items increased by
a staggering 800 per cent. Syrians have been forced
to ration energy products or to choose whether to buy
food, fuel or medicine. That economic predicament will
only fuel the displacement crisis and the humanitarian
crisis, with knock-on effects for stability in the region
and beyond.
We can always do more to alleviate the worst
effects of this crisis with humanitarian assistance
and, indeed, we should continue to do so. However,
there are plainly also other steps that can be taken to
address the various measures and dynamics, internal or
external, that contribute to the crisis. I believe that in
areas such as those and potentially others, too, it should
be possible to identify concrete, reciprocal, verifiable
measures that could be taken in parallel and that could
begin to shift conflict dynamics. In so doing, we would
create a safe, calm and neutral environment and, in
the process, explore how a broader political process
could be constructed to tackle all issues addressed in
resolution 2254 (2015).

22-330943/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

We must remain focused on achieving a
comprehensive political resolution to the conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), while respecting
the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria and enabling the Syrian people to
realize their legitimate aspirations.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: As the eyes of the world turn to other
conflicts, Syria is on the verge of becoming yet another
forgotten crisis. Yet millions of Syrians struggle each
month to survive, to feed their families and to provide
a future for their children. For many, the situation has
never been more dire since violence erupted in 2011.
Fighting in many areas continues, and civilians,
including women and children, are being injured or
killed. In February and March, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights verified
the death of 92 civilians, including 25 children. I wish
we did not have to say this every month. Civilians must
be protected, and constant efforts made to spare their
lives. The obligations under international humanitarian
law in that regard could not be any clearer, but they
continue to be flouted.
We also need to address the dire situation of
Al-Hol camp residents, most of them women and
children. Murders, looting, and vandalism occur
frequently — five women were killed in the camp in the
past week alone. The camp is simply not safe. Living
conditions also remain precarious. Residents struggle
to get food, medical care, clean water, protection and
other basic services. I reiterate the call for the full
repatriation of third-country nationals from camps
in north-east Syria, as well as for improvements to
security that are consistent with the civilian character
of the camp.
The economic crisis continues unabated. Fuel
shortages and lack of electricity affect the delivery of
basic services, including in water and sanitation, health
and education. Food and fuel prices are spiralling
higher every month, putting the basic necessities for a
healthy and dignified life even further out of reach for
millions of people. Food prices rose another 18 per cent
between February and March. The economic crisis and
related cuts in family expenses often disproportionally
affect women’s and children’s mobility and access to
4/23

26/04/2022

basic services, including to reproductive-health and
protection services.
Reliable access to sufficient and safe water across
the north remains a major challenge. Unprecedented
water shortages last year are already taking their toll on
farmers and livestock producers. Some subdistricts in
the north-east are reporting harvest losses of over 75 per
cent. The loss of crops and agricultural livelihoods will
likely worsen already high rates of food insecurity and
malnutrition. Women and girls are disproportionately
affected owing to their prominent role in the agriculture
sector.
For Syrians living through the twelfth year of this
crisis, the future looks bleak. As the economic and
food-security outlook worsens, the resources available
for our emergency response are dwindling. We simply
do not have the money needed. For far too many
people, we are not able to provide the bare minimum in
assistance. It is clear that we cannot continue business
as usual. We must support Syrians in need to find a
more sustainable path forward.
As the Emergency Relief Coordinator said in his
most recent briefing to this Council (see S/PV.9003),
we have significantly scaled up our plans to invest
in resilience and early recovery. Over 25 per cent
of the overall request for humanitarian aid to Syria
will contribute to early recovery and resilience, as
featured in 570 projects in our humanitarian appeal
for Syria this year. For example, to improve access to
education in newly accessible areas of Raqqa, UNICEF
rehabilitated 69 classrooms and three water, sanitation
and hygiene facilities over the past two months,
benefiting 1,100 students. UNICEF plans this year
to increase the resilience of at least 10,000 younger
children by supporting them through access to early
childhood education. Such initiatives as these will
enable vulnerable Syrians to lead more dignified lives,
give children hope and reduce the need for assistance
in the longer run.
But the challenges remain enormous. There
are more than 2.4 million children out of school in
Syria, and, unless we are significantly scale up our
support, even more are at risk of dropping out. Rapid
and substantial investments are now required to help
us break the vicious cycle of suffering, violence and
despair. We count on the generous support of donors
and the cooperation of the Syrian authorities.
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

We are expanding access. Three cross-line
convoys have now deployed to north-west Syria. The
third convoy crossed conflict lines on 30 March.
These convoys delivered food and nutrition support
to children and carried other essential humanitarian
items, including health supplies. We are working to see
further interagency convoys deploy in May, and we are
continuing to work to improve the distribution of this
vital aid.
This is important progress, but it is modest in
the face of the tremendous needs, and the United
Nations will continue to work with all relevant parties
to expand it. We are planning to extend our initial
six-month plan for regular and sustained cross-line
deliveries to the end of the year. We need the continued
support of all concerned parties to make these missions
timely and predictable. In the north-east, the United
Nations should be given the space to coordinate the
humanitarian response from within the country from
its hub in Qamishli.
A staggering 4.1 million people in north-west
Syria need humanitarian aid. Almost a million
people — mostly women and children — are living in
tents, half of which are being used beyond their normal
lifespan. These people depend on us to survive. They
deserve to live with dignity.
Last year, the United Nations dispatched some 800
trucks of cross-border aid each month, consistently
reaching 2.4 million people. While current crossline missions complement the massive cross-border
operation, they cannot substitute its size or scope at
this point.
When it comes to delivering life-saving aid to
people in need across Syria, all channels should remain
open and available. The renewal of the United Nations
cross-border authorization in July remains essential to
saving lives in north-west Syria. I echo the call of the
Secretary-General for the Security Council to maintain
consensus on renewing resolution 2585 (2021) in July
this year. What he said at the time of his call remains
entirely relevant: there is a moral and humanitarian
imperative to do so. Ultimately, our actions need to
translate into a better future for the people of Syria.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Shawky.
Ms. Shawky: I thank members for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council today on

S/PV.9022

behalf of my organization, CARE International, which
is an independent development and humanitarian
organization operating in more than 100 countries
globally since 1945.
CARE has been working in Syria since 2013. In
total, we have reached more than 9 million people since
the beginning of the crisis. We partner with Syrian
organizations across the country, and we also implement
programmes directly. We have thousands of people
working day in and day out in the north-east and northwest of Syria, providing food, access to clean drinking
water, shelter, health service assistance and education,
and supporting women’s economic empowerment. All
our programmes are planned and scrutinized through a
gender lens to implement and promote gender justice in
all stages of our interventions. We strive to strengthen
people’s resilience and support them in adapting to the
recurring shocks and stresses that come with more than
a decade of conflict.
As the world experiences economic breakdown
from rising inflation, astronomical food and energy
prices and growing crises, people in the Middle East
are struggling to keep their head above water. For the
Syrian people, who are now in the eleventh year of an
ongoing conflict, the situation is exceptionally dire.
Early this year, CARE conducted a rapid gender
analysis across northern Syria to better understand
the impacts of the conflict on women and girls. The
respondents told us that they resort to very high-risk
coping strategies in order to survive: they reduce their
food intake, as Mr. Pedersen just highlighted; they
increase household debts; and they sell the few assets
they might still have left.
There are three staggering findings that I would
like to highlight to the Council.
First, 60 per cent of the people are reducing their
food intake to ensure that their children are fed. People
also compromise on the quality of food, unable to buy
vegetables or even cooking oil. Currently, food rations
are approximately 50 per cent of the internationally
recommended dietary intake.
Many of the women we spoke to told us that they
are collapsing. One of them is Dalal, a displaced
mother in north-western Syria. Dalal told us: “My kids
are hungry. We have not tasted any fruit or vegetables
for more than two months now.” Without additional
funding beyond June this year, food rations will be

22-330945/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

cut further and beneficiary coverage is expected to
reduce by 2 million people in order to stretch available
resources until the end of the year.
The second area of concern I would like to share
with the Council is water and sanitation. Only 35 per
cent of those women we spoke to have access to safe
toilets. Collecting water can take more than an hour
and most women rely on a male family member to fetch
water, simply because it is unsafe to do otherwise.
Bayan, who lives with her children in a camp in northwestern Syria, told us that she can bathe her children
only once every 10 days.
The third concern is access to health care, as half of
the health facilities across northern Syria — including
mental health clinics — have been destroyed. Health
needs in the region were immense even before the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) struck and we have
struggled to respond to the pandemic since then. We
should all be alarmed by the latest report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the fact that, as of March 2022, only 4.4 per cent of
the population in north-western Syria had been fully
vaccinated against COVID-19.
Unfortunately, it is clear that the gap between
humanitarian needs and the resources required to meet
them was already growing into a chasm, even before
Syrians and their neighbours in the region began to feel
the impacts of the Ukraine crisis. I particularly want to
highlight the situation of children.
From CARE’s recent rapid gender analysis, 71 per
cent of the communities we spoke to told us that child
and early forced marriage is a growing problem. We are
also seeing increasing rates of child labour, particularly
as the economic situation continues to decline. In short,
we are collectively failing to safeguard the future of
generations to come in Syria. As though that were
not enough, the more than 5 million people in Syria
today who directly depend on the Euphrates River
are at risk of losing all access to drinking water and
water for agriculture. Climate change and conflict are
compounding water security for millions of people
in north-eastern Syria. This is, in fact, north-eastern
Syria’s worst drought in 70 years.
At the same time, we must not discount the dire
humanitarian needs throughout the whole of Syria.
As of this month, 14.6 million Syrians are in need of
assistance and protection. That is a staggering increase
of 1.2 million people compared to last year alone. A
6/23

26/04/2022

few days ago, the World Food Programme also reported
that three out of every four households are unable to
meet their basic needs. It is easy to disassociate from
those figures, but in reality the lack of political will
and reductions in funding mean that people’s coping
capacities are quickly eroding.
Despite that, the humanitarian community remains
obligated to respond to the humanitarian imperative
to ease the suffering of our fellow citizens in Syria.
It is essential that humanitarian access not become an
annual obstruction to our responsibility as humanitarian
organizations. The ability to reach vulnerable families
through the most direct, efficient and timely modalities
is not a nice thing to have but a matter of life and death.
To achieve that, we need the Security Council, at a
minimum, to reauthorize resolution 2585 (2021) for at
least another 12 months.
Why is the reauthorization of that resolution
important? Allow me to highlight three reasons.
First, humanitarian needs are growing, not
shrinking. Now is the time to increase lifesaving
assistance. The United Nations cross-border operation
cannot be ended without a long-term and concerted
commitment to addressing the challenges Syrians are
facing, which is, in turn, predicated on the Syrian
conflict ending.
Secondly, we have stated and continue to believe
that the size and scale of the massive United Nations
cross-border operation currently in place cannot be
replicated by non-governmental organizations or any
other modalities.
Thirdly, we strongly support a continued
commitment to early recovery and resilience
programming. That will make schools available for
children, allow hospitals to reopen and generate
livelihood opportunities for families. Then and only
then will mothers like Dalal be able to buy the food she
needs to sustain her family until the time comes when
she and countless others can return home safely.
Additionally, in two weeks, the United Nations,
civil society, policymakers and donors will come
together for the sixth Brussels Conference. We urge the
organizers and participating States, first and foremost,
to listen to the voices of Syrians and Syrian civil
society, who must be at the centre of any discussions
and decisions about the future of Syria. At this stage in
the crisis, listening and being accountable to Syrians
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

should be non-negotiable. We need to come prepared
to turn the important outcomes of that dialogue into
action, with funding commitments that meet the
urgency of the moment.
In conclusion, I wish to leave the Council not
with a sense of hopelessness, but rather inspired
and challenged to use the tools it already has at its
disposal — namely, resources and diplomacy — to
catalyse a Syrian-centred aid and policy response. The
next few months present several key opportunities to
work collectively to meet the challenges faced by Syria
today. The renewed authorization of resolution 2585
(2021), as well as a renewed commitment to emergency
and long-term funding for Syria, can help us achieve
that outcome and provide the support that the Syrian
people deserve.
The President: I thank Ms. Shawky for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings. My delegation would
also like to express its gratitude to Ms. Shawky, not
only for her detailed briefing but, most importantly for
the life-saving work done by her organization and so
many other international humanitarian organizations
operating in the difficult environment in Syria.
Ms. Shawky said that she did not want to leave us
hopeless, but the crisis she has described in Syria is
certainly staggering. Nearly 15 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance, and the number is
increasing, not decreasing, while 90 per cent of the
people in Syria are facing extreme poverty. As she
described, it is clear that vulnerable populations are
having to make horrible choices between paying for
food, medicine, fuel, education or housing. I agree. We
all need to do better for the Syrian people.
Last year the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2585 (2021), underscoring our
shared imperative to address the humanitarian crisis.
The United States is firmly committed to fully
implementing all aspects of the resolution, including
by providing financial support for early recovery. We
support all modalities to enable aid to reach those in
need, and we welcomed the cross-line convoy to the
north-west in March. Those missions are not easy to
undertake, and we know that they pose great risks to

S/PV.9022

the humanitarian personnel. We are very grateful to the
United Nations and others who worked collectively to
make those deliveries happen.
Yet I believe that as we heard, it is undeniable that
cross-line aid still cannot meet the vast needs of Syria’s
population. The cross-border mechanism remains
an irreplaceable lifeline for millions of Syrians. The
United Nations has consistently demonstrated that it
has the ability to facilitate the transparent delivery of
humanitarian aid into north-western Syria, and there is
no substitute for the 1,000 truckloads that transit Bab
Al-Hawa with food, medicine and supplies that reach
millions every month. The Council must reauthorize
and expand the cross-border humanitarian mandate
this summer. Without that reauthorization, millions
more will be subjected to even greater deprivation
and hardship. I agree with the Secretary-General, just
quoted by the Assistant Secretary-General as saying
that the renewal of resolution 2285 (2021) is a moral
and humanitarian imperative.
Next month, as we heard from Ms. Shawky, in
addition to our work here in the Council the European
Union and the United Nations will co-host the sixth
Brussels conference on supporting the future of Syria
and the region. It will be an opportunity to demonstrate
our continued commitment to the Syrian people and
the communities that host refugees. The United States
strongly encourages robust pledges to address the
increasing humanitarian needs in Syria and assist the
host countries in the region.
While we work collectively to address the
humanitarian crisis, we must acknowledge the primary
cause of the 11 years of conflict. It is what the Al-Assad
regime has perpetrated on its own people. We commend
the United Nations and all humanitarian actors who
continue to work tirelessly to address the devastating
reality for millions of people, but humanitarian aid
continues to be only a stopgap. The most effective and
sustainable way to resolve the humanitarian situation is
through a nationwide ceasefire and a political solution,
as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). To that end, the
United States appreciates the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen and his team to promote an inclusive political
process. We support the Constitutional Committee
as a mechanism for dialogue. We urged the regime’s
delegation to the Constitutional Committee to engage
meaningfully in line with the format agreed by all
participants and not to obstruct the talks.

22-330947/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

In addition to the efforts through the Constitutional
Committee, I would like to urge Special Envoy
Pedersen to continue to redouble his efforts with regard
to all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), including on
the protracted issue of people arbitrarily detained or
missing. As Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, said earlier this
month, there has been a clear lack of progress on this
file, even as we are entering the twelfth year of the
conflict. During the Human Rights Council’s fortyninth session, the United States joined other members
of the Council in condemning the ongoing abuses in
Syria, including abuses of detainees. At least 152,000
persons are still missing or arbitrarily detained in
Syria, and tens of thousands have been subjected
to torture and ill-treatment and lack access to legal
representation and medical care in detention. We await
the United Nations recommendations for measures
aimed at enhancing attention in order to hasten the
release of those arbitrarily detained souls in Syria. And
we urge those with influence on the Al-Assad regime
to encourage it to undertake large-scale unilateral
releases, including of women, children and the disabled,
to cease additional arbitrary detentions, enforced
disappearances and egregious abuses against prisoners
and allow immediate unhindered access to third-party
prison monitors and medical services for all detainees.
In conclusion, pursuing accountability and justice
is essential both to building confidence in the political
process that we called for in resolution 2254 (2015) and
to securing the stable, just and enduring peace that the
Syrian people so need and deserve.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Geir Pedersen and Joyce Msuya
to the meeting and thank them for their briefings. We
also listened to Nirvana Shawky’s comments.
On the political track, we note the holding in
Geneva of the seventh session of the small body of
the Constitutional Committee from 21 to 25 March.
It is important that Syrians have the opportunity
to engage in direct dialogue and discuss the future
foundations of their own State. We believe that there is
no alternative to continuing the Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process, with the assistance of the
United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We
believe it is important to ensure that the Special Envoy
adheres to his mandate as laid out in resolution 2254
(2015) and especially that he engages more actively
with the Syrian parties. I say that because we have a
8/23

26/04/2022

growing number of questions about the Special Envoy’s
attempts to advance his step-for-step initiative, whose
specific content, participants and added value are still
unclear. After all, both Damascus and the opposition
reject his ideas. I must confess that we are becoming
increasingly concerned that such a scenario could
have a very negative impact on the effectiveness of
the Special Envoy’s efforts to support the work in the
Constitutional Committee, including in the context of
the preparations for its next meeting.
Despite the fact that there have been no large-scale
hostilities in Syria since March 2020, the situation on
the ground remains volatile. Tensions persist around the
Idlib de-escalation zone, which Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
militants have turned into a terrorist enclave where
they are essentially holding Syrian civilians hostage. At
the same time, we are seeing attempts to whitewash the
terrorists by including them in the pseudo-authorities
being created in Idlib. That should fool no one.
Categorizing terrorists as good or bad is impermissible.
Regular clashes are occurring on the perimeter of
three other zones of Turkish operations in northern Syria.
The events around the Al-Sinaa prison in Al-Hasakah
earlier this year were another clear confirmation of the
significant strengthening of the terrorists east of the
Euphrates, where the virtual inaction of the United
States and its allies has allowed fighters from the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to raise their heads.
The security zone at Al-Tanf occupied by Washington
is another source of threats. Militants prepared and
trained by American instructors are launching raids
against Syrian forces and detaining refugees in Rukban,
blocking humanitarian assistance’s access to the camp.
Another serious destabilizing factor is Israel’s arbitrary
rocket attacks, which are violating Syria’s air space
and that of Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq. According to
various reports there have been approximately 40 such
attacks in the past year, resulting in victims among
both Syrian servicemen and civilians, including women
and children.
Western countries’ suffocating unilateral sanctions
and politicized approaches to providing humanitarian
assistance have continued to worsen the socioeconomic
situation in Syria. Food prices have reached new highs,
the Syrian pound is collapsing and the numbers of
those in urgent need have already reached a record
14.6 million. We can see that the Western States’
illegitimate sanctions policies against a number of
countries, including Syria, whose policies are not to
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the liking of Washington and its satellites, have long
ago become a inhumane war against civilians using
economic coercion instead of guns and shells.
We note that the United Nations 2022 humanitarian
plan for Syria provides for a considerable share — 25 per
cent — of early-recovery projects to be allocated to
the restoration of medical and educational facilities
and water-supply systems. However, we have seen in
practice that those plans often remain substantially
underfunded, and the implementation of development
and reconstruction projects is often constricted by
donors’ politically aimed preconditions. Largely as a
result of those factors, more than half of all Syrians are
still living in areas that need to be cleared of mines,
and a third of households have no more than two hours
of electricity a day. It is notable that we are seeing this
unacceptable situation nine months after the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2585 (2021), which is supposed
to establish regular domestic access throughout Syria
and boost its early recovery. It is particularly significant
that during that time only three cross-line convoys have
been able to access Idlib, and no supplies at all have
reached northern Syria from Damascus.
As a justification, we are always hearing about the
lack of necessary agreement from the aforementioned
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists and complaints about
unsafe working conditions for humanitarian workers on
the ground. We view all that as a basic unwillingness
to address the problem of humanitarian deliveries from
Damascus, including to Idlib. There is no point in
pretending that in such circumstances we see any real
reasons to renew the cross-border resolution.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I am making this
statement today on behalf of the co-penholders of the
Syria humanitarian file, Norway and Ireland. I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya Mpanju, and in
particular Ms. Shawky. Their excellent briefings today
have once again made clear the breadth and depth of the
humanitarian needs on the ground across Syria.
More than 11 years after its outbreak, the terrible
conflict in Syria continues. In February and March
alone a further 92 civilians were killed, including 25
children. Not only do lives continue to be lost, but
access to basic services remains perilous for many
Syrians. In particular, we remain concerned about
the attacks on health-care and education personnel
and facilities. We call on all parties to the conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law

S/PV.9022

and to protect civilian infrastructure and civilians,
including those working in education, health services,
the media and humanitarian operations. Such violations
of international humanitarian law are unacceptable.
Humanitarian needs throughout Syria are at their
highest level ever. A staggering 12 million people in
Syria are food-insecure, including more than 75 per cent
of the population in the north-west. Food prices continue
to reach record highs, as we heard in the briefing. Men,
women and children go hungry every day as families
face the choice between eating and staying warm.
Twenty-five per cent of children in 58 districts across
Syria are stunted. Stunting is a major public health
issue that will have severe long-term effects unless
urgent action is taken. Those children, who have known
nothing but war, are at risk of irreversible damage to
their physical and cognitive development. The food
insecurity is exacerbated by the economic crisis, which
puts women and girls at particular risk. Gender-based
violence is a continuing threat. The increase in child
marriages reflects the desperation of families to find
money, while the rise in suicides among women speaks
to the hopeless reality of many lives on the ground. It is
vital that the United Nations and the Security Council
continue to strive to reach those who are experiencing
such severe challenges daily across Syria.
Last July the Council collectively adopted
resolution 2585 (2021), which recalled the need
for full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
We welcome the ongoing efforts to implement that
resolution. As co-penholders, Ireland and Norway
strongly support the use of all modalities to supply
aid to the significant number of Syrians in need. We
welcomed the third cross-line delivery, which took
place during this period, and I commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies for their efforts to advance
cross-line deliveries and urge further progress. We call
on all the parties to support cross-line deliveries, grant
the necessary security guarantees and allow the safe
passage of cross-line convoys and their personnel.
We welcome the significant progress made in terms
of early-recovery activities during the reporting period.
We thank the United Nations for identifying significant
opportunities in its programming for investment in
early recovery, with 26 per cent of the total requests
for assistance targeting early recovery and resilience.
Major donors such as the European Union are stepping
up their support and investment for early recovery, and

22-330949/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

thousands of civilians are already benefiting from the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and utilities, sewage
networks and irrigation networks. We encourage
continued efforts to increase support to early recovery
in all of Syria. Aid provided through the cross-border
operation also remains indispensable. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/330) makes clear, millions in
the north-west rely on that lifeline for vital support.
It is clear that at this point there is no alternative that
could replicate the scale and scope of this operation.
Relieving the desperate and ever-growing humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people will continue to be our
guiding principle. Syrians, who have already borne 11
years of conflict and hardship, deserve every effort of
the Security Council to mitigate their suffering.
I would now like to turn to the political file in
my national capacity. I thank Geir Pedersen for his
briefing and his ongoing work on the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). We want to commend his
continued efforts on the Constitutional Committee and
look forward to hearing his report of the next meeting,
planned for the week of 28 May. Ireland renews its
call to the Syrian authorities to engage in meaningful
discussions leading to substantive outcomes. During
last month’s session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, we heard from Syrian women. Their right
to determine the future of their country cannot be
overstated. For that right to be fulfilled, nothing less
than their full, equal and meaningful participation in
all aspects of the political process will suffice. We
believe lasting peace can be achieved only with Syrian
women in the room and at the negotiating table. We
support Geir Pedersen’s engagement with the Women’s
Advisory Board.
Ireland remains deeply concerned about the fragile
security situation in several parts of Syria, particularly
the north-west. We renew our calls for a nationwide
ceasefire and call on all the parties, particularly the
Syrian authorities, to cease all indiscriminate attacks and
direct attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. It
is reprehensible that grave violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including torture and sexual and gender-based violence,
continue to be documented across Syria. Ireland
supports all efforts towards accountability, including
through the Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
10/23

26/04/2022

Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We
commend national efforts to assist in tackling impunity,
such as the proceedings in Koblenz, Germany, which
can supplement those at the international level.
The forced disappearance of individuals is one of
the cruellest tactics of war. Ireland urges the immediate
release of those arbitrarily detained and the clarification
of the fate and whereabouts of the missing, whose
families are entitled to know the truth. We call for
immediate access for humanitarian actors to detention
centres and look forward to the Secretary-General’s
study on bolstering efforts to locate the missing,
identify remains and support families, as mandated in
General Assembly resolution 76/228.
In conclusion, the political process called for in
resolution 2254 (2015) can succeed only if accompanied
by true accountability and justice, which are essential
if the Syrian people are to achieve a stable, just and
lasting peace.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank both Mr. Geir Pedersen
and Ms. Joyce Msuya for their briefings today. We also
thank Ms. Nirvana Shawky for her briefing.
Just as the Syrian people recently commemorated the
seventy-sixth anniversary of the country’s evacuation
day, we hope that one day they will also overcome the
ongoing crisis in Syria in a way that preserves Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
After more than a decade of war in Syria, it is now
imperative for us to reconsider how the Security Council
has handled this file. Over the past several years,
polarization and existing divisions in the Council have
caused paralysis. In addition, the periodic meetings of
the Council on Syria have been confined to a repetition
of national positions without a serious discussion on
a peaceful solution that meets the aspirations of the
Syrian people.
Turning to the political situation, we emphasize
the importance of all parties engaging in negotiations
and dialogue, particularly through the work of the
Constitutional Committee. It is important that the
discussion focus on common constitutional elements
and for that to be through a Syrian-led and Syrianowned process. We also welcome the agreement to
hold the eighth round of talks in May, and we urge the
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9022

Committee to continue its work periodically so that all
parties can engage in substantive discussions.

meaningful discussions in order to resolve the Syrian
crisis, rather than merely managing it.

Progress in the political process requires addressing
security challenges, including through de-escalation
and by securing a ceasefire throughout Syria. That is
particularly pertinent given the recent deterioration
in the security situation, as seen in Al-Hol camp and
in the recent increase in murders and violence against
women. In that regard, it is important to preserve the
humanitarian foundations and purpose of the camp,
while also addressing the root causes of extremism
and terrorism that threaten the security and stability
of Syria and the region, particularly given attacks by
Da’esh against civilians in Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah
and eastern Homs.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I should like to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his tireless
efforts and his briefing today. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya and Ms. Shawky for their
updated information.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we underline
the importance of focusing on providing basic needs
and essential services to the Syrian people, including
electricity, water and food. We also note that the living
conditions in Syria remain difficult, particularly
given the unprecedented rise in the prices of basic
commodities due to the economic crisis in Syria, which
coincides with increasing international prices of food
and energy, in addition to the significant damage to
the electricity sector as a result of terrorism and war.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates supports the
efforts to increase early recovery projects in Syria.
We would also like to specifically draw attention
to the difficult conditions of women and girls in
Syria, which is manifested in the alarming increase
in suicide among women and the continued crimes of
sexual violence. We stress the importance of providing
those women with the necessary support to alleviate
their suffering.
As the July renewal of the cross-border aid
mechanism to Syria approaches, we hope that the
Council will consider the matter in an objective and
logical manner. We need to cooperate on this file,
regardless of any differences on other files, to ensure
that aid reaches those in need, both through crossborder and crossline operations. In that context, the
United Arab Emirates welcomes the crossing of the
third humanitarian aid convoy from Aleppo to northwest Syria, based on resolution 2585 (2021).
In conclusion, the positions of all members of the
Security Council on this file are clear. In the coming
months, it is important to focus on how to revive

There is no other way to put it: Syria, this hot
conflict, is a tragedy without an end. Every time we
need to discuss the situation on the ground, we note
yet another grim milestone. As we just heard, the
humanitarian catastrophe deepens; the humanitarian
needs increase by the day; and the violence continues
to claim innocent lives, including women and children.
As dark as that is, there seems to be no limit to the
depravity of the regime. It has knowingly committed
egregious crimes against the civilian population that
qualify as crimes against humanity, including enforced
disappearance, torture, murder, imprisonment and rape.
It has abducted and forcefully disappeared thousands of
people — an issue that is highlighted in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/330).
More than 150,000 persons have disappeared or
are still detained somewhere in the dark side of Syria.
Only the Al-Assad regime knows about the fate of those
who are either languishing in some inhuman detention
or are dead without a trace. The regime does not even
care to reveal any information about their whereabouts,
keeping suspended the lives of families who still
search for their loved ones in vain, since, due to this
vicious choice of the regime, they may never get their
much-needed closure. Not only does the regime show
unseemly disregard for the fate of missing people and
their families; it oversees what I can call an economy of
anguish, where prison guards and other regime cronies
sell false information to desperate family members of
the missing persons, who have been living in endless
torment in search for answers for more than a decade
now. That is widely recognized as a major obstacle to
peace and justice in Syria. Addressing it has rightfully
been one of the foremost demands of victims and civil
society over the past decade.
We remain deeply concerned about the fate and wellbeing of children detained in the Ghuwayran detention
centre and other detention centres across north-east
Syria. We echo the call of Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for an immediate sustainable solution for the
children. We commend the efforts of the Syrian victim

22-3309411/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

groups and civil society in developing the Truth and
Justice Charter, launched in February 2021, with a clear
vision and demands to deal with the question of enforced
disappearances and arbitrary detention in Syria.
We call upon the Special Envoy and Member States
to support the creation of a mechanism for missing
people, as well as of a consultative or contact group
to provide urgent actions and support with regard to
detainees and forced disappearances and missing
persons files in Syria.
We support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism regarding the investigation
and prosecution of persons responsible for the most
serious crimes and the referral of this situation to the
International Criminal Court.
What we continue to witness in Syria, beyond the
obvious humanitarian catastrophe, is a total breakdown
of morality. It is our responsibility in the Council to
take a firm stance and to demonstrate to the Syrian
people, as well as to the world, that a regime that has
inflicted, and continues to inflict, unspeakable misery
and suffering on its own people, without remorse and
with total impunity, is an affront to human civilization.
Such a monument to savagery and the personification
of evil should not prevail. We should not have to be
reminded that failing to uphold international law and
the profoundest respect for human rights has direct
consequences in other parts of the world. Impunity
emboldens autocratic regimes to commit further
crimes. It is a licence to kill. Therefore, silence is not a
choice. It is not our choice.
The ongoing political process should not be
a political process in name only. Meetings on a
constitutional framework succeed one another without
any results beyond their numbering. Fresh pressure must
be exerted on all stakeholders, including the regime, at
all levels to begin a serious and genuine political process
in Syria, including with the meaningful participation of
women. That is important to support the tireless and
commendable efforts of the Special Envoy to produce
tangible results.
Keeping in mind what has been spoken of many,
many times during this meeting and every time we meet
on Syria, that is, the worsening humanitarian situation,
the Council must renew resolution 2585 (2021),
reauthorize the Bab Al-Hawa crossing and reopen
other border crossings so that vital humanitarian aid
can reach those who depend on it. It is the only lifeline
12/23

26/04/2022

for millions in desperate need. To refuse that would
be tantamount to knowingly condemn an innocent
people to death by starvation. That is a crime and
should not happen. Humanitarian assistance needs to
be non-political, based on the needs of the population,
and reach everyone.
Let me end by recalling that the consequences of
our action or inaction, as we have seen over the course
of the last 11 years, will have a direct impact on Syrian
civilians today and on the generations to come.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the three African
countries members of the Security Council (A3), that
is, Ghana, Kenya and my country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their
briefings. We take note of the important work that
they are doing along with their teams in a complex
environment, and we thank them for their commitment.
We also listened closely to Ms. Nirvana Shawky. In
addition, we welcome the participation in this meeting
of the Permanent Representative of Syria.
Our statement will relate to the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria.
Although there have been few new developments
since our last review of the situation in Syria (see
S/PV.9003), that situation remains concerning
and requires the full attention of the international
community. We must continue to extend to Syria
the lifeline that it so sorely requires, not only for its
humanitarian needs but also, and above all, for a
political solution.
We believe that a political solution is the most
promising path towards peace in Syria. It requires the
immediate establishment of a nationwide ceasefire,
an inclusive and pluralist dialogue that takes into
account the interests of a broad range of Syrians,
and the restoration of State authority across all the
Syrian territory.
We take note of the important work achieved by
the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nationsfacilitated Constitutional Committee during its seventh
meeting, held in Geneva from 21 to 25 March, and
encourage the spirit of compromise so as to achieve
substantial and constructive progress in ensuring
mutually acceptable constitutional reform proposals.
The parties must maintain their political will and
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

momentum if they want to make headway at the eighth
meeting of the Constitutional Committee, to be held
next month.
The need to push ahead with a broader political
process is increasingly crucial. Confidence-building
measures such as the release of vulnerable detainees, in
particular older persons, women and children, as well
as information on the fate of disappeared persons, must
be part and parcel of that political process aimed at
achieving peace. We recall the important role of women
in settling the political climate in Syria and welcome
their participation in the peace process, in particular
in the context of discussions with the Women’s
Advisory Board.
The A3 is concerned by the presence of foreign
military forces, which could undermine regional and
international security. We underscore that Syria must
not serve as a stage for other States to settle their
scores. The A3 encourages the efforts of regional and
international actors to achieve political stability in
Syria, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), with respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria. That resolution remains the most
important road map to achieve the political solution to
the Syrian crisis that we truly hope to see.
(spoke in English)
The destruction of basic infrastructure resulting
from the continued hostilities is aggravating the
already dire economic and social crises, amplifying
the humanitarian needs in Syria. A significant increase
in the price of gasoline derivatives, resulting in fuel
shortages and prolonged power cuts, have affected the
delivery of basic services, including education, access
to water and, more concerning, access to essential
health services for the population, particularly women
and teen-age girls.
On a daily basis, innocent civilians are exposed
to the dangers created by the hostilities, characterized
by air and ground strikes, bombardments and
anti-personnel landmines. Millions of Syrians have
lost their lives. Millions of others have suffered serious
physical and psychological trauma as a result of those
brutal violations, which contravene international law
and international humanitarian law.
Those hostilities, which continue in particular in
the north-west and north-east as well as the south of the
country, include air and ground strikes, bombardments

S/PV.9022

and clashes between non-State armed opposition groups
and Government and pro-Government forces. The
continued frequent use of anti-personnel landmines
is causing multiple long-lasting impacts, including
injuries, psychological trauma and loss of livelihoods.
The A3 condemns all those acts of violence as
well as those emanating from the activities of terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which continue to increase
the toll of civilian victims, many of whom are women
and children.
While commending the work of United Nations
humanitarian agencies and partners in Syria, we remain
concerned about the deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers and facilities at Al-Hol camp, which have
led to the suspension of humanitarian activities since
16 March. We call on the parties to uphold and respect
their international obligation to ensure the protection of
humanitarian workers and grant unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance throughout the territory.
The continuation of the cross-border humanitarian
aid mechanism remains critical to ensuring that
millions of Syrians in dire humanitarian conditions can
be assisted with both food and non-food aid. We also
take note of the fact that cross-line aid deliveries have
been scaled up, with the development of the six-month
plan to complement the cross-border mechanism and
expand the reach of humanitarian aid.
At this juncture, I would like to commend the
efforts of United Nations agencies and its partners,
which continue to support humanitarian action in
Syria. Syria remains the world’s largest displacement
crisis, with an impact on neighbouring countries, which
need continued international support. Those countries
are under increased financial pressure, especially in the
light of the devastating socioeconomic impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
At the national level, it is important to work for
the establishment of the conditions necessary for the
return of State refugees to their homes by guaranteeing
them safety, security and adequate housing, which
are essential to their sustainable recovery and the
stabilization of the country.
In conclusion, the Council must build on the unity
shown by its members in the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2585 (2021), on the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism in July. The same unity is needed

22-3309413/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

26/04/2022

to make the necessary progress on the political track.
In solidarity with the Syrian people in their quest for
peace, the A3 urges all parties to the conflict to cease
fire and encourages all stakeholders and actors in the
subregion to show greater commitment to finding a
solution to the political process in Syria.

punish and silence the voices of politically active
women. We must heed her words. We call for an end
to all sexual and gender-based violence in Syria and
simultaneously underline the irreplaceable value of
women’s full, safe, equal and meaningful participation
in political processes.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya
and Ms. Nirvana Shawky for their briefings.

Let me conclude by addressing the situation in the
north-east. We are concerned about increased tensions,
exacerbated by bombing, sieges, price hikes and water
shortages. The situation is explosive and may spiral out
of control. Such a situation would strengthen terrorist
groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We
therefore urge all parties involved to urgently contribute
to lowering tensions.

It is clear that advancing the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015) must be central in the weeks
and months ahead. We urge all Syrian and international
parties to commit to prioritizing a sustainable political
solution to end this 11-year war.
We welcome the seventh session of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee, which took place in
Geneva a few weeks ago. We are encouraged that all
delegations offered at least some revisions to some of
the texts. However, much more determination will be
needed to make real progress. We take note of what the
Special Envoy said about plans to reconvene another
round of negotiations on 28 May. And we call on all
participants to prioritize constructive engagement
towards concrete outcomes. That is vital for building
trust and confidence.
Norway will continue supporting the Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, and we reiterate our
support to the Special Envoy’s “step for step” approach.
Let me also highlight again the issue of persons who
are missing and unlawfully deprived of their liberty.
We are deeply concerned about the lack of progress
on the release of detainees and the dissemination of
information to families of the missing. So many Syrians
are personally affected and have no information on what
happened to their family members. We underline that
progress on this file is essential for breaking through
the current political stalemate. We call on all parties
to allow humanitarian actors, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to visit detention
centres and carry out their important work providing
information to the families of victims.
Earlier in April, we all heard the briefing of Mariana
Karkoutly at the open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/PV.9016). She drew particular attention
to the troubling reports of the use of sexual violence
in detention settings in Syria and provided a grim
picture of how sexual violence is used to humiliate,
14/23

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen,
Ms. Joyce Msuya and Ms. Nirvana Shawky for their
very comprehensive briefings.
The war in Syria continues. As we say every month,
the war is unfortunately not over. Idlib continues to
be subjected to indiscriminate shelling and bombing
by the regime and its allies. On 4 April, at least four
schoolchildren died on their way to school. We condemn
those attacks. The people of Dara’a, subjugated by
force in the summer of 2021, also continue to challenge
the regime.
Arms have never been a lasting solution to a
conflict. We therefore wish to reiterate that a one-sided
rehabilitation of the Syrian regime will not bring
stability to Syria or to the region. That is why France
will continue its relentless fight against impunity in
Syria. Those responsible, particularly for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, must be held accountable
for their actions.
The Syrian population continues to pay a high
price for this conflict. Humanitarian needs in Syria,
as explained this afternoon, are at an all-time high.
Food insecurity is increasing and the loss of supplies
from Ukraine, due to Russian aggression against that
country, is exacerbating the situation.
The situation in the north-west and north-east
is particularly worrying in that regard. Vaccination
rates against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are
also particularly low. In the north-west, more than
half the population has no access to medical care and
4.1 million people are in need of humanitarian aid, an
increase of more than 20 per cent since last year. France
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

has provided vaccination doses to north-western Syria
via the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. In
the north-east, 2.1 million people are now in need of
humanitarian assistance, 16 per cent more than last year.
The cross-border humanitarian mechanism
therefore remains indispensable. France is determined
that the mechanism be renewed because it saves lives.
The Secretary-General has been very clear that this is
a moral and humanitarian imperative. The cross-border
mechanism and all its associated safeguards will be
necessary as long as aid does not reach all populations
in need throughout the territory.
At the same time, progress on cross-line access
must continue, both in the north-west and north-east.
It is essential to ensure full humanitarian access
to all people in need. All parties to the conflict,
in particular the regime, must therefore respect
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
As emphasized today, the sixth Brussels Conference
on supporting the future of Syria and the region, to be
held on 9 and 10 May, is a key step in that direction.
France and the European Union will be there. Since
2011, more than €25 billion have been mobilized by
the European Union (EU) and its member States in
response to this crisis.
Only a political solution will make it possible
to establish lasting peace. Resolution 2254 (2015),
unanimously adopted by the Council, remains the
only common path to create the conditions for lasting
peace in Syria. This is incumbent upon everyone. We
therefore reiterate our support for the Special Envoy’s
efforts to make progress on the full implementation of
this road map.
It is regrettable that the seventh session of the
Constitutional Committee at the end of March did not
produce any tangible results. The regime has once again
refused to amend the working document, even though
the very purpose of these rounds of meetings is to allow
all Syrians to jointly draft constitutional elements. The
political process must make progress, and each actor
must take its responsibilities, first and foremost the
regime and its Russian ally.
Without a political solution, the French and European
positions on the lifting of sanctions, normalization and
reconstruction will remain unchanged.

S/PV.9022

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their briefings.
I carefully listened to the statement delivered by
Ms. Nirvana Shawky.
Last month, the seventh session of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee core group was held in
Geneva. According to the consensus reached in
advance, representatives held in-depth discussions on
constitutional texts and submitted their revisions. This
is a result of the diligent mediation efforts of Special
Envoy Pedersen, which China welcomes. China calls
on all parties in Syria to maintain communications with
the Special Envoy, enhance consultations on specific
texts and continue to advance the Syrian-led and
-owned political process.
It is worth noting that Syria still faces a complex
security situation. Therefore, making progress on
resolving major issues for Syria’s national security such
as foreign occupation and terrorism can help create the
conditions necessary for the political process. China
stands ready to work with the United Nations, the
guarantor States of the Astana process and relevant
countries in the region to make greater efforts to resolve
the two aforementioned outstanding issues.
The economic and humanitarian situation in Syria
does not inspire optimism. It is the responsibility
of the international community to help the Syrian
people overcome difficulties and move forward with
reconstruction. Resolution 2585 (2021) emphasizes the
importance of helping Syrian cope with the economic
and social impacts of the pandemic and promote
reconstruction projects in such areas as water resources,
medical care and education. The international
community should earnestly implement the provisions
of the resolution by providing humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance to the Syrian people without
preconditions and help them obtain sustainable
basic services.
China welcomes the fact that the United Nations
will allocate 26 per cent of the resources for the Syrian
humanitarian response plan to carry out 570 earlyrecovery projects. We hope that these projects can truly
improve people’s livelihoods, reduce humanitarian
needs and save more lives in Syria.
China welcomes the third cross-line aid operation
recently launched by the United Nations in northwest Syria. We appreciate the Syrian Government’s

22-3309415/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

active cooperation in the operation and urge relevant
parties in the north-west to provide access and security
guarantees for the cross-line operations so as to
facilitate the distribution of assistance.
The cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism
is controversial, politically, legally and in practice.
Previous reports of the Secretary General pointed out
that the environment for cross-border aid operations
is complex and that the risk of humanitarian supplies
being misappropriated by terrorists cannot be ruled
out. The United Nations should strengthen the
monitoring of cross-border aid operations to ensure
their humanitarian nature and at the same time strive
to promote the gradual transition of cross-border
operations to cross-line operations.
Finally, I would like once again to call on the
countries concerned to lift the unilateral coercive
measures against Syria and restore the rights of the
Syrian people to develop their economy, conduct trade
and rebuild their country.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
Syria (S/2022/330), as well as the briefers for today’s
updates. My delegation welcomes the delegations of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the Islamic Republic
of Iran to today’s meeting.
The briefings by Ms. Msuya and Mr. Pedersen
add to the discouraging information presented in the
latest report of the Secretary-General. After 11 years
of conflict, the humanitarian situation on the ground
in Syria is getting worse as the political process
remains stalled. The list of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
committed by all parties keeps on growing, as does
the list of perpetrators who remain unaccountable for
those crimes.
Civilians, including children, continue to die as a
direct consequence of the hostilities. Food insecurity
has reached its highest recorded level. Basic services
such as water and electricity are severely compromised.
Children continue to be recruited and deprived of
liberty on security grounds for alleged or actual links
with parties to the conflict.
Although immunization rates have recently
improved, the coronavirus disease continues to spread
as health services deteriorate. Gender-based violence
16/23

26/04/2022

is on the rise. Terrorist groups keep finding fertile
grounds to recruit and carry out attacks.
At this point, it should be unnecessary to recall
that only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led United
Nations-facilitated political process, with due regard
to the preservation of Syria’s territorial integrity, will
bring lasting peace. A military solution is an illusion,
evidenced in practice by the continuous stalemate
on the ground. An agreement towards a sustainable
nationwide ceasefire is urgently needed, as that would
help alleviate the suffering of the Syrian population, as
would ongoing early-recovery and resilience initiatives
aimed at preventing a further increase in the number of
people in need of aid and at restoring the provision of
such essential services as health, education, electricity,
water and sanitation.
Civilians should be protected at all times. The
physical integrity and well-being of children should be
a fundamental priority, and all efforts should be made
to provide them with essential services, including
education and health care. They should be primarily
treated as victims, detained only as a last resort and
for the shortest amount of time possible, and not be
recruited. They need to be reunited with their families
whenever and as soon as possible.
Rising humanitarian needs demand the maintenance
of predictable and regular delivery of international
aid to the Syrian people, both through cross-line and
cross-border operations. Humanitarian assistance
remains indispensable and life-saving for millions of
people across Syria, especially those living in camps
and informal settlements. Brazil reiterates the call on
all parties to comply with their obligation to ensure
free and unimpeded humanitarian access in accordance
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
We also underline the importance of keeping all
humanitarian operations under detailed and close
monitoring and of seeking ways to facilitate expanding
operations in the cross-line modality. In that regard, we
welcome the news of a third cross-line convoy at the
end of last month, which carried humanitarian aid from
the World Food Programme, UNICEF, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Population Fund and the World
Health Organization.
As pointed out by the World Food Programme in a
recent report, the conflict in Ukraine risks increasing
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

food insecurity in many places around the world as well
as the operational costs of humanitarian assistance at a
time when it is most needed. Brazil favours initiatives
that include independent assessments of the impact of
sanctions on the daily life of the civilian population,
particularly on vulnerable groups. Sanctions should
never undermine access to food, shelter and essential
health supplies for those most in need.
In conclusion, Brazil thanks Mr. Pedersen for his
tireless efforts aimed at trying to restore hope in the
dialogue foreseen by resolution 2254 (2015) and to
move us away from this unacceptable status quo. We
are glad to hear that the discussions on the seventh
session of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva
last month reached some results and that invitations
for an eighth session have already been sent out. We
call on all members of the Constitutional Committee
to engage in constructive work with a genuine goal in
mind: to narrow differences in order to carry out the
Committee’s drafting mandate.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Msuya and
Ms. Nirvana Shawky for their briefings. I also
welcome the delegations of Syria, Iran and Turkey to
today’s meeting.
First of all, with regard to the implementation of
resolution 2585 (2021), Mexico acknowledges the
efforts and the progress made in dispatching the
third cross-line humanitarian aid convoy to Sarmada
on 30 March. We hope that the delivery of cross-line
humanitarian aid in the north-west will continue and
that this route will soon be predictable and sustainable.
However, despite that progress, Mexico agrees with
the Secretary-General that the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing must remain open. As we have seen, the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate month
after month. Some 4.1 million people are now in need
of humanitarian assistance in the north-west, and foodinsecurity rates are 51 per cent higher than in 2019.
Mexico welcomes the update on early-recovery projects
and calls for their continued expansion.
Secondly, we want to emphasize the impact of the
critical humanitarian situation on women and girls,
including the risk they run of being victims of genderbased violence. The increase in the number of suicides
among women is extremely worrying. That tragic

S/PV.9022

reality underscores the importance of a humanitarian
response that includes mental health and psychosocial
support services that are accessible, inclusive and have
a gender perspective.
Thirdly, with regard to the situation in northeastern Syria, we again express our concern about the
violence and killings in Al-Hol, as well as about the
plight of children who remain in Ghwayran prison and
other detention centres. We stress that their repatriation
and reintegration into their countries of origin is a
priority, while always keeping in mind the principle of
the best interests of the child.
Fourthly, with regard to accountability, we take note
of the interim report on missing persons submitted on
8 April by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We look forward to the publication of the
final report and advocate strengthening the cooperation
and complementarity among existing investigative
and accountability mechanisms. Similarly, Mexico
reiterates its support for the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. We call on States
to work with them to identify and bring to justice those
responsible for crimes in Syria.
Fifthly, we welcome the organization of the
seventh session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee, held at the end of March. However, we
deplore the fact that once again the outcome of that
meeting fell short of the stated objectives. We urge the
parties to commit to engaging in the work facilitated
by the Special Envoy, and we welcome the fact that the
Committee’s next session will take place May.
Lastly, the constitutional process is only one
of the pillars of resolution 2254 (2015). However, it
remains the key to restoring trust, promoting social
reconciliation and building lasting peace. A cessation
of hostilities is essential if we are to focus efforts on the
political process. To that end, Mexico urges a definitive
national ceasefire.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Joyce Msuya for
their briefings. I also thank Ms. Nirvana Shawky of
CARE International for her insights. I acknowledge

22-3309417/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

and welcome the presence of the representatives of
Syria, Turkey and Iran in today’s meeting.
On the political track, there has been very little
progress since the meeting of the seventh session of the
small body of the Constitutional Committee held last
month. We note that the Special Envoy has remained in
touch with the two co-Chairs with regard to convening
the next session. We are of the view that convening the
next session is important to maintaining momentum
in the talks. In that regard, we note the announcement
by the Special Envoy today about the holding of the
next session on 28 May. In order to ensure credible
progress, all sides need to engage constructively and
purposefully, with a sense of compromise. Efforts to
exert external influence on them can only be detrimental
to the overall political process. It is for the Syrians to
determine and decide what is best for Syria and their
own future. The Special Envoy has been making efforts
to bring out all sides and facilitate the political process,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We support his
proactive diplomacy aimed at building momentum
for the political track, including through the step-forstep process. India has consistently called for support
for regional efforts to find a long-term solution to the
conflict. The progressive normalization of Syria’s
relations with its Arab neighbours in recent months
is an encouraging development. We also welcome the
proactive engagement of the United Arab Emirates
with Syria.
On the security front, we remain concerned about
the overall situation in Syria. As pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s recent 60-day report (S/2022/330),
violence continued in the Idlib de-escalation area in
the north-west, including through air strikes, mutual
shelling and clashes. There is an urgent need for
genuinely serious attempts to broker a comprehensive
nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We believe that the
withdrawal of foreign forces is essential to realizing
that objective.
India has also continued to point to the looming
threat posed by the resurgence of terrorist groups in
Syria. United Nations-designated terrorist groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham are gaining influence in Iraq as
well as Syria. We reiterate that the global fight against
terrorism cannot and should not be compromised
for narrow political gains. The credibility of the
international community’s collective fight against
terrorism can be strengthened only by ensuring
18/23

26/04/2022

accountability for the grave and inhuman acts of
terror committed by terrorists and terrorist groups. To
that end, India has contributed $200,000 to support
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, including
on the development and use of chemical and biological
weapons by ISIL in Iraq.
On the humanitarian front, with the conflict in
its twelfth year, the needs of the population continue
to grow. More than 14 million people remain in need
of humanitarian assistance, the largest number at any
time since the start of the conflict in 2011. We must not
lose sight of the suffering that the Syrian people endure
on a daily basis. The ongoing cross-border operations
continue to negatively impact the sovereignty of the
Syrian State. In the north-west, we believe there is
considerable scope for expanding cross-line operations,
and we welcomed the recent operation that took place
last month. We continue to encourage the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies to expand efforts to enhance
cross-line operations. There is also a need to scale up
humanitarian assistance and shore up donor support
for the United Nations humanitarian response plan for
Syria. It is still underfunded, particularly with regard
to building resilience and access to basic services. We
also continue to believe that it is critical to achieve
progress on the implementation of resolution 2585
(2021) concerning early recovery and infrastructure.
In conclusion, for its part, India has continued to
extend development assistance and human resource
development support to Syria, and will continue to
support the people of Syria in their quest for lasting
peace and stability.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Special Envoy
Pedersen, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Ms. Nirvana Shawky for their valuable briefings.
The Syrian conflict continues to have a profound
impact on the population. The hostilities have
driven record levels of need, with 14.6 million
Syrians — 80 per cent of the population — requiring
humanitarian assistance. The monthly cost of food has
reached an all-time high, exacerbated by the impact
of Russia’s premeditated and unprovoked invasion
of Ukraine.
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The Council needs to support the United Nations in
its efforts to assist millions of Syrians. The SecretaryGeneral has highlighted the continuing life-saving
importance of the United Nations cross-border
mandate, which is due for renewal in July. In the past
few years, when the Council has regrettably closed
border crossings, needs have increased. Without the
mandate, another generation of women and girls, as we
heard today in Ms. Shawky’s powerful statement, will
face increased suffering. Access to life-saving sexual
and reproductive health services would be severely hit
and survivors of gender-based violence would not get
the support they need. The United Kingdom therefore
supports both the renewal and the expansion of the
United Nations cross-border mandate. For our part, we
have worked to support the implementation of resolution
2585 (2021). Our support for early recovery over the
past six months has provided agricultural training and
inputs for livestock and vegetable production, as well
as apprenticeships and small business grants to help
create jobs and address market gaps.
We urge all Council members to support the
renewal of the United Nations cross-border mandate in
July. Indeed, as the Secretary-General clearly states,
the Council has a moral and humanitarian imperative
to do so. But we should also be clear that cross-border
assistance alone is not enough. The United Kingdom
continues to support the United Nations-facilitated,
Syrian-led process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
Special Envoy Pedersen has the United Kingdom’s
full support for his continued efforts to facilitate a
sustainable resolution of the conflict.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On 17 April, Syria commemorated the seventysixth anniversary of the withdrawal of the last French
soldier from its lands, thanks to the great sacrifices
made by the Syrian people. Today, Syrians are once
again demonstrating their determination to continue
their struggle to ensure that any occupation of Syrian
territories is stamped out, however long it takes. That
applies to the current illegitimate presence of United
States and Turkish forces in the north-east and northwest of my country, as well as the Israeli occupation
of the Syrian Golan. Ending that illegitimate foreign
presence will assure Syria’s sovereignty, independence,

S/PV.9022

unity and territorial integrity. It will also end those
forces’ sponsorship of separatist militias and terrorist
groups and help to eliminate the terrorist outposts of
Da’esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra and their affiliate entities
and groups.
Ending the illegitimate foreign presence will put an
end to the terrible conditions in the Al-Hol and Rukban
camps and enable foreign terrorists and their families
to be repatriated to their countries of origin. It will also
put an end to all forms of displacement, demographic
change and the looting of Syria’s national wealth.
Restoring Syrians’ national economic resources to
them will eventually strengthen security and stability
in Syria and throughout the region and improve the
humanitarian situation and living conditions. It will
also help to create the conditions conducive to the
voluntary, dignified and safe return of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
The plight that Syria has endured over the past
10 years as a result of various Western countries’
destructive and criminal policies demands that
those countries be held accountable for their crimes.
In that regard, I would like to refer to a letter dated
18 April from Syria’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council. It concerns the war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed by the
forces of the so-called international United States-led
coalition on Syrian territories in the city of Raqqa and
the Baghuz area around Deir ez-Zor. Their crimes have
claimed the lives of thousands of innocent civilians,
including women and children, and have destroyed
infrastructure, public and private property, health
and educational facilities and a number of places of
worship. The Syrian Arab Republic holds the United
States Administration and its allies involved in those
attacks fully responsible for the crimes committed by
the military forces that have joined the ranks of that
illegitimate coalition. If the Security Council is serious
about stopping and preventing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, it should immediately launch an
investigation into what happened in demolished Raqqa
and martyred Baghuz.
My delegation listened attentively to the briefings
by Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Joyce Msuya, whom
we will welcome when she visits Syria in mid-May
with a view to enhancing the existing cooperation
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. It will also

22-3309419/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

26/04/2022

be an opportunity for Ms. Msuya to familiarize herself
with the situation on the ground. Despite the fact that
these periodic briefings tackle the dire humanitarian
conditions experienced by Syrians in various parts of
the country, certain countries continue to be tone-deaf
to the disastrous effects of the unilateral coercive
measures imposed on the Syrian people by the United
States and the European Union (EU). Those economic
terrorism measures have led to declines in economic
and development indicators, investment and trade
exchange, a rise in inflation rates, the depreciation
of Syria’s currency and a growing gap in the funding
needed to provide basic services.

The United States and its Western allies, including
Turkey and their separatist militias and terrorist
groups, continue to hinder the delivery of aid within
Syrian territory in order to justify their continued
violation of Syria’s sovereignty through the so-called
cross-border aid delivery mechanism, which has been
a lifeline for terrorist organizations and beneficiaries
of the war economy. Thanks to those policies, in the
nine months since resolution 2585 (2021) was adopted
only three cross-line convoys, amounting to a mere
42 trucks — out of the hundreds that have been sent
across the borders in total — have been dispatched to
the north-west.

These inhumane measures have also impeded
imports of food, medicine and pharmaceutical
raw materials, as well as medical equipment and
agricultural and industrial production requirements,
including seeds, fertilizers and machinery. That has
had a negative effect on food security and put our
citizens’ right to nourishment in jeopardy, leading to
a significant decline in Syrians’ standard of living.
And the repercussions of those illegal measures are
not limited to the livelihoods of Syrians. They have
also caused problems for humanitarian, international,
governmental and non-governmental organizations
as a result of the reluctance of banks, insurance and
shipping companies and suppliers to meet the demands
of those organizations for fear of being subject to
Western sanctions. That has spiked the costs of meeting
essential humanitarian needs. The facts show that any
talk of exemptions from those unjust coercive measures
are baseless allegations propagated by the United States
and the EU to cover up their violations of human rights,
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

As the Syrian Arab Republic commemorates the
seventy-sixth anniversary of its independence, it is more
committed than ever to its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and the unity of its people, and more
resolved to restore security and stability, exercise State
authority over all of its territories and provide decent
livelihoods for its people. We reaffirm our commitment
to a political solution aimed at fulfilling the hopes of
our people based on an intra-Syrian national dialogue
and a Syrian-owned and -led political process, without
any external interference. Syria commends the efforts
of the national delegation during the seventh round
of meetings of the Constitutional Committee and
looks forward to the holding of the next round, while
stressing the need to ensure that its terms of reference
and rules of procedure are fully adhered to. At the same
time, we reject any form of external interference in the
Committee’s work and the imposition of predetermined
results or artificial timelines.

Meanwhile, certain Western countries — which
prioritize their own interests and agendas over any
humanitarian or operational considerations — continue
to obstruct the implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
on promoting and increasing early-recovery projects, by
cutting their funding and linking its implementation to
politicized conditions, while simultaneously delaying
the adoption of the strategic framework and country
programmes governing cooperation between the Syrian
Government and the United Nations agencies operating
in Syria. Some donors have even stopped supporting
a number of Syrian Arab Red Crescent programmes,
including the children’s hospital in Aleppo, the
community first-aid programme and programmes
addressing malnutrition.
20/23

The Syrian Government will continue its efforts
to achieve national reconciliation, including through
local reconciliation efforts that enjoy large-scale
participation in many Syrian cities and regions, thanks
to the amnesty decrees issued by our President, which
have enabled thousands of Syrians within and outside
the country to return to their normal lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings. I also thank the civil-society briefer,
Ms. Nirvana Shawky of CARE.
This month at the United Nations we have been
discussing the fate of the thousands of missing persons
and detainees who have disappeared at the hands of the
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian regime, and the recent report (A/76/690) of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. The updates are a constant
reminder of the unimaginable levels of suffering that
the Syrian people continue to endure. Their stories
cannot be sidelined.
As we repeat in this Chamber every month, a
sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict can be
achieved only through political means in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). The only functioning mechanism
for the political process is the Constitutional Committee,
which must start producing tangible outcomes. Yet once
again, owing to the regime’s uncompromising attitude,
the seventh round of the Committee’s meetings yielded
no concrete results. On the other hand, we commend
the Syrian Negotiation Commission, whose flexible
stance has contributed constructively to the work of the
Committee. We will continue to support the work of the
United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen in seeking
a political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015).
Maintaining the ceasefire and uninterrupted
humanitarian aid in Idlib is crucial not only to preventing
a new humanitarian crisis but also to supporting the
efforts to find a permanent solution to the Syrian
conflict. Yet the regime and its backers’ attacks on
civilians, and ceasefire violations, continue. We want to
repeat our warning that an escalation in Idlib will have
serious consequences for all involved, especially the
regime. It is the international community’s collective
responsibility to prevent a new humanitarian crisis or
wave of migration, which could be triggered by such
an escalation.
Some actors in the region have misguidedly tied
their hopes of eradicating Da’esh and other terrorist
organizations to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG). We have consistently
warned the international community about that
terrorist organization. On numerous occasions we have
expressed our concerns about the fact that members of
Da’esh are being released in exchange for bribes, which
will only aid Da’esh in its resurgence. We also want to
briefly address the PKK/YPG’s acts of aggression. Last
year it attacked Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin, recruited
child soldiers, prevented civilians, including Kurds
and Yazidis, from returning to their homes, violently
suppressed peaceful civilian protests and arrested

S/PV.9022

teachers of Arabic. Those acts and atrocities have been
well documented in the reports of international and
non-governmental organizations. Most recently, on
20 April, the PKK/YPG targeted a family in Jarabulus
and attacked the civil-defence teams that subsequently
came to the family’s help, killing one person and injuring
five others. While all that was happening, the so-called
Syrian Democratic Forces issued statements of open
support for the PKK, revealing once again that they are
part of the same terrorist entity. We assure the Council
that all terror organizations, whether PKK/YPG or
Da’esh, will pay for the atrocities they commit. We will
not tolerate the presence of any terrorist organizations,
and neither will they find safe haven along our borders.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are at their highest
level since the conflict began, with 14.6 million
people across the country in need of humanitarian
assistance. Syrians living in the north-west are among
the most vulnerable, with increasing protection and
humanitarian needs. The need for the continuation
of the United Nations cross-border mechanism in
July is therefore first and foremost a humanitarian
imperative. We have also heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths about the developments concerning
cross-line access through Idlib. Continuing the United
Nations dialogue with relevant local actors will be
useful with regard to the request for additional crossline convoys. The preservation of the parameters in
this area, which continue to function, will facilitate
the planning and execution of that activity. Similarly,
coordination between the United Nations and Syria’s
interim Government is crucial to cross-line requests to
that region, where medicines and childhood vaccines
are a priority.
For our part, we will continue to constructively
engage in and facilitate the efforts for cross-line
convoys. But we would like to caution against preparing
plans based on the regime’s unilateral timetables
without prior agreement with the Syrian opposition
and local actors. Additionally, we want to point out that
cross-line aid cannot replace or replicate the size and
scope of the cross-border operation. There is simply no
alternative to the cross-border mechanism.
The Syrian people deserve our collective action.
Turkey will continue to do its utmost to bring peace
and justice to the brave Syrians, who have suffered
too much for too long. Yet that is a moral and legal
responsibility that rests with all of us, especially
the members of the Security Council. The world has

22-3309421/23

S/PV.9022

The situation in the Middle East

entrusted the permanent members of the Council with
maintaining world peace, upholding the Charter of
the United Nations and protecting the people we have
pledged to serve. We have elected the non-permanent
members to do the same thing. So far, the Security
Council has failed the Syrian people. We implore all
Council members to act now and save the people of
Syria and their future.
As for the hallucinatory statement made by the
criminal representative of the Syrian regime, I repeat
that I do not consider him my legitimate counterpart
and therefore will not give him a response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the briefers for their information.
Since the conflict began more than a decade
ago, Syria’s humanitarian needs have reached an
all-time high. The recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/330) indicates that 14.6 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance, an
increase of 1.2 million from 2021. According to the
report, acute and rapid economic downturns, as well
as climate-related effects, have emerged as major new
drivers of humanitarian needs. The current economic
crisis has affected civilians across the country,
particularly children, women, the elderly and those
with disabilities. Given the dire humanitarian situation,
it is more vital than ever to end the unilateral coercive
measures against the Syrian people. The illegal
measures have had disastrous consequences for every
aspect of people’s lives and run counter to resolution
2585 (2021), relating to early-recovery projects.
In his report, the Secretary-General called for
waiving sanctions that are preventing access to critical
health supplies, coronavirus disease-related medical
assistance and food. In that context, it is essential
that the ongoing technical dialogue on sanctions
and humanitarian operations in Syria among the
relevant Member States and humanitarian actors
provide solutions to the challenges that a number of
humanitarian actors in the country face in ensuring
adequate and reliable access to financial services. As
the Secretary-General emphasized in his report, the
current humanitarian relief efforts should focus on
supporting early-recovery and reconstruction projects,
ensuring the continuous operation of water, electricity,
22/23

26/04/2022

education and medical facilities and the provision of
basic services, as mandated in resolution 2585 (2021).
The Security Council must therefore work
diligently to ensure that resolution 2585 (2021) is
properly implemented in a balanced and effective
manner, particularly in terms of early-recovery projects
and the lifting of unilateral sanctions. At the same time,
political conditions should not be allowed to block
early-recovery projects or humanitarian assistance.
We commend the efforts of the Syrian Government,
United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners
to expand the scope and frequency of humanitarian
relief operations on a continued basis. In that context,
we salute the United Nations agencies for successfully
completing the third cross-line delivery to Sarmada
since the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021).
We reiterate our call for ending the plunder by
foreign forces of Syria’s natural resources, particularly
oil and agricultural products. Such criminal acts not
only violate Syrian territorial sovereignty, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations, they also have a negative impact on
efforts and measures aimed at restoring the Syrian
economy. We support the initiatives to facilitate the
repatriation of refugees and internally displaced
persons and are willing to provide assistance for the
success of such endeavours.
After more than a decade of conflict in Syria, it has
become evident that only one solution exists. That is a
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process facilitated
by the United Nations. We support the continuation of
inter-Syrian talks in Geneva. We warmly welcome the
convening of the Constitutional Committee’s seventh
session. We also commend Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to
streamline the process. We reiterate that the Committee
must work in strict accordance with its terms of reference
and rules of procedure, free from outside interference or
pressure, and with no artificial timetables. It must be a
fully Syrian-led and Syrian-owned effort and the United
Nations role should be limited to facilitation. We are
looking forward to the next meeting of the Committee,
which will be held in the second half of May. We hope
that by working efficiently, independently and without
outside intervention, the Constitutional Committee will
produce positive results.
The Syrian crisis cannot be resolved without putting
an end to the occupation and uprooting the terrorist
threats. We once again reaffirm our commitment
22-33094

26/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence and its efforts to combat
terrorism. We strongly condemn the Israeli regime’s
repeated violations of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and we call on the Security Council to hold
it accountable for such acts of aggression and malice,
as well as its blatant threats to use force against other
countries of the region, thereby endangering regional
peace and security. The war on terrorism must not be
used to undermine Syria’s sovereignty and territorial

S/PV.9022

integrity. The illegal presence of foreign forces in parts
of Syria, which has created ideal conditions for terrorist
activities, must end immediately. We are maintaining
our contacts with the Syrian Government, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and our
partners in the Astana format in order to help end the
crisis and alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people as
soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

22-3309423/23
