VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Noting with satisfaction that the Solomon Islands
achieved full interna! self-government on 2 January
1976 and that the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Solomon
Islands agree that the Territory should proceed to early
independence,
Noting also with satisfaction the development assistance provided by the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, Australia and New Zealand, as well as the
assistance of the United Nations Development Programme in the economic development of the Territory
during 1976,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Solomon Islands;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to assist the people of
the Solomon Islands towards the achievement of independence;
4. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the people of the Solomon Islands,
to continue its efforts towards diversification of the
economy of the Territory;
5. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render ali possible assistance to the people of the
Solomon Islands in their efforts to consolidate their
national independence and, to that end, invites the
specialized agencies and the institutions associated with
the United Nations to work out concrete programmes
of assistance to the Solomon Islands;
6. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/47.

Question of the Gilbert Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory, 17
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
16 /bid., Thirty-first Session, Supplernent No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XIX.
17 /bid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Comrnittee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

121

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Gilbert Islands;18
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland, as the administering Power, to continue to take measures to
expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory
in accordance with the relevant recommendations of
the Special Committee, including in particular the observations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in 1974;19
4. Requests that steps be taken towards diversification of the economy of the Territory and that the administering Power continue to enlist the assistance of
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert Islands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/48.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,20 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
June 197621 at the invitation of the Government of
New Zealand, as the administering Power, and the
people of the Tokelau Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 3428 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 22
Having also heard the statement of one of the members of the Visiting Mission, 28
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to help the people of the Tokelau Islands to realize
18 /bid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev. l), chap. XIX.
rn /bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rcv.l). chap. XXI, annex l.
2 0 lhid., Thirty-first Session, Sup¡Jlernent No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XVII.
21 /bid., chap. XVII, annex.
22 fbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 1-11.
2:1 /bid., 24th meeting, paras. 3-7.

122

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

---------------------

their aspirations in accordance with the objectives set
forth in the Declaration,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size and meagre resources,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Tokelau Islands;24
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in conformity
with the Declaration;
3. Commends the conclusions and recommendations
of the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Tokelau
Islands, 197625 to the Government of New Zealand, as
the administering Power, and to the people of the
Tokelau Islands for their consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Visiting Mission for the constructive work which they
accomplished, and to the administering Power, the
fonos ( councils) and the people of the Tokelau Islands
for the clase co-operation and assistance extended to the
Mission;
5. Decides that, in accordance with the wishes of
the people of the Tokelau Islands, as expressed through
their representatives, and in conformity with the recommendation of the Visiting Mission, the Territory
shall henceforth be known as "Tokelau";
6. Expresses the view that measures to promete
the economic development of Tokelau are an important
element in the process of self-determination, and the
hope that the administering Power will continue to intensify and expand its programme of budgetary support
and development aid to the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as other regional and
international bodies, in the strengthening and development of the economy of the Territory;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations to consider the methods and scale of their
operations, in order to ensure that they are able to
respond appropriately to the requirements of such small
and isolated Territories as Tokelau;
9. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of political
education, as well as to ensure the preservation of the
identity and the cultural heritage of the people of
Tokelau;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question at its next session in the light
of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the
possible dispatch of a second visiting mission to Tokelau, as appropriate and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.

85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
24 [bid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chap. XVII.
25 !bid., chap. XVII, annex, paras. 381-421.

31/49.

Question of
(Malvinas)

the

Falkland

lslands

The General Assembly,
Having considered thc question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 3160
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Bearing in mind the paragraphs related to this question contained in the Political Declaration adopted by
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, 26 and in the Political Declaration adopted by
the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16
to 19 August 1976, 27
Having regard to the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 28 and, in particular, the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee concerning the Territory, 29
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) and, in particular,
the conclusions and recommendations of the Special
Committee conccrning the Territory;
2. Expresses its gratitude for the continuous efforts
made by the Government of Argentina, in accordance
with the relevant decisions of the General Assembly,
to facilitate thc process of decolonization and to promote the well-being of the population of the islands;
3. Requests the Governments of Argentina and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to expcdite the negotiations concerning the
dispute over sovereignty, as requested in General Assembly resolutions 2065 (XX) and 3160 (XXVIII);
4. Calls upon the two parties to refrain from taking
decisions that would imply introducing unilateral modifications in the situation while the islands are going
through the process recommended in the above-mentioned resolutions;
5. Requests both Govemments to report to the
Secretary-General and to the General Assembly as
soon as possible on the results of the negotiations.
85 th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31 / 50.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
H aving examined thc relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
2 6 A/10217 :md Corr.1, annex, para. 87.
27 A/31/197, annex I, para. 119.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Sessio11, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XXX.
2 9 Jbid., chap. XXX, para. 8.
