S/2014/130

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 14 November 2013 to 27 February 2014

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous report
of 13 November 2013 (S/2013/650).
2.
In the midst of Lebanon’s protracted political process and deteriorating
security situation, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of
operations remained relatively stable notwithstanding two serious incidents, both of
them breaches of the cessation of hostilities and violations of resolution 1701
(2006). On 15 December, one Israel Defense Forces soldier was killed by a
Lebanese Armed Forces soldier shooting across the Blue Line in an individual act.
On 29 December, rockets launched from southern Lebanon against Israel were met
with artillery response by the Israel Defense Forces without causing any injuries or
damage. The incidents were contained through the enhanced utilization by the
parties of the liaison and coordination arrangements established with UNIFIL.
Lebanon and Israel continued to display their resolve to safeguard the quiet along
the Blue Line and their commitment to resolution 1701 (2006), although their
respective outstanding obligations under the resolution remain pending.
3.
There was a worrying upsurge in terrorist incidents related to the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period. Al-Qaeda-linked armed
groups claimed responsibility for terrorist attacks in Lebanon, including a double
suicide bombing of the Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Beirut on
19 November. As at 5 February, there were a further six suicide bombings in Beirut
and Hermel, in which a total of 15 people were killed. On 27 December, former
Minister Mohammed Chattah was assassinated in a car bomb attack, which also
killed five other people. On 16 January, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon opened the
in absentia trial of the persons accused in connection with the 2005 killing of former
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri.
4.
Cross-border shelling and shooting from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon continued, causing at least seven fatalities, injuries and material damage.
There were also at least five air strikes by Syrian Government aircraft, as well as
helicopter air strikes in which two Lebanese citizens reportedly were killed. The
14-24753 (E) 120314

*1424753*

S/2014/130

Lebanese Armed Forces reported continued smuggling of weapons across the
Lebanese-Syrian border.
5.
Ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic led to a continued influx of
Syrians seeking shelter in Lebanon. As at 3 February 2014, there were 902,000
Syrian refugees assisted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and partners, an increase of approximately 100,000 since my
previous report.
6.
On 15 February, following extensive dialogue across the political spectrum,
Prime Minister designate Tammam Salam announced the formation of a 24-member
Government of national interest, 11 months after the resignation of Prime Minister
Mikati’s Government. In accordance with Lebanese law, the period set for
parliamentary sessions to choose a new President starts on 25 March 2014, ahead of
the end of President Sleiman’s term of office on 25 May 2014.
7.
The International Support Group for Lebanon met in New York on
25 November, and members have continued to coordinate to mobilize support for
Lebanon. On 15 December, a multi-donor trust fund was established by the World
Bank in support of Lebanon’s stabilization efforts. On 29 December, President
Sleiman announced that Saudi Arabia would provide $3 billion to be used to
purchase military equipment for the Lebanese Armed Forces from France.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
8.
In the evening of 15 December, an Israel Defense Forces officer was shot
across the Blue Line by a Lebanese Armed Forces soldier in the vicinity of Ras
Al-Naqoura (Sector West) and died from his injuries before reaching the hospital. In
the ensuing hours, the Israel Defense Forces fired gunshots and flares towards
Lebanon in the same general area, without causing personal injuries or material
damage, before ceasing fire later in the night.
9.
Upon being alerted about the incident by the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNIFIL
immediately engaged with both sides, urging them to exercise restraint, requesting
their cooperation, and keeping communication channels open to avert further
escalation of the situation. The Lebanese Armed Forces at the highest level assured
UNIFIL of its full commitment to the cessation of hostilities and explained that the
shooting was an isolated incident perpetrated by a lone soldier. In the morning after
the shooting, the Lebanese Armed Forces found and arrested the soldier, who had
fled, and opened an investigation, as did UNIFIL. UNIFIL called an extraordinary
tripartite meeting on 16 December at the request of the Israel Defense Forces.
10. The 16 December extraordinary tripartite meeting facilitated by UNIFIL
sought to preserve confidence among the parties in order to fully restore the
cessation of hostilities along the Blue Line, establish the facts and circumstances of
the incident, and strengthen the existing security arrangements to prevent any such
incidents from reoccurring. The presence of my Special Coordinator at the meeting
attested to the particular concern of the United Nations. The Lebanese Armed Forces

2/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

expressed regret for the incident, which it reiterated was an isolated individual act,
and said that the soldier involved would be held accountable under Lebanese law.
11. Cooperation by the parties allowed UNIFIL to complete its investigation
quickly, which included two interviews of the perpetrator facilitated by the
Lebanese Armed Forces. The UNIFIL investigation found that the soldier had acted
alone without provocation or orders, and in contravention of the rules of
engagement of the Lebanese Armed Forces, in a serious violation of resolution 1701
(2006). The firing at Lebanon across the Blue Line by the Israel Defense Forces was
also in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). As a result of the investigation by the
Lebanese Armed Forces, the Prosecutor for the Military Tribunal issued an
indictment including charges of a serious offence on 29 January and directed the
case to the Investigative Judge.
12. In a second serious incident, on 29 December, a rocket was launched against
Israel from the El Khraibe area of Lebanon, in the UNIFIL area of operations
(Sector East). Unknown assailants fired four rockets, one impacting Israel near
Kiryat Shmona, two falling short of the Blue Line, and one, which misfired, falling
a short distance from the launch. In retaliation for the attack, the Israel Defense
Forces fired 33 artillery rounds across the Blue Line towards the launching area in
Lebanon. No injury or material damage was caused by either the rocket attack or the
Israeli response.
13. Immediately after the incident, the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force
Commander was in contact with his Israel Defense Forces and Lebanese Armed
Forces counterparts to defuse the situation and prevent any further escalation. For
the first time, UNIFIL communicated with the parties via a simultaneous
videoconference link, the latest enhancement of the tripartite liaison apparatus.
14. UNIFIL began an investigation to determine the facts and circumstances of the
rocket attack and inspected the launch sites and those impacted by the Israel
Defense Forces artillery fire in Lebanon, as well as the rocket impact sites in Israel
and Lebanon. UNIFIL intensified its patrols across the area of operations and
focused its coordinated operations with the Lebanese Armed Forces on potential
rocket launching sites, with a view to preventing any further attacks.
15. The Lebanese Armed Forces shared the results of its own investigation with
UNIFIL, stating that the rockets had been launched using crude improvised
launching pads and an electrical timer. At least two perpetrators were involved; they
used a vehicle to carry the rockets in the early hours of the morning by secondary
unpaved roads to avoid detection. Both parties told UNIFIL that they attributed the
rocket firing to an extremist group aiming to cause general destabilization in the
area. The attack has not been claimed to date.
16. At the 29 January tripartite meeting, UNIFIL recommended that the Lebanese
Armed Forces, with the support of the Mission, further enhance security control
over the area of operations to ensure that it is free of unauthorized armed elements,
that the Lebanese authorities find the perpetrators of incidents and bring them to
justice, and that both parties do the maximum to avoid escalation and to decrease
tensions.
17. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces maintained the same level of
coordinated activities as during the previous reporting period, manning 10 permanent
co-located checkpoints, 7 in Sector East and 3 in Sector West. In addition, UNIFIL

14-24753

3/16

S/2014/130

conducted training for the Lebanese Armed Forces with the aim of improving the
effectiveness of combined operations as well as Lebanese Armed Forces tactical and
operational capabilities. There was no notable change in the deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces south of the Litani River, which remained at approximately
two brigades.
18. UNIFIL observed a number of ground violations of the Blue Line committed
mainly by Lebanese shepherds but also by farmers. Most ground violations were
brief and took place in the Shab’a Farms area (Sector East). In addition, two men on
20 November and three boys on 11 January violated the Blue Line while fishing in
the Wazzani River. UNIFIL protested the violations to the Lebanese Armed Forces,
recalling that it is the primary responsibility of the Lebanese authorities to ensure
full respect for the Blue Line in its entirety.
19. Also in the Shab’a Farms area, on 5 January, the Lebanese Armed Forces
detained a man crossing the Blue Line into Lebanon. The man told the Lebanese
Armed Forces that he was from the Syrian Arab Republic and was trying to join his
parents who were refugees in Lebanon. On 13 January, a foreign domestic worker
employed in Lebanon crossed the Blue Line into Israel and was detained by the
Israel Defense Forces. Subsequently, her case was handled by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Israeli Ministry of the Interior.
20. The Israel Defense Forces also violated the Blue Line once, on 15 January,
when eight Israeli soldiers briefly crossed the Blue Line while patrolling in the
vicinity of Meiss ej-Jebel. UNIFIL protested the violation to the Israel Defense
Forces, who denied the violation.
21. There was no change in the status of the Israeli-occupied northern part of the
village of Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue Line, which remains a
violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. Israel is yet to
respond to the UNIFIL proposal regarding security arrangements aimed at
facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area, submitted to
both parties on 25 June 2011. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL of its
approval on 19 July 2011. UNIFIL continued to raise the issue with the Israeli
authorities, who did not provide any new information.
22. Air violations, mostly by unmanned aerial vehicles, but also by fixed-wing
aircraft, including fighter jets, continued almost daily in violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. UNIFIL protested all violations to the Israel
Defense Forces, calling upon the authorities to cease them immediately. The
Government of Lebanon also protested the violations. In a 19 November letter to
UNIFIL, Lebanese Armed Forces Commander Lieutenant-General Kahwaji
expressed deep concern regarding the continued violations of Lebanese airspace by
the Israel Air Force, including reconnaissance and training flights conducted over
the northern and eastern parts of the country. The Israeli authorities have denied
conducting air training activities over Lebanon and continue to claim that the
reconnaissance overflights are necessary security measures.
23. In addition to the 15 and 29 December incidents described above, there were
several instances of tension across the Blue Line. The most serious occurred on
18 January, when UNIFIL observed a suspicious object close to the Blue Line in the
vicinity of El Adeisse (Sector East). After UNIFIL secured the area and informed the
parties of its discovery, an initial deployment of Israeli and Lebanese troops on both

4/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

sides of the Blue Line resulted in a tense stand-off. UNIFIL Geographic Information
System (GIS) measurements determined that the object was located a few metres
south of the Blue Line. Through the UNIFIL videoconference links, the Head of
Mission and Force Commander opened a dialogue with the parties and was able to
defuse the tension. Thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces removed the object.
24. On several occasions during the period, the Israel Defense Forces carried out
maintenance work between the technical fence and the Blue Line and, in some
cases, Israeli and Lebanese soldiers pointed their weapons at each other. UNIFIL
troops on the ground defused the situation. On 24 December, a bush fire on the
northern side of the Blue Line at B19 in the vicinity of Yarin (Sector West) triggered
some explosions in a mine field. The Lebanese Armed Forces protested to UNIFIL,
claiming that the Israel Defense Forces had ignited the fire. UNIFIL investigations
could not substantiate the Lebanese claim and found no violation of the Blue Line.
25. UNIFIL generally enjoyed full freedom of movement throughout its area of
operations. However, during the reporting period, UNIFIL troops encountered five
cases of unfriendly behaviour by civilians, some involving aggressive conduct
towards peacekeepers and, in one instance, theft of UNIFIL equipment. On
4 December, a UNIFIL patrol was diverted while passing through the village of
Yatar (Sector West) and channelled into a constricted area where its movement was
stopped by a group of approximately 20 young men. As the patrol commander
dismounted the vehicle to approach the group, they pushed him aside and forcefully
entered the vehicles, quickly removing some communication equipment and a map.
The Lebanese Armed Forces then arrived on the scene and escorted UNIFIL back to
its position. On 10 December, a UNIFIL patrol with six peacekeepers and two light
vehicles was stopped in Blida (Sector East) by approximately 15 civilians. After a
member of the patrol stepped out of his vehicle in an attempt to speak with the
group, the group tried to remove his personal weapon, which he avoided by getting
back into his vehicle. The civilians then slashed six tires of the patrol vehicles. On
16 January, civilians in a vehicle in the vicinity of El Adeisse approached UNIFIL
troops and accused them of taking their photographs, demanding that they hand over
their equipment. To avoid escalation, the UNIFIL troops handed over a memory
card. On 23 January, in the vicinity of Hanin (Sector West), a civilian car overtook a
UNIFIL patrol and stopped a short distance ahead, signalling the patrol for
assistance. As UNIFIL soldiers proceeded to assist the driver, some civilians arrived
on motorized scooters, surrounded the patrol and threw large rocks, causing damage
to UNIFIL vehicles but no injuries.
26. UNIFIL protested all the incidents to the Lebanese authorities, impressing
upon them the importance of the full freedom of movement of UNIFIL. Where
required, the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened to bring a quick end to the
incidents.
27. These incidents notwithstanding, UNIFIL relations with the local population
remained generally positive, as supported by regular meetings and liaison activities
with communities. Specific initiatives were carried out in villages that had seen
incidents of unfriendly behaviour in the past. In Blida, for instance, road signs were
erected in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, to help to direct UNIFIL
vehicular traffic along the main roads and avoid friction with the inhabitants.
28. UNIFIL implemented quick-impact projects in support of its mandate and
participated in joint outreach activities with a wide range of United Nations

14-24753

5/16

S/2014/130

agencies and non-governmental and other organizations. UNIFIL continued to brief
newly deployed contingents on the local environment, including vis-à-vis the Syrian
refugees present in the area of operations. In cooperation with the international
non-governmental organization Save the Children, UNFIL organized training for the
mission’s military personnel, with a view to raising their awareness of child
protection. UNIFIL troops directly provided medical, dental and veterinary
assistance and implemented projects in the areas of water and sanitation, education
and environmental protection.
29. During the period, UNIFIL observed a number of individuals carrying hunting
weapons south of the Litani River, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Most of
the instances were observed in the areas of Bastara, Houla and Meiss ej-Jebel. In
each case, UNIFIL tried to halt the hunting activity and notified the Lebanese
Armed Forces of the violations.
30. UNIFIL continued to provide assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces in
taking steps to establish an area free of armed personnel, assets and weapons
between the Blue Line and the Litani River, other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and of UNIFIL. Incidents during the reporting period demonstrated that
unauthorized weapons and hostile armed elements ready to use them were still
present in the area of operations.
31. The Government of Israel continued to allege that Hizbullah had been building
up its military presence inside populated areas in southern Lebanon and that
unauthorized weapons were being transferred into Lebanon, including into the
UNIFIL area of operations. If specific information is received regarding the illegal
presence of armed personnel or weapons in its area of operations, UNIFIL, in
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, remains determined to act with all
means available within its mandate and to the full extent provided for in its rules of
engagement. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL does not proactively search
for weapons in the south. As described in my previous reports, UNIFIL cannot enter
private property unless there is credible evidence of a violation of resolution 1701
(2006), including an imminent threat of hostile activity emanating from that specific
location. To date, UNIFIL has neither been provided with, nor found, evidence of
the unauthorized transfer of arms into its area of operations. The Lebanese Armed
Forces Command continued to state that it would act immediately to put a stop to
any activity in contravention of resolution 1701 (2006) and relevant Government
decisions.
32. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to carry out its dual mandate of
conducting maritime interdiction operations and training the Lebanese Armed
Forces. Since my previous report, the Task Force hailed 1,526 ships, and the
Lebanese navy and Customs officials inspected 422 vessels to verify that there were
no unauthorized arms or related materiel on board. In addition, the Task Force
conducted 90 training activities with the Lebanese navy.
33. Along the line of buoys, UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces patrol boats
dropping eight depth charges and three flares, reportedly to ward off Lebanese
fishing boats in the vicinity. Israel conducted two gunnery exercises in the vicinity
of the line of buoys on the Israeli side, and maintenance on several buoys. UNIFIL
has no mandate to monitor the line of buoys, which the Government of Israel
installed unilaterally and which the Government of Lebanon does not recognize.

6/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
34. The liaison and coordination arrangements between UNIFIL and the parties
continued to serve as the foundation of the mission’s work in implementing
resolution 1701 (2006), safeguarding the cessation of hostilities, ensuring full
respect for the Blue Line, and protecting security and stability in southern Lebanon.
In that regard, the parties continued to engage constructively with UNIFIL, both at
the tripartite and bilateral levels.
35. The tripartite forum chaired by the UNIFIL Force Commander remained the
key mechanism for addressing all security and military operational issues related to
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). During the reporting period, three
tripartite meetings were held, on 4 and 16 December and 29 January.
36. Liaison and coordination arrangements were enhanced in the wake of the
rocket launching on 29 December, with a simultaneous videoconferencing link
between UNIFIL and the parties. This link should enable real-time exchange in the
aftermath of a serious incident and assist UNIFIL in de-escalating tensions.
Meanwhile, there was no progress in establishing a UNIFIL office in Tel Aviv.
37. On 9 January, the Government of Lebanon transmitted a complaint to the
Security Council accusing the Government of Israel of waging an electronic war on
Lebanon and its information and communication networks. The Lebanese Armed
Forces also requested UNIFIL to take all possible measures to stop this Israeli
aggression and to include telecommunications violations on the regular agenda of
the tripartite meetings.
38. UNIFIL also continued to work with the parties to establish visible markers
along the Blue Line. As at 29 January, UNIFIL had cleared 300 points from mines,
measured 230 points, constructed 203 points and verified 182 points.
39. As part of its strategic priorities, and in complement to the efforts of the
International Support Group to bolster the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNIFIL continued
its work to facilitate the army’s capacity-building for tasks mandated under resolution
1701 (2006) and focused on the area between the Litani River and the Blue Line.
The Strategic Dialogue Permanent Committee, composed of representatives of the
Lebanese Armed Forces, the Government of Lebanon (Ministry of Defence and
Ministry of Foreign Affairs), UNIFIL and the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, met on 17 January and reviewed the scope, purpose and objectives of
the strategic dialogue, in the context of the initiatives arising from the International
Support Group, the recent donation pledged by Saudi Arabia, and the army’s fiveyear development plan, of which the strategic dialogue is an integral part.

C.

Disarming armed groups
40. Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) called for the full implementation of
the relevant provisions of the Taif Accords, and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), which require the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon, so that there
will be no weapons without the consent of the Government of Lebanon and no
authority other than that of the Government of Lebanon.
41. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
the Lebanese State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701

14-24753

7/16

S/2014/130

(2006), continues to restrict the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and
authority over its territory. Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it
maintains a substantial military capacity separate from that of the Lebanese State,
which it claims serves as a deterrent against potential aggression from Israel. The
Government of Israel asserts that these weapons, including large quantities of
missiles, constitute a serious threat. President Sleiman has continued to advocate the
approach to the control of Hizbullah’s arms contained in the national defence
strategy paper that he presented as a basis for discussion in the National Dialogue in
September 2012. No meetings of the National Dialogue were held during this
reporting period.
42. Arms outside the control of the State continued to proliferate and undermine
stability inside Lebanon. During the reporting period, there were repeated violent
incidents, including terrorist bombings, assassinations and attacks on the Lebanese
Armed Forces. On 19 November, a double suicide bombing in the Bir al-Abed
neighbourhood of Beirut targeted the Iranian Embassy, killing at least 23 people and
injuring more than 140. On 4 December, Hassan Laqis, a Hizbullah commander, was
assassinated in Beirut. On 15 December, there were two attacks on Lebanese army
checkpoints in Sidon, which killed one soldier and five of the purported attackers.
On 17 December, a car bomb exploded in the Beqaa valley near a point reported to
be a Hizbullah training camp and reportedly caused two fatalities. On 27 December,
former Minister Mohammed Chattah, a senior adviser to former Prime Minister
Saad Hariri, was assassinated by a car bomb in Beirut, which also killed five other
people. A suicide bombing in the Beirut suburb of Haret Hraik killed 5 people and
injured 77 on 2 January. In the Beqaa valley town of Hermel, 3 people were killed
and 26 injured in a 16 January car bomb. On 21 January, another suicide bombing in
Haret Hraik killed 4 people and injured 35. On 1 February, a suicide bomber
detonated a car bomb in Hermel, killing three, and on 3 February a suicide attack in
Choueifat in south Beirut killed the suicide bomber and wounded two people. The
Al-Qaeda-linked groups Jabhat al-Nusra and Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham have
variously claimed responsibility for some of these attacks.
43. In Tripoli, there was recurrent violence during the reporting period between
the predominantly Sunni neighbourhood of Bab al-Tabbaneh and the neighbouring
Alawite area of Jabel Mohsen. Clashes on 30 November resulted in 12 fatalities,
including one Lebanese soldier, and over 70 injuries. On 2 December, caretaker
Prime Minister Najib Mikati announced that the Lebanese Armed Forces would
assume control of security in Tripoli and that security services in the city would be
reinforced and put under their command. One Lebanese soldier was subsequently
killed and six others injured on 5 December during patrols to secure the city.
Members of the Alawite community were targeted by gunmen in a number of
attacks, including on 11 December when two Alawite men were shot and seriously
wounded by unknown gunmen. Outbreaks of violence in Tripoli during January led
to at least seven fatalities, including one Lebanese soldier, and over 48 casualties,
including at least five Lebanese soldiers.
44. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to deploy across the country to prevent
attacks, contain violence and confront and detain armed elements. The Lebanese
Armed Forces defused car bombs, including in the Bekaa valley on 22 November
and in Zahle on 29 November. On 22 December, the Lebanese Armed Forces
deployed in the Bekaa town of Souairi to contain an armed clash between two
families that had caused four fatalities. On 30 December, it was reported that Majed

8/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

al-Majed, the commander of the extremist Abdallah Azzam Brigades, which had
claimed responsibility for, inter alia, the Iranian Embassy bombing, was seriously ill
and in the custody of Army Intelligence. Al-Majed died in custody on 4 January. The
Lebanese Armed Forces confronted other militants from the Abdullah Azzam
Brigades and military prosecutors charged suspects with membership in the
organization. On 22 January, Omar Atrash, a Sunni militant wanted in connection
with recent attacks was arrested. On 12 February, Naim Abbas, reportedly a senior
leader of the Abdullah Azzam Brigades was arrested, and two car bombs were
discovered and dismantled. Military magistrates have sentenced a number of those
accused of responsibility for car bombs, including sentencing to death nine suspects
on 3 December for their involvement in a failed plot to bomb the southern suburb of
Maamoura in October.
45. There has been no progress on the dismantling of military bases maintained by
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada. In 2006, it was decided in the National Dialogue that these bases should
be dismantled. Their existence continues to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and
impede the ability of the State to monitor and control effectively parts of the
Lebanese-Syrian border.
46. The Palestinian refugee camp of Ein el-Helweh and the neighbouring Taamir
area have been used as a refuge by militant Sunni elements, allegedly including
fugitive Ahmed Assir. On 1 December, militants from the Jund al-Sham group killed
a member of Fatah and injured two others. In violence over the next two days, two
others were injured. On 25 December, a car bomb exploded in Ein el-Helweh
without causing casualties. On 1 February, one individual with links to Fatah was
killed by two unidentified gunmen in Ein el-Helweh.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
47. In its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council decided that all States
should prevent the sale or the supply of arms and related materiel to entities or
individuals in Lebanon by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag
vessels or aircraft. It also called upon the Government of Lebanon to secure its
borders and other entry points to prevent the entry into Lebanon without its consent
of arms and related materiel.
48. Representatives of the Government of Israel have consistently alleged that
there are significant, ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah across the LebaneseSyrian border. The United Nations takes these allegations seriously but is not in a
position to independently verify them. Representatives of the Government of Israel
have continued to express grave concern at the prospect of the transfer of advanced
weapons systems to Hizbullah. Hizbullah has denied allegations that chemical
weapons have been transferred to it and maintains that it does not intend to acquire
them.
49. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed in border areas to counter the
movement of armed elements between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. In
multiple incidents in December and January, Lebanese soldiers arrested Syrians near
the border with the Syrian Arab Republic, some of whom were in possession of
arms. On 21 December, there was a report of a number of casualties as a result of
fighting near the Bekaa valley village of Nahle, apparently between Hizbullah

14-24753

9/16

S/2014/130

fighters and armed members of the Syrian opposition. On 30 January, the Lebanese
Armed Forces intercepted a vehicle loaded with arms as it crossed from the Syrian
Arab Republic and attempted to enter the Bekaa town of Arsal.
50. During the reporting period, there were repeated incidents of shooting, crossborder shelling and rockets fired into Lebanon from the Syrian Arab Republic,
causing a number of injuries and material damage. On 17 January, rockets struck the
border town of Arsal, killing seven people and injuring seven others. On 31 January,
one Lebanese citizen was killed and several injured in Akkar by shelling from
within the Syrian Arab Republic. There were also at least five air strikes within
Lebanon by a Syrian Government aircraft and helicopters, in which two Lebanese
citizens were reportedly killed. Following statements by the Lebanese authorities of
their intention to defend Lebanon from violations of its sovereignty, the Lebanese
Armed Forces fired back at Syrian aircraft in Lebanese airspace on 30 December.
51. Hizbullah publicly acknowledged its continued involvement in the fighting in
the Syrian Arab Republic and held funerals for Hizbullah fighters killed there. Other
Lebanese elements are reported to be engaged in fighting alongside the Syrian
opposition. President Sleiman has continued to call upon all parties to adhere to the
policy of disassociation agreed in the Baabda Declaration during the National
Dialogue session of June 2012.
52. The influx of Syrian refugees into Lebanon has continued to grow. As at
15 February, 927,000 Syrians had registered or were seeking registration with
UNHCR, almost 80 per cent of whom are women and children. This includes 42,900
registered refugees in the UNIFIL area of operations. Additionally, 52,000 Palestine
refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic have sought refuge in Lebanon but since
August 2013, they have faced restrictions on entering Lebanon. On 16 December,
the United Nations launched the sixth Syria Regional Response Plan, appealing for
$1.7 billion for Lebanon, including an appeal for $165 million presented by the
Government. This appeal covers humanitarian needs for a projected 1.5 million
Syrian refugees, 100,000 Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic, 50,000
Lebanese returnees and 1.5 million affected Lebanese through the end of 2014.
Funding for the fifth Regional Response Plan (2013) reached 51 per cent of its
$1.6 billion goal. Many refugees continue to live in substandard accommodation and
lack access to basic services, including clean water and sanitation. Provision of
adequate shelter remains a particular challenge given the dispersal of refugees in
over 1,600 localities throughout Lebanon.
53. Humanitarian partners continued implementing their winterization programme
to mitigate the additional challenges posed by colder temperatures. United Nations
agencies are also scaling up their interventions to extend additional support for host
communities. To guide the national response and mitigate the socioeconomic and
humanitarian impact on Lebanon, the World Bank, the United Nations and the
Government of Lebanon jointly produced the Road map of Priority Interventions for
Stabilization from the Syrian Conflict, presented by the Government at the Second
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria, held in Kuwait City. The
multi-donor trust fund referred to in paragraph 7 above was established as an
additional option for channelling assistance.
54. The situation for Syrian refugee women and girls in Lebanon, as elsewhere,
remains particularly difficult. Coping mechanisms for survival include prostitution,
sex offered in return for assistance and early marriage of girls. Further protection

10/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

and support mechanisms are needed to combat reported sexual exploitation, physical
abuse and harassment.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
55. Eight manual mine clearance teams, two explosive ordnance disposal teams
and one mechanical mine clearance team from UNIFIL were validated by the United
Nations Mine Action Support Team and deployed in the UNIFIL area of operations
during the reporting period. UNIFIL cleared more than 1,656 m2 of hazardous land
to provide access to Blue Line points and found and destroyed 66 anti-personnel
mines during the period from 1 November to 2 February. Furthermore, the Team
conducted 27 validation events, 84 quality assurance visits of operational sites and
82 visits, meetings and demonstrations. It also provided explosive ordnance
awareness training to 15 members of Observer Group Lebanon and 11 UNIFIL staff
members as part of the course “Safe and secure approach to field environments”.
56. The Lebanese Mine Action Centre reported that, during the period from
1 November to 31 January, it had cleared 559,334 m2 of hazardous land, including
minefields and battle areas, and destroyed 709 cluster munition items,
210 unexploded ordnance and eight anti-personnel mines.

F.

Delineation of borders
57. No progress was made during the reporting period towards the delineation or
demarcation of the Lebanese-Syrian border, including in areas where it is uncertain
or disputed, as called for in Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006). Extending the authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout all
Lebanese territory and enabling the Lebanese security forces and Lebanese Armed
Forces to secure borders to prevent the entry of arms or related materiel necessitates
the delineation and demarcation of the border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic as soon as practicable.
58. There has also been no progress on the issue of the Shab’a Farms. There has
still been no reaction to the provisional definition of that area contained in my report
of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641)
from either Israel or the Syrian Arab Republic.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
59. UNIFIL continued to cooperate closely with the Lebanese authorities to ensure
the safety and security of all Mission personnel, in addition to applying its own risk
mitigation measures, continuously reviewing its security plan and carrying out
safety awareness training for its personnel.
60. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in the Lebanese Military Court
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL peacekeepers. In two cases of serious attacks in 2008 pending at the
Military Court of Appeal and the Permanent Court of first instance respectively,
hearings were scheduled for 27 March and 2 May. In two cases of serious attacks

14-24753

11/16

S/2014/130

perpetrated in 2007 and 2011, the investigations have not identified the suspected
perpetrators as yet and both cases remain open pending new evidence. The
investigation is still ongoing in two other cases of serious attacks perpetrated in
2011. A new investigation was launched following the arrest on 20 January of a
person suspected of preparing terrorist attacks against UNIFIL.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
61. As at 27 January, the total military strength of UNIFIL was 10,113, including
365 women. The civilian component consisted of 301 international and 634 national
staff, including 90 and 160 women, respectively. A total of 52 United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization military observers, including two women, are also part of
UNIFIL.
62. In November, the Irish-Finnish battalion completed its rotation; it is now
composed of two Finnish companies and one Irish company. In January, the
Malaysian battalion completed its redeployment from Sector East to Sector West.
63. As at 27 January, the Maritime Task Force consisted of three frigates, four fast
patrol boats and two helicopters.

V. Observations
64. Despite the serious incidents and provocations during the reporting period,
relative stability has been maintained in southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line.
This is notable given the situation elsewhere in Lebanon and in the region.
Sustaining this calm is important in maintaining the fragile stability in Lebanon and
for regional security. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense
Forces for their resolve in safeguarding the cessation of hostilities through the
utilization of the presence of UNIFIL, particularly its liaison and coordination
arrangements. I am also encouraged by the parties’ continued willingness to engage
with UNIFIL on constructive confidence-building measures. The number of recent
incidents across Lebanon further underlines the imperative for the parties to
continue to prevent any escalatory developments along the Blue Line.
65. I remain concerned at the lack of progress towards achieving a permanent
ceasefire to the conflict, as envisaged in resolution 1701 (2006). My Special
Coordinator and UNIFIL have continued to emphasize the need for the parties to
work towards that goal by taking tangible steps and laying the groundwork for
future progress. I continue to encourage the parties to recommit to a permanent
ceasefire and to work with my Special Coordinator and UNIFIL to achieve that aim.
66. I regret the tragic killing of a soldier of the Israel Defense Forces on
15 December. This deplorable act by a Lebanese Armed Forces soldier could have
led to a major escalation, were it not for the collective efforts of UNIFIL and the
parties.
67. I condemn the firing of rockets on 29 December. Such hostile actions, in
serious breach of resolution 1701 (2006) and of the cessation of hostilities, gravely
endanger human lives and threaten to unravel peace and security in the area. The
Lebanese authorities have the primary responsibility to ensure that there are no

12/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River and to prevent any attempts to use Lebanese territory for hostile
actions. Notwithstanding every country’s right to self-defence, retaliatory fire by
Israel does not conform to United Nations expectations with respect to the cessation
of hostilities. These expectations include that each party immediately notify UNIFIL
if it has been fired upon and refrain from responding, except where clearly required
in immediate self-defence. This would allow UNIFIL in the first instance to
effectively deal with the attack by coordinating an immediate security and
investigative response.
68. Major obligations under the resolution remain outstanding and require action
by both parties. The imperative to remove unauthorized weapons from the UNIFIL
area of operations remains a long-term endeavour with added urgency in the light of
the increasingly fragile stability in Lebanon.
69. In addition, I remain concerned that overflights of Lebanese territory and
territorial waters continue to be committed almost daily by Israel in violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006). I call again upon the
Government of Israel to cease all violations of Lebanese airspace.
70. The continued occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of the northern part of
the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line constitutes a
continuing violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Israel has an obligation to withdraw
its armed forces from northern Ghajar, in accordance with the resolution.
71. I welcome the continued progress in the visible marking of the Blue Line,
which has contributed to preventing inadvertent ground violations. The commitment
of the parties to continue working with UNIFIL, including on contentious or
problematic points, will be vital to the completion of this process. Notwithstanding
their respective reservations, both sides have undertaken to respect the Blue Line, as
identified by the United Nations, in its entirety.
72. I remain concerned that incidents that impede the freedom of movement of
UNIFIL and endanger the safety and security of peacekeepers continue to occur. The
freedom of movement of UNIFIL and the security and safety of its personnel are
integral to the effective execution of its tasks, in accordance with resolutions 1701
(2006) and 1773 (2007). The primary responsibility for ensuring the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL in its area of operations lies with the Lebanese authorities.
73. Lebanon continues to be affected adversely by the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I deplore the shelling, shooting and aerial incursions into Lebanese border
areas from the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the movement of armed fighters and
war materiel between the two countries. The lack of progress in delineating and
demarcating the border between the two countries is no justification for violations
of Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and all parties fighting there to cease violations of the border and to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).
74. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic in breach of the policies of neutrality and disassociation adopted by
the Government of Lebanon and of the principles of the Baabda Declaration of June
2012, which was agreed upon by all of Lebanon’s political leaders. I call upon all
Lebanese parties to step back from any involvement in the Syrian conflict,

14-24753

13/16

S/2014/130

consistent with their commitment in the Baabda Declaration, and urge them instead
to act in the interests of Lebanon and to recommit to the policy of disassociation.
75. The Security Council strongly condemned the numerous terrorist acts in
Lebanon during the reporting period, which cost many lives and caused great
suffering to many innocent Lebanese. This is a new and dangerous dimension in the
present crisis. The terrorist groups perpetrating these acts threaten the security of all
Lebanese people. I reiterate my call for unity on the part of all parties in Lebanon in
the face of such threat. I call upon all the Lebanese people to stand behind their
State institutions, including the army and security forces, as the best means to
confront such unacceptable and indiscriminate actions. The recurrent rounds of
violence in Tripoli remain of deep concern. Violence and attacks against the
Lebanese Armed Forces in that city and elsewhere reflect the unacceptable
proliferation of weapons outside the authority of the State. In that regard, I call upon
Member States to uphold their obligation under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent
the sale or supply of arms or related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon.
Continued broad political support is needed for the security and judicial authorities
to combat impunity in respect of all acts of violence. The assassination of former
Minister Mohammed Chattah was a deeply disturbing reminder of earlier crimes.
The opening of the trial in the Special Tribunal for Lebanon illustrates the refusal of
Lebanon and the international community to acquiesce in impunity.
76. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
the State continues to pose a threat to Lebanese sovereignty and stability and
contradicts the country’s obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). President Sleiman has reiterated the urgency of the adoption of a national
defence strategy in the light of the use of Hizbullah’s arms outside Lebanon. I urge
the parties to resume the National Dialogue to address the issue of arms. A return to
the Dialogue could be useful in addressing other issues as well, including building
upon the Baabda Declaration. I commend President Sleiman for his leadership in
taking forward this and other crucial dossiers. With the approach of the end of his
term of office, the principles agreed in the Baabda Declaration received further
support in the National Charter of the Maronite Patriarchate, published on
9 February. I further reiterate my call for the implementation of earlier decisions of
the National Dialogue, specifically those relating to the disarmament of the
non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
77. I warmly welcome the formation of the new Government of Lebanon and
commend Prime Minister Tammam Salam for the efforts to bring about an inclusive
outcome. I urge Lebanon’s political leaders to build on their constructive
engagement in order to sustain and build up the vital institutions of the State in the
face of continuing adversity. It is of crucial importance for confidence and stability
that the presidential election be conducted successfully within the legal and
constitutional time frame. Equally important is the need to take steps to ensure that
parliamentary elections are held thereafter without delay and in accordance with the
Constitution. I pay tribute to outgoing Prime Minister Najib Mikati for his
leadership. Given the severity of the security, humanitarian and economic
challenges facing Lebanon, it is essential for the Government to be able to act
effectively without delay to address such challenges with the full support of all
parties. Such cooperation is also essential for the effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and other relevant resolutions, as well as

14/16

14-24753

S/2014/130

for the continued commitment to the Baabda Declaration, which remain crucial to
Lebanon’s stability.
78. The international community has reason to be grateful for the continued open
border policy of Lebanon and its generous efforts in hosting and assisting Syrian
refugees. Lebanon hosts the largest number of refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic in both absolute terms and relative to population. The burden of such a
large number of refugees, proportionally greater than in any other country in the
world, on so small and fragile a State is huge. It drains its resources and has severe
impacts on stability. I commend the response by the Government of Lebanon,
including during the sudden refugee influx into the town of Arsal in November.
Whatever Government is in place in the coming period, it is crucial that it have
strong mechanisms in place to coordinate, in partnership with the United Nations,
both the refugee response and support for host communities. However, this is a
burden that must be shared. I am grateful to all the donors who have contributed to
the appeals for Syrian refugees in Lebanon to date. While I am encouraged by the
additional commitments made at the pledging conference I chaired in Kuwait in
January, the shortfall in 2013 — and potentially in 2014 — was very large. Early
delivery on pledges made is crucial for the sake of the refugees. More assistance
will be needed in the coming months. Additionally, given the acute pressures on
government services, local administration and host communities, it is vital that
programmes envisaged in the road map for stabilization presented by the
Government be funded, including through the multi-donor trust fund that has now
been established. Lastly, it is encouraging that a number of Member States have
opened their door to at least a measure of resettlement: programmes of this sort are
important both for securing assistance to the most vulnerable and as a signal to
neighbouring countries such as Lebanon of the international community’s
commitment to burden-sharing.
79. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for its continued commitment and
strong cooperation with UNIFIL and for the role that it plays in upholding Lebanese
commitments under resolution 1701 (2006). In addition to playing a key role in the
preservation of stability along the Blue Line, the Lebanese Armed Forces addressed
the multiple threats to Lebanon’s security and stability in other parts of the country.
This included efforts to secure the areas bordering the Syrian Arab Republic and to
combat terrorism and maintain stability in Lebanon against the daunting challenges
posed by the impact of the Syrian crisis. My Special Coordinator and UNIFIL have
worked with the Lebanese Armed Forces to finalize coordination mechanisms to
facilitate additional donor support in response to the five-year capabilities
development programme and to the strategic dialogue plan, which seeks to support
the gradual assumption by the Lebanese Armed Forces of security control in the
UNIFIL area of operations. It is encouraging that work in this area is moving
forward. I welcome the generous offer of assistance for the Lebanese Armed Forces
by Saudi Arabia, which was announced by President Sleiman. I also welcome the
offer of the Government of Italy to host an international conference to help to
stimulate and channel additional support to the Lebanese Armed Forces. I encourage
the international community to further contribute to strengthening the Lebanese
Armed Forces, including its naval capacity, drawing on the five-year capabilities
development plan and also with respect to its activities towards the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) south of the Litani River, as facilitated by the UNIFIL
strategic dialogue.

14-24753

15/16

S/2014/130

80. I thank the Member States participating in the International Support Group for
their continued commitment to Lebanon. Their cooperation has helped to generate
important momentum on the assistance agendas mentioned above and underlines on
an ongoing basis international support for Lebanon’s security and stability and for
State institutions, as well as for Lebanon’s policy of disassociation. I look forward
to working closely with them to the same ends in the coming period and welcome in
that regard the intention of France to host a ministerial meeting of the Group.
81. The security situation in the Palestinian refugee camp of Ein el-Helweh is of
concern and I welcome the efforts of Palestinian camp leaders to work with the
Lebanese authorities to maintain order. The need to improve the living conditions of
Palestine refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to the resolution of the refugee
question in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement, is ever more urgent.
The Palestinian refugee camps are still more crowded as a result of the growing
numbers of Palestine refugees displaced from the Syrian Arab Republic. I encourage
donors to be forthcoming in support of UNRWA, including to enable it to assist
displaced Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic.
82. Regrettably no progress has been made with regard to the Shab’a Farms area
in accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006). I call, once again, on
Syria and Israel to submit their responses to the provisional definition of the Shab’a
Farms area that I provided in October 2007 (S/2007/641).
83. For both Lebanon and Israel the development of their oil and gas reserves is a
national priority. I encourage both countries to continue efforts to address the
delimitation of their respective maritime exclusive zones and the exploration and
exploitation of their natural resources in a manner that facilitates this and does not
give rise to tensions. The United Nations remains ready to assist in this matter
should both parties so request.
84. Lebanon is going through a very difficult period. Its resilience in the face of
challenges arising from the conflict in the neighbouring Syrian Arab Republic has
been impressive, but the threats, including from terrorism, have increased sharply in
recent months. It is imperative that the international community remains united and
committed in its support for Lebanon. Equally it is crucial that all parties in
Lebanon come together in addressing the multiple challenges to its stability. The
calm prevailing across the Blue Line makes a vital contribution to Lebanon’s
stability, and to the security and well-being of the peoples of both countries. Longerterm security and stability call for an end to conflict in the region, including
progress towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Notwithstanding the
evident difficulties I will continue to do all in my power to further these goals.
85. I wish to express my appreciation to all countries contributing troops and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I also commend the UNIFIL
Head of Mission and Force Commander and the military and the civilian personnel
of UNIFIL, as well as my Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the staff of his
Office, all of whom continue to play a critical role in helping to promote stability
along the Blue Line and in Lebanon.

16/16

14-24753
