S/PRST/2007/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5664th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 April 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions on Lebanon, in
particular resolutions 1701 (2006), 425 and 426 (1978), 520 (1982), 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006), as well as the statements of its president on the
situation in Lebanon, in particular its statement of 12 December 2006
(S/PRST/2006/52).
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the legitimate and
democratically-elected Government of Lebanon, calls for full respect of the
democratic institutions of the country, in conformity with its constitution, and
condemns any effort to destabilize Lebanon. The Security Council calls upon
all Lebanese political parties to show responsibility with a view to preventing,
through dialogue, further deterioration of the situation in Lebanon. It reaffirms
its strong support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
14 March 2007 (S/2007/147) on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
It notes with appreciation the indication by the Secretary-General that further
progress has been made towards the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
It reiterates its attachment to the full implementation of all provisions of this
resolution and urges all concerned parties to cooperate fully with the Security
Council and the Secretary-General to achieve a permanent ceasefire and a
long-term solution as envisioned in the resolution.
“The Security Council welcomes the completion of the second phase of
the deployment of UNIFIL, expresses its strong appreciation to Member States
that contribute to UNIFIL and commends the active role of the force, notably
of its Commander, as well as of the Special Coordinator of the United Nations
for Lebanon.
“The Security Council, taking note of the Secretary-General’s
observation that more can be done to consolidate the cessation of hostilities,
urges the Israeli and Lebanese Governments to approve the temporary security

07-31028 (E) 170407

*0731028*

S/PRST/2007/12

arrangements for the northern part of the village of Ghajar and to further close
liaison and coordination arrangements with UNIFIL, notably through tripartite
meetings. It also encourages the parties to cooperate with UNIFIL to visibly
mark the Blue Line, notably in sensitive areas in order to prevent inadvertent
violations.
“The Security Council welcomes the measures taken by the Government
of Lebanon, with the assistance of UNIFIL, to establish between the Blue Line
and the Litani river an area free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons
other than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL, and
encourages the Government of Lebanon to strengthen its efforts to this end.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep concern at the continuing Israeli
violations of Lebanese air space, appeals to all parties concerned to respect the
cessation of hostilities and the Blue Line in its entirety, to refrain from any act
of provocation, and to abide scrupulously by their obligation to respect the
safety of the UNIFIL and other United Nations personnel, including by
avoiding any course of action which endangers United Nations personnel and
by ensuring UNIFIL is accorded full freedom of movement throughout its area
of operation.
“The Security Council, in this context, expresses its serious concern at
mounting information by Israel and another State of illegal movements of arms
across the Lebanese-Syrian border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). It
welcomes the determination expressed and the measures taken by the
Government of Lebanon to prevent such movements in conformity with
relevant resolutions, notes that the Government of Syria has stated that it has
taken measures and reiterates its call on that Government to take further
measures to reinforce controls at the border.
“The Security Council, taking note of the letter of the Secretary-General
to the president of the Council of 13 April 2007 (S/2007/207), welcomes the
Secretary-General’s intention to evaluate the situation along the entire border
and invites him to dispatch at the earliest, in close liaison with the Lebanese
Government, an independent mission to fully assess the monitoring of the
border and to keep the Council informed on his contacts with the Lebanese
Government, and to report back to the Council, before his next report, on its
findings and recommendations in this regard. The Security Council urges all
parties to cooperate fully with this mission.
“The Council urges again all Member States, in particular in the region,
to take all necessary measures to implement in full paragraph 15 of resolution
1701 (2006) to enforce the arms embargo, and expresses its intention, upon
reception of the Secretary-General’s recommendations, to take further concrete
steps to achieve the goals set out in this paragraph.
.
“The Council welcomes any request by the Government of Lebanon for
assistance to enhance Lebanon’s border security capacities, including by
supplying equipment and training. It welcomes in this regard the on-going
assistance provided by the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Arab
Emirates and others, and encourages Member States, as suggested by the
Secretary-General, to consider further assistance.

2

07-31028

S/PRST/2007/12

“The Council, while commending the steps taken by the Government of
Lebanon to exercise its monopoly of the use of force throughout its territory,
takes note with concern of reported activities of unauthorized armed elements
outside of UNIFIL’s area of operations and reiterates its call for disbanding
and disarmament of all militias and armed groups in Lebanon. It expresses its
deep concern at the report of recent statements made in this regard by the
Hizbullah Secretary General, notably with regard to the seizure by the
Lebanese authorities of a truckload of arms on 8 February 2007, and
underscores that these statements are an open admission of activities which
would constitute a violation of resolution 1701 (2006). It expresses concern at
any allegation of rearming of Lebanese and non Lebanese armed groups and
militias and reiterates that there should be no sale or supply of arms and
related materiel to Lebanon except as authorized by its Government.
“The Security Council expresses deepest worry at the presence in very
high numbers of unexploded ordnance in south Lebanon, including cluster
munitions. It deplores the death and injury of dozens of civilians, as well as of
several de-miners, caused by those munitions since the cessation of hostilities.
It supports in this context the Secretary-General’s request to Israel to provide
to the United Nations detailed data on its use of cluster munitions in southern
Lebanon.
“The Security Council notes with profound concern that there has been
no progress on the issue of the return of the two Israeli soldiers abducted by
Hizbullah on 12 July 2006 despite further intense efforts by the SecretaryGeneral and his facilitator, and reiterates its call for their immediate and
unconditional release.
“The Security Council further encourages efforts aimed at urgently
settling the issue of the Lebanese prisoners detained in Israel.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his facilitator towards an early resolution of those issues and reiterates its
call upon all parties concerned to fully cooperate with the Secretary-General to
this end.
“Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006), in particular paragraph 10 of resolution 1701,
on the delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, the Security Council notes in
this context the progress recently made by the senior cartographer appointed
by the Secretary-General in reviewing relevant material and developing an
accurate territorial definition of the Sheba’a Farms area. Noting the SecretaryGeneral’s expectation that the technical work will be completed by mid-June
and his intention to report more fully at that time, the Security Council invites
all parties to cooperate with the cartographer by providing any relevant
material in their possession.
“The Security Council also reiterates its appreciation for the process
launched by the Secretary-General to investigate the implications of the
interim proposal contained in the seven-point plan of the Government of
Lebanon regarding the Sheba’a farms area. It looks forward to the early
completion of this task in liaison with relevant parties and to further
recommendations by the Secretary-General on this key issue.

07-31028

3

S/PRST/2007/12

“The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the Secretary-General
in his efforts and dedication to facilitate and assist in the fulfilment of all
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
“The Security Council stresses the importance of, and the need to
achieve, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on
all its relevant resolutions including its resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973.”

4

07-31028
