S/2007/150

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 15 March 2007 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the seventh report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, which was prepared pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005) and 1686 (2006).
The report describes progress made by the Commission since its previous
report dated 12 December 2006 (S/2006/962) in investigating the February 2005
assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 other victims,
and in providing technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their
investigation of a number of other attacks perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October
2004.
The present report provides information on the Commission’s progress in the
investigation of the Hariri case, with particular emphasis on developing crime scene
leads and collecting evidence relating to perpetrators as well as linkage and
contextual aspects of the case. The Commission also continued to provide
significant technical assistance on 15 other cases, pursuing possible linkages
between these and the Hariri case. It has also worked in conjunction with the
Lebanese authorities on the investigation of the 13 February 2007 bombings, in
which three people were killed and at least 20 people were injured when two
explosions occurred on two buses travelling through the village of Ain Alaq, near
Beirut.
I wish to take this opportunity to express thanks to Commissioner Brammertz
for his leadership and to the staff of the Commission for their dedication and
commitment in often demanding circumstances.
I also wish to thank the Government of Lebanon for its enduring cooperation
with, and support for, the Commission. In addition, I would like to welcome the
request of the Lebanese Government transmitted in Prime Minister Siniora’s letter
of 21 February 2007 for a further extension of the mandate of the Commission for a
period of up to one year, from 15 June 2007.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. Meanwhile, I am transmitting the report to the
Government of Lebanon.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-27088 (E) 190307

*0727088*

S/2007/150

Seventh report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission established pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005),
1644 (2005) and 1686 (2006)
Serge Brammertz
Commissioner

Beirut
March 2007

Summary
The Security Council, in its resolution 1644 (2005) of 15 December 2005,
requested the International Independent Investigation Commission to report to it on
its progress, including on the cooperation received from the Syrian authorities, every
three months.
The present report summarizes the progress made by the Commission in its
investigative activities since the last report to the Council (S/2006/962). During the
reporting period, the Commission remained focused on its primary objective in the
investigation of the Hariri case and provided technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in 16 other cases, including the assassination of Minister Pierre Gemayel
and, most recently, the Ain Alaq bombings of February 2007.
In the Hariri case, the Commission has made progress in collecting new
evidence and in expanding the forms of evidence collected. This has enabled the
Commission to narrow its focus in a number of areas during the reporting period,
particularly in relation to establishing the motive behind the execution of the crime.
The Commission continues to maintain a close working relationship with
Lebanese authorities on all matters relevant to its mandate. The Commission also
continues to receive responses to its requests to other Member States, including the
Syrian Arab Republic. This cooperation remains an important component of the
Commission’s work.
Since the last report, the political and security environment in and around
Lebanon has remained unstable. The Commission continues to monitor the political
situation in the region and its potential impact on its investigations and requirements
for its security.
In the light of the current and planned investigative activities, it is unlikely that
the Commission will complete its work before its current mandate expires in
June 2007. The Commission therefore welcomes the request for an extension of its
mandate beyond that date.

2

07-27088

S/2007/150

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1644
(2005) of 15 December 2005, in which the Council requested the International
Independent Investigation Commission to report every three months to the Council
on the progress of its inquiry and on international cooperation, including the
cooperation received from the Syrian authorities.
2.
This report, the seventh report of the Commission, provides an update of
issues covered in previous reports to the Council and notes progress in the work of
the Commission since the last report, of 12 December 2006 (S/2006/962). As
outlined in earlier reports, the Commission remains mindful of its obligation to
protect the confidentiality of its investigations in order to ensure the integrity of the
legal process and to protect those who have cooperated with the Commission. This
approach is taken in full agreement with the Lebanese judicial authorities. Hence the
present report provides an overview of activities undertaken in the reporting period
rather than a detailed account of ongoing investigations.
3.
Since the last report, the security environment in and around Lebanon has
remained unstable, as illustrated by the bombings of two buses in the village of Ain
Alaq, near Beirut, which resulted in the death of three people and injuries to 20
others on 13 February 2007. Also, discussions about the creation of a special
tribunal for Lebanon remain at the top of the political agenda in Lebanon and in the
region. The Commission therefore continues to monitor these issues for potential
impact on its investigation activities and requirements for its security.
4.
As in the past, the Commission maintains a close working relationship with
Lebanese authorities on all matters relevant to its mandate. During the reporting
period, the Commission also received extensive and timely assistance from a
number of other States in a wide range of substantive areas. The Commission also
continues to receive responses from the Syrian Arab Republic, which provides
information and facilitates interviews with individuals located on Syrian territory.
This cooperation remains an important component of the Commission’s work.
5.
The Commission has remained focused on its primary objective: the
investigation of the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22
others. It has made progress in collecting new evidence and in expanding the forms
of evidence collected. This is done to enhance case knowledge and corroborate
existing information. This approach has enabled the Commission to narrow its focus
in a number of areas, in particular in relation to developing its understanding of the
motive behind the execution of the crime.
6.
Following requests from the Security Council, the Commission has been
providing technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities for the 14 other cases, the
case of the assassination of Minister Pierre Gemayel and, more recently, the Ain
Alaq bombings. In doing so, the Commission has sought to identify areas of work
where it can add value to the investigations, while expending appropriate resources
to achieve the required results. The objective remains to assist in each individual
case, while identifying possible linkages between them.
7.
The forensic programme of the Commission continues to form a particularly
important component of the investigative work in support of all cases. Further
corroboration of findings through forensic work was achieved during the reporting

07-27088

3

S/2007/150

period, and a number of new tasks were undertaken. With that in mind, the
Commission introduced internal and external capacity-building measures to manage
its complex and interlinked forensic projects.
8.
The Commission intends to compare selected DNA profiles and fingerprints
with relevant databases, access to which will be facilitated by an international law
enforcement organization. The Commission is also developing its own database of
relevant DNA samples, and will continue to work with Lebanese authorities and
foreign experts to gain access to materials and conduct further analyses, as
appropriate.

II. Progress in the investigations
9.
During the reporting period, the Commission’s investigation of the Hariri
assassination concentrated on its main objectives and expanded the scope of
information and evidence being collected. In support of those objectives, and in
addition to other operational work it undertook, the Commission conducted 42
interviews linked to the Hariri case during the reporting period.
10. The provision of technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities has continued
in the 16 other cases, including the Pierre Gemayel case and the Ain Alaq bombings.
The Commission has conducted 27 interviews, carried out forensic investigations on
the crime scenes, undertaken the collection and examination of crime scene exhibits,
conducted portrait sketch activities with witnesses, and collected closed-circuit
television footage in support of these other cases. The overarching objective remains
to develop each case individually, while seeking evidence of possible linkages
between the cases. Linkages may include the characteristics of the victims targeted,
motive, purpose of the attacks, the modus operandi employed, and perpetrators of
the attacks.
11. In the reporting period, the Commission developed and implemented a broader
plan for collection of evidence in relation to all cases currently under investigation
to enhance the evidential base for the cases in conjunction with conventional
interview processes. This was done to corroborate and substantiate the witness
statements. It is made possible through the acquisition of documentary information
such as government and national agency records; and the management of forensic
collection, research and analysis projects, including the development of inventories
and databases, the coordination of external analysis by forensic experts of exhibits
provided by the Lebanese authorities, the systematic exploitation of
communications intercept material, further development of communications traffic
analysis, further analysis of considerable electronic data holdings and the
development of confidential witnesses and contacts.
12. By applying this methodology, the Commission believes it can establish a
more detailed picture of events around the crime, elicit new leads and corroborate
witness statements. This is especially important when investigating the linkage and
knowledge aspects of the cases, where the establishment of the facts can sometimes
be clouded by individual subjectivity.
13. The Commission devotes the majority of its time and resources to the Hariri
case by developing crime scene leads and collecting evidence relating to the
perpetrators, linkage and contextual aspects of the case. It is mindful of the balance

4

07-27088

S/2007/150

that needs to be struck between the Hariri case, the provision of support in the 14
other cases, and the Gemayel and Ain Alaq cases. This is a changing equation over
time, but the Commission strives to take advantage of methodologies that add the
most value to all the cases while making the best use of available resources.

A.

Hariri investigation

1.

Crime scene and associated topics
Properties of the blast — seismological analysis
14. The analysis of seismological data registered on 14 February 2005 by the
National Centre of Geophysics in Lebanon is ongoing and aims to establish the
properties of the blast that killed Hariri. The preliminary report, which was received
from external experts, corroborates the Commission’s earlier assessments that only
one blast occurred and that the precise time of the blast was 12:55:05.
15. The phenomenon of more than one sound being heard by a number of
witnesses is now satisfactorily scientifically and experimentally explained. In fact,
three distinct phases of the blast can be observed on the seismograms, owing to the
different propagation speeds of three different waves: the primary and secondary
volume waves, the surface waves and the sound waves. At a sufficient distance from
the explosion, these waves can be mistaken for the signature of more than one
explosion. The sound recordings performed during the scaling explosion
experiments confirm these theoretical explanations.
16. The final report on the characteristics of the explosion, which will be provided
to the Commission in the next reporting period, will include an assessment of the
power of the explosion, and a comparative analysis of other explosions that have
occurred in Lebanon.
Properties of the blast — scaling explosion experiments
17. The analysis of scaling explosion experiments confirms previous conclusions
that the physical phenomena observed at the crime scene are fully compatible with
an above-ground explosion. For example, the fireball, deposit of carbon residues on
the facades of the hotels, and damage sustained to the buildings and the
surroundings, due to the blast effects, are not compatible with an underground
explosion.
18. In addition, a full analysis of the autopsy and injuries records and associated
photographs of the victims will be undertaken to examine the wound phenomena for
the primary blast (for example: the presence of pulmonary lesions and lesions of the
eardrums) and secondary blast (projections of debris) associated with an aboveground explosion. A preliminary assessment of the data corroborates that the
explosion occurred above the ground. These findings are being confirmed by
numerical simulations.
Aerial delivery theory
19. The validity of the hypothesis of an aerial delivery of the explosive device, put
forward to the Commission in August 2006, is being examined. The Commission is
conducting a scientific, technical and investigative analysis of the possibilities of

07-27088

5

S/2007/150

the bomb being delivered in this way. Preliminary technical findings indicate that
this theory is unlikely. The Commission intends to conduct a fact-finding mission, to
include interviews and meetings with relevant experts, in order to develop its
understanding of this possibility, and will draw some conclusions during the next
reporting period.
Forensic examination of exhibits recovered on the crime scene
20. As previously reported to the Council, the Commission was able to make a
preliminary association between certain vehicle parts found in the crater at the crime
scene and those of a Mitsubishi van. This was done using documentation and
technical information received by the Commission from Japan, as well as the
Commission’s own-sourced manuals and documents. The process of creating a
complete inventory of these exhibits is ongoing, in conformity with international
standards, and, once complete, the alleged parts of the vehicle will be submitted for
formal identification in cooperation with external technical experts.
Visualization projects
21. Three digital visualization projects have been completed, and a new one is
ongoing to enable evidence and case facts to be presented in a way that will
facilitate the identification of further investigative steps to be taken. The first two
projects are the visualization of the city and the crime scene at various points along
the route taken by the Hariri convoy on 14 February 2005, using panoramic and
three-dimensional (3D) satellite imagery. The third project is the visualization of a
time line reconstruction of Hariri’s last day, including the alleged communications
traffic activity of the bomb team as the convoy proceeded along its route. A fourth
project entails the creation of a model that will allow users to “walk through” the
crime scene showing the exact locations where various exhibits were found.
22. Themes being placed into the model include the plotting of trajectories and
final locations of physical and biological evidence; the reconstruction of events;
animations of the Mitsubishi van and the convoy vehicles as they arrived at the
crime scene; the damage caused by the explosion; witness information; video
recordings from the closed-circuit television system of a nearby branch of the HSBC
bank; and test explosions data.
Geographical origin of the alleged bomber
23. The project to attempt to determine the geographical origin of the bomber is
being developed through two approaches. One method uses a team of experts that is
conducting a statistical analysis on allele frequencies based on the nuclear DNA
profile of the 33 human parts collected from the crime scene. These human parts
belong to the man likely to have detonated the device, and are compared with the
allele frequencies of profiles provided by several countries. This work should
provide a probability-based assessment on the possible place of origin of the alleged
bomber.
24. The second method focuses on the study of isotope data. In the Commission’s
previous report, the results of the first phase of analysis showed that the individual
did not spend his youth in Lebanon, but was likely situated there in the two to three
months before his death. The Commission can now also add that the man had
significant exposure to lead pollution in an urban environment up to the age of

6

07-27088

S/2007/150

about 12, and that such exposure was low during the last 10 years of his life,
possibly indicating that he lived in a more rural environment during this period.
25. In order to advance this line of inquiry, the Commission has collected a total of
112 samples from 28 locations in the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon. Over the
coming weeks, it will collect samples in three other countries in the region, and
further countries are identified for another series of sampling missions.
26. As stated in the previous report, the Commission is mindful that results should
be carefully interpreted and the limitations clearly understood. The Commission will
treat future results as forensic information to be used primarily for lead purposes in
the investigation.
Ongoing crime scene investigations
27. The preliminary results of examinations of the personal effects of a victim
discovered at the crime scene in June 2006 have resolved outstanding questions, but
further investigative work will be undertaken to finalize the matter in the near
future.
28. The issue of a victim who was killed at the crime scene, found in a location
where normally he should have been protected from the blast, continues to be
investigated. Documentary information in relation to this matter is being translated
and will be analysed before a decision is taken on the relevance of this individual to
the investigation.
29. The issue of alleged tampering with the crime scene and obstruction of the
investigation as a result of removal of artefacts remains under investigation. The
Commission is conducting analyses and will undertake further investigative steps to
clarify if there was deliberate intent in this matter.
30. A number of interviews were conducted in the reporting period to clarify
issues relating to the crime scene prior to the blast, new leads arising from the
analysis of witness statements and communications traffic, and the acquisition of
artefacts as possible evidence. A minimum of 15 further crime scene witness
interviews are planned in the next reporting period in support of these objectives.
31. Investigations are ongoing into the acquisition and storage of the Mitsubishi
van, and its preparation with explosives. The Commission has received a body of
new information relating to this topic, and over 500 pages of data are being
prioritized for translation and analysis. The Commission is developing recent leads
concerning the van, investigating the history of the vehicle from the most recent
time it was known to be in Lebanon, and working backwards in time from that
point.
32. The Commission continues to work on establishing the route of the Mitsubishi
van as it was brought to the area prior to the attack, then towards the St. Georges
Hotel area, and then on its final path on 14 February 2005.
33. The Commission has largely resolved the allegation that a red car was parked
outside the St. Georges Hotel, apparently reserving a space for the Mitsubishi van
before its arrival on the crime scene. It has been suggested that the vehicle had
driven off to make way for the van to park in its place. It has been established by
witness interviews and the examination of photographs of the scene immediately
after the explosion that the position of the red car was some 15 metres before the

07-27088

7

S/2007/150

place where the crater was created. The conclusion at this stage, subject to further
information coming to light, is that there is no direct connection between that
vehicle and the arrival of the Mitsubishi van.
2.

Individuals involved in the commission of the crime
Communications
34. The Commission’s analysis of communications traffic continues in order to
support and validate different points arising from the investigations. Much work has
been done to support the interviews conducted, in order that respective
communications contact with other persons of interest to the case can be discussed
with witnesses. Patterns of communications traffic, including frequencies and
timings of calls, and linkages and clear associations to others, are all developed and
elicit investigation leads.
35. In relation to the six mobile cellular telephone SIM cards allegedly used by the
team that executed the operation on the day of 14 February 2005, the Commission
has developed further information of interest relating to associated earlier
operations, including possible surveillance and reconnaissance activity, possible
practice-runs or earlier attempts to kill Rafik Hariri, and other actions undertaken by
the team. New areas of interest have emerged from this analysis and are currently
being examined.
36. The Commission has also undertaken an investigative project examining the
role of the persons using the six SIM cards and activities that can be inferred from
their use. This exercise is supported by the Commission’s existing communications
traffic analysis projects in relation to the cards. The objective is fourfold: first, to
reaffirm the validity of the hypothesis that the cards could indeed have been used by
the bomb team to execute its task; second, to establish whether other modes of
communication must have been used between the members of the team, and also
perhaps with other individuals, in order for the attack to take place; third, to allow
the Commission to establish a better understanding of how the crime was committed
on 14 February; and finally, to understand further what other activity the bomb team
undertook, and what locations it travelled to and why, in the days leading up to the
attack.
37. Such extensive analysis enables the Commission to reach a better
understanding of the bomb team, its role in the crime and its other activities. This in
turn creates further investigative leads geographically and temporally, and pointing
to the activities of individuals outside the immediate bombing team the Commission
believes were using the six SIM cards.
38. This detailed examination of the activities of the six SIM cards has resulted in
a number of significant elements for ongoing investigation. These include, but are
not limited to: potential identification of the role of each participant in the
preparation, planning, surveillance and actual attack; the bombing team’s
anticipation of Hariri’s activities and movements; and possible earlier attempts on
Hariri’s life.
39. One working hypothesis is that the bomb team had to ensure that Hariri was
indeed dead after the explosion in order for the video claim of responsibility to be
delivered and to have resonance with its intended audience. It is possible that the
team, and those commissioning the crime, could not afford to deliver a claim of

8

07-27088

S/2007/150

responsibility to the global media if Hariri had survived the attack. Thus, the
Commission is exploring the hypothesis that one member of the team, or an
associate, was tasked with confirming the death of the principal target as soon as
possible and may have contacted someone waiting for the news. Based on existing
information, the time frame for this activity would have been within approximately
45 minutes of the explosion.
40. This in turn led to the series of events related to the taped claim of
responsibility and the subsequent telephone calls made to media outlets. The
Commission is examining the hypothesis that one or more members of the bomb
team was responsible for delivering the tape and making the subsequent telephone
calls to the media. Other variations on this hypothesis are being explored to
establish the numbers of perpetrators who may have been involved on the day of the
attack.
Ahmed Abu Adass
41. In the reporting period, the investigation developed its understanding of how
Ahmed Abu Adass was identified and chosen to be the person to make the video
claim of responsibility, who involved him in that activity and where and when that
occurred. A working hypothesis is that he was identified because of his personality
and other specific characteristics. It is possible that his association and relationship
with one or more individuals whom he met at his place of worship led him to depart
his home on 16 January 2005, for reasons that are currently unknown.
42. The Commission is aware that Ahmed Abu Adass was acquainted with
individuals associated with extremist groups, at least because they attended the same
place of worship, which he frequented regularly and where he occasionally
conducted prayers. The Commission also conducted extensive analysis of
communications traffic records associated with Ahmed Abu Adass, including
analysis of the telephone communication at his home and place of work and on lines
belonging to his alleged associates.
43. A working hypothesis is that Ahmed Abu Adass was either coerced or duped
into making the videotaped claim of responsibility. The claim he read out on tape
was made on behalf of a group, and Ahmed Abu Adass himself did not state he
would be the one who would carry out the attack. In relation to the tape’s
production, it is of note that relatives and persons who knew him before his
disappearance have stated that his appearance on the videotape was physically
different from that before 16 January 2005. To some, he appeared even thinner than
previously; his beard had markedly grown, indicating that he may have made the
tape towards the end of the approximately four-week period between his
disappearance and 14 February 2005. His clothing was also different from his usual
style in that he had headwear and clothing that his close friends and family had not
seen him wearing before.
44. It is of interest to the investigation that a note was included with the video on
14 February 2005, which stated that the bomber was indeed Ahmed Abu Adass.
From its forensic findings, the Commission believes this to be highly unlikely. One
working hypothesis is that the video and the accompanying note could have been
designed to deceive. Another working hypothesis is that while an extremist group
may have been involved in part in committing the crime as outlined in the tape and

07-27088

9

S/2007/150

note, this group was actually manipulated by others for another objective not related
to its own organizational aspirations.
45. Thus, the Commission continues to investigate the various possibilities
concerning the group that executed the crime. The Commission has received
information in relation to individuals who operated in Lebanon and beyond who
may have been involved in the production of the Ahmed Abu Adass tape, and also
may have participated in the attack on Rafik Hariri in more than one context. In
connection with this information, the Commission has undertaken a number of
missions outside Lebanon, conducted 23 interviews to date, researched over
200 gigabytes of data from numerous computers, USB devices, CD-ROMs, mobile
telephones and SIM cards, and analysed large volumes of communications traffic.
46. A working hypothesis is that a small number of individuals belonging to a
larger group may have come together to undertake the filming of the claim of
responsibility, acquire the Mitsubishi van and have it prepared with explosives.
They may also have participated in the acquisition of an individual who was to
detonate the bomb, and may have assisted in delivering him and the bomb to the
scene of the crime.
47. The Commission has a number of investigative leads to follow up, further
interviews to conduct, and further communications traffic analysis and forensic
collection missions to perform. It also awaits the final forensic analysis of various
artefacts that are possibly associated with this working hypothesis, including video
cameras and related equipment, cassette tapes, computer hardware and other items.
These artefacts were submitted for DNA/fingerprint research and forensic digital
analysis during the last reporting period. To date, 118 samples have been taken and
will be analyzed for nuclear and mitochondrial DNA profiling, and 127 fingerprints
have been collected.
Individuals with prior knowledge of the attack
48. The Commission believes that beyond those directly involved in the crime and
those who decided it should take place, certain other individuals may have had prior
knowledge of the attack. Some of those individuals possibly only had partial
information; for example, knowing about the bomb, but not for whom it was
intended, or knowing that Hariri was to be killed, but not knowing precisely when.
The Commission is also exploring hypotheses that some knew both the target and
the timing of the attack, and were informed for specific reasons.
49. The Commission is developing a hypothesis whereby the final phase of the
operation to assassinate Hariri took shape by early February 2005, at which point all
necessary components for the operation were assembled. These include the van,
acquired and prepared with explosives and ready for use; the bomber, prepared,
briefed and ready to be deployed; the minimum necessary information acquired, and
surveillance and reconnaissance conducted, to be able to undertake the operation;
the bomb team undiscovered and able to execute the operation; the videotaped
message of Ahmed Abu Adass completed and ready to be delivered upon the success
of the operation; and, most importantly, the intent still present in the minds of those
who ordered the crime to go ahead with the operation.
50. A working hypothesis is that the bomb team was working within a “window”
of opportunity to deliver the attack on Hariri, rather than one specific day, given the

10

07-27088

S/2007/150

significance of the target and the time that would have been spent in overall
preparation of the attack. That preparation time was most likely measured in weeks
rather than days.
51. The activities of some potentially relevant individuals were noticeably altered
during this period, as the bombing team began what became the final activities prior
to the attack. The Commission is investigating such issues, and is finding that
attitudes, behavioural patterns and comments made by certain persons in the period
before the killing could have relevance.
3.

Motive to assassinate Hariri
Rafik Hariri timeline
52. As indicated in earlier reports to the Council, the Commission had collected a
significant amount of evidence and information related to Rafik Hariri during the
last 15 months of his life. The picture assembled is complex and multilayered, and
provides part of the backdrop for the motive behind the decision to assassinate him.
This aspect of the Commission’s investigation is ongoing, and is unlikely to be
completed in the next reporting period given the significant amount of work
required.
53. The following issues shaped Hariri’s environment in this period: the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) and the political implications of its
implementation; the extension of the term of Lebanese President Emile Lahoud; the
personal and political dynamics that existed between Hariri and other political
parties and leaders in Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and other countries; the
preparation and manoeuvring ahead of the parliamentary elections due to be held in
May 2005, as well as other business matters in which he was involved. All of these
factors came together and were handled by Hariri, sometimes proactively, and
sometimes in reaction to events around him. The Commission believes it is likely
that a combination of these factors may have created the environment in which the
motive and intent to kill him arose.
54. Whereas the Commission had previously adopted a broad focus in the
investigation of possible motive, the current reporting period saw these significantly
narrowed down to the group of inquiries linked to Hariri’s political activities. The
Commission is developing a detailed picture of the factual reality that is
substantially beyond its earlier understanding of events.
55. From this understanding of the dominating themes, it has become more evident
that Hariri was perceived to be in a position of vulnerability from a security
perspective. There are indications nevertheless that he received assurances that he
would not be the focus of an attack, and that even up to his last few days, he
remained confident, at least for external consumption, that he would not be the
subject of an attack.
56. The Commission continues to develop the hypothesis that Hariri’s threat
environment was sufficiently serious for measures to have been taken in attempts to
ameliorate the underlying situation, both in the Lebanese political establishment and
in the international community.
57. In the last months of Hariri’s life, he was very focused on the forthcoming
2005 elections. The nature of his intentions for the planned elections and his

07-27088

11

S/2007/150

perceived likelihood of success, as well as his political and personal relationships
with other parties and their leaders, are particularly significant aspects of the
Commission’s work in this area, particularly given the rivalries existing between
certain political figures at the time.
58. Negotiations unfolded during that period between Hariri and other individuals,
including potential candidates, and intense interest was focused upon the draft
electoral law, including the drawing of electoral district boundaries in Lebanon and,
in particular, in Beirut. Throughout that period, Hariri was also adjusting his
political stance, and on the day of his murder had made public that position.
59. It is of some note that Hariri was killed on the day that Parliament was
scheduled to debate the electoral law to be applied in the forthcoming elections.
Another working hypothesis for the Commission is that those who decided upon the
assassination saw it as beneficial to kill him before he formally began his election
campaign, especially given the perception in the media at the time that he was likely
to win.
60. The Commission has established that Hariri worked on differing political and
professional levels, which was reflected in the nature and extent of information,
views and positions he discussed with those with whom he interacted. That is
evident from the information the Commission has collected from some of his
friends, acquaintances, political interlocutors and apparent rivals.
61. It is therefore critical that the Commission continue to have access to those
political and diplomatic interlocutors with whom Hariri dealt, and those individuals
involved in the relevant political and diplomatic dynamics at all levels. The
Commission looks forward to continuing cooperation with such individuals,
including, where appropriate, Government officials, in order to ensure the
completeness of its investigations.
62. The Commission is developing a working hypothesis that in the period
immediately prior to his death, Hariri and others in the national and international
political arena were taking steps to defuse the tensions that had arisen between him
and others on the political stage. These initiatives apparently included the
development of diplomatic and political dialogue between Syrian and Lebanese
individuals and Hariri. This dialogue had previously been managed through other
Syrian and Lebanese channels, which had apparently fuelled misperceptions and
aggravated the already tense political environment.
63. A working hypothesis is that the initial decision to kill Hariri was taken before
the later attempts at rapprochement got under way and most likely before early
January 2005. This leads to a possible situation in the last weeks before his murder
in which two tracks, not necessarily linked, were running in parallel. On one track,
Hariri was engaged in rapprochement initiatives and, on the other, preparations for
his assassination were under way.
Other investigative areas of interest
64. In a wider context, the Commission continues to seek information that
broadens and deepens its knowledge of the political and security environment in
Lebanon at the time leading up to and beyond Hariri’s assassination. To that end, the
Commission has received significant documentary information from certain
Lebanese agencies, and continues to seek more, based upon strictly focused

12

07-27088

S/2007/150

requirements. It will continue to request documents of relevance, and anticipates
expanding the concept to incorporate other agencies and other forms of data as
necessary.
65. Similarly in this context, the Commission conducted three interviews with
Syrian officials in relation to the location of parts of the archive brought back from
Lebanon at the time of the Syrian withdrawal in 2005. Following those interviews,
two document exploitation missions to those archives at two locations in the Syrian
Arab Republic were undertaken, in order to acquire those historical documents
created within a strict time period that were of relevance to the broader contextual
knowledge objective. The missions were undertaken in conjunction with Syrian
authorities, and have elicited useful results with the selection and provision of
documentary information. It is anticipated that further requests for assistance will be
forthcoming in this regard throughout the next reporting period.
66. The Commission continues to clarify issues surrounding individuals alleged to
have engaged in financial transactions with Rafik Hariri, especially during the
period immediately leading up to 14 February 2005. This area of the investigation is
complex, and the Commission is ensuring that it is pursued only to the extent that it
is linked to its investigative objectives.

B.

Technical assistance in the other cases

1.

The 14 other cases
67. The Commission’s focus in the provision of technical assistance to the
Lebanese authorities during the reporting period continued with work aimed at
interlinking a number of investigative projects. That work will continue to develop
in the same manner in the next period. A seismological analysis of the 14 cases is
also being conducted by external experts, and the Commission anticipates that it
will receive the results before the end of the next reporting period.
Six targeted attacks
68. The Commission has conducted 17 interviews relating to the six targeted
attacks in this reporting period, and in doing so it has almost concluded its
interviews with the surviving victims of the six attacks, as well as with the victims’
families and close associates. The primary purpose of these interviews has been to
establish the victims’ movements on their last days; determine possible motive for
the attacks; understand the victims’ security arrangements, if any; identify whether
they were under surveillance; and determine any threats or assurances they received.
Various leads have emerged from these interviews, and these will be followed up in
the coming weeks and months.
69. The Commission has also completed a number of internal analytical reports
relating to the Lebanese authorities’ case files of the six attacks, and has submitted
12 related requests for assistance. It has also conducted communications traffic
analysis in support of other interviews related to a number of the cases, and
continues to examine potential communications linkages in the modus operandi of
the attacks, and potential commonalities between cases. This work will continue for
the next reporting period, and the Commission will also undertake an analysis of
exhibits found at each crime scene, including the possible remains of the improvised

07-27088

13

S/2007/150

explosive devices (IEDs), and other associated items, as deemed relevant. In
conjunction with this analysis, an assessment of the modus operandi used by those
placing the bombs will be undertaken to develop further the Commission’s
understanding of commonalities between each attack.
70. The Commission is in the process of prioritizing and translating a number of
forensic and crime scene reports provided by the Lebanese authorities, which will
be sent for further analysis to an external team of forensic experts. It will also
examine all remaining relevant forensic documents and materials in the possession
of the Lebanese authorities, develop an exhibits and documents inventory and
conduct further forensic examinations on the information and exhibits.
71. The Commission also requested that the Lebanese authorities facilitate an
examination of the victims’ vehicles and other cars containing the IEDs that were
used in the attacks. The Commission conducted a preliminary examination of the
available vehicles. These cars have been examined by a visiting forensic expert team
in order to develop leads regarding the modus operandi of these attacks and,
potentially, to establish horizontal and vertical linkage to other attacks. A number of
additional exhibits and residues were taken by the experts for further forensic
examinations.
72. The Commission has also recently received a draft report from visiting
forensic experts who examined the scene where Gebran Tueni was killed. In
addition to 32 exhibits previously recovered by the Lebanese authorities, these
experts collected and examined an additional 190 exhibits.
73. The experts confirmed that an amount of high explosives was used in the
attack on Tueni, and that the IED in this case was contained in a Renault Rapid
vehicle. The bomb was activated when Tueni’s Range Rover drove by. The
Commission believes that the IED was most likely triggered by a remote control
device. A time delay activation mechanism is unlikely to have been used because it
was not known in advance precisely when Tueni would drive by the location of the
IED. It is also very unlikely that the IED was triggered by a suicide bomber, as there
were no human remains found at the site arising from any individuals other than the
three victims who were killed in the attack.
74. The experts also found that the attack on Tueni occurred at a location that was
conducive to a bomb attack. It took place on a narrow road, along a mountain ridge,
which could be viewed clearly from the area surrounding and opposite the crime
scene. This location chosen provided a clear unobstructed view of the vehicle-borne
IED and, as such, allowed for an effective position to trigger the device remotely.
75. In the El-Murr case, the Commission arranged for an international law
enforcement sketch artist to develop the image of two individuals seen acting
suspiciously, one of whom was seen the night before the crime, and another who
fled the scene at the time of the attack. At this stage, the Commission does not
believe the sketches identify the man as being the same person.
Eight bomb attacks
76. The Commission continues to implement the plan for the provision of
technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in the eight bomb attacks where no
specific individuals appear to have been targeted, by reviewing and analysing the
files as received from the Prosecutor General and the investigating judges.

14

07-27088

S/2007/150

77. The Commission has sent seven requests for assistance to the Lebanese
authorities, requesting, inter alia, additional witness and suspect statements, closedcircuit television footage relevant to the cases, intercepted communications if
available and information relating to vehicles of interest.
78. The preliminary objective in this exercise is to conduct individual case
analyses for each of the eight cases and make some suggestions as to further
investigative steps that may be taken by the Lebanese authorities. Through that
exercise, the next aim is to continue to develop horizontal analysis in relation to
perpetrator identification, motive, intent and modus operandi.
79. In support of these objectives, and as in the six targeted attacks, the
Commission will also undertake a preliminary analysis of exhibits found at each
crime scene, and will study each location with relevant experts to conduct a first
assessment of the modus operandi used by the perpetrators.
2.

Pierre Gemayel case
80. The Commission continues to provide technical investigative support to the
Lebanese authorities by conducting interviews, analysing witness statements,
collecting closed-circuit television imagery, performing forensic work, conducting
communications analysis and reconstructing the crime scene events. In support of
this work, the Commission has submitted 10 requests for assistance to the Lebanese
authorities.
81. Following the Commission’s investigations conducted at the crime scene in
November 2006, three days after the assassination, 240 exhibits, including DNA
samples, fingerprints, mobile phones, and ballistic and transfer traces, were
submitted to forensic examination and analysis.
82. Preliminary results show that there was no global positioning system in the
victim’s car, which may have given useful tracking information. The specific make
and model of at least one vehicle used by the perpetrators has been established.
Also, 22 DNA samples taken from a number of places on the vehicle used by
Gemayel have been analysed. The DNA profiles of the two victims were found at
many locations, and eight DNA samples taken from the doors gave the profile not
only of Gemayel, but also of more than one unknown individual.
83. The Commission has conducted a detailed ballistics analysis on the 49
cartridge cases and 55 bullets or parts of bullets found at the crime scene. It can now
be concluded that a minimum of five different weapons were used. In addition, the
Commission has prepared weapons photo-boards and has acquired recordings of the
sounds of different weapons used, in order to assist in the interview process.
Statements collected from witnesses are compatible with the scientific findings and
have allowed the Commission to refine its understanding of the weapons used in this
crime.
84. Sketches of the alleged assassins of Pierre Gemayel provided by the
Commission to the Lebanese authorities were recently released and publicized, and
they will form part of a broader sketch database that will be developed during the
next reporting period.
85. The Commission has developed further investigative leads, including those
arising from additional closed-circuit television footage discovered in the proximity

07-27088

15

S/2007/150

of the scene of the crime. The footage has been sent to a technical laboratory for
enhancement of the images. This work is ongoing, as is a 3D-reconstruction and
forensic examination of items relating to the crime scene and other items that may
have association with the crime. The Commission will continue to provide technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities on this case for the foreseeable future.
3.

Ain Alaq bombings
86. The Commission has taken a series of investigative and forensic steps to
support the Lebanese authorities in their investigations into these bombings, in
which three people were killed and a number of individuals were injured on
13 February 2007. A team of forensic experts was provided to conduct forensic
examinations on the crime scene, including examining the Mitsubishi and Kia buses
that were bombed, a process which took five days to complete, between 20 and
24 February 2007.
87. The team recovered 127 relevant exhibits, as well as 242 steel ball bearings
associated with the explosions. The team provided a preliminary analysis of its
findings, and will submit a full report during the next reporting period. The findings
indicate that there had been one IED inside each bus, and that the explosive in each,
possibly TNT, was approximately 1.5 kg in weight. There were approximately
750 grams to 1 kg of steel ball bearings of the same diameter. Ballistic examinations
confirmed that the ball bearings were placed around the explosive.
88. The devices were placed in each bus in a similar position, towards the rear and
under a seat on the left-hand side. At the time of explosion, the IED in the
Mitsubishi bus was approximately 0.75 m above the ground, and in the Kia bus
approximately 1.10 m above the ground. A small number of exhibits were collected
that may have come from the initiation system of the IED, and it was assessed that
the devices were likely detonated by a time delay device or possibly by remote
control. Several fragments of bags that could have been used to carry the bombs
were recovered and submitted for forensic examination.
89. The final report on these crime scene investigations and the results of the
forensic examinations conducted on exhibits (DNA, fingerprints and explosives)
will be received during the next reporting period.
90. It remains unclear at this stage what the motive was in executing these attacks,
in the place, on the date and at the time they occurred. In terms of modus operandi,
the use of ball bearings may be indicative of the intent to injure as many people as
possible with the relatively small amount of explosive used. It is unclear at present
whether the bombs were placed by one or two persons, and whether more
individuals were involved in the attacks. The Commission is working upon a
number of hypotheses in this regard in support of the Lebanese authorities.

16

07-27088

S/2007/150

III. External cooperation
A.

Interaction with the Lebanese authorities
91. During the reporting period, the Commission has continued to work closely
with the Lebanese authorities in the Hariri investigation and the 16 other cases. This
close interaction has taken the form of regular meetings between the Commission
and the Prosecutor General and senior members of his office, as well as
communication with the investigative judges assigned to the various cases and with
the senior representative appointed by the Internal Security Forces.
92. The Commission has also exchanged a significant amount of information,
including documents, reports and other materials, with Lebanese authorities.
Specifically, the Commission continues to share with the appropriate institutions the
substance of relevant information that it obtains in the course of its investigations in
a manner that does not compromise the interest of the source of this information.
This continues to include information that may be relevant to individuals who are
detained by the Lebanese authorities.
93. During the reporting period, the Commission also continued to rely on the
cooperation and assistance of the Lebanese authorities, especially as its caseload
had increased and its investigations into the Hariri assassination, the 14 cases, the
Gemayel murder and the Ain Alaq attacks had advanced and necessitated a broader
range of investigative actions.
94. Thus, during the reporting period, the Commission addressed 57 formal
requests for assistance to the Prosecutor General seeking, inter alia, his help in
obtaining documents and other information and in facilitating interviews and other
missions on Lebanese territory. The Lebanese authorities responded fully and
expeditiously to these requests.

B.

Cooperation with the Syrian Arab Republic
95. Pursuant to the Syrian Arab Republic’s obligations under Security Council
resolutions 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005), and the common understanding reached
between the Commission and the Syrian Arab Republic in 2006, the cooperation of
the Republic with the Commission remains generally satisfactory.
96. During the reporting period, the Commission submitted four formal requests
for assistance to the Syrian Arab Republic seeking information regarding
individuals, groups and issues of interest to the Commission and requesting the
facilitation of interviews and other missions on Syrian territory.
97. Following the transmission of its requests for assistance, the Commission has,
since December, undertaken a number of investigative activities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, including conducting interviews, where, once again, responses by
individuals can be characterized as variable in quality on occasion; the holding of
meetings with relevant Syrian officials; the collection of samples from locations in
the Syrian Arab Republic to support the geographic origin forensic project; and the
collection of documents from two archive storage sites. The last three missions in
particular were arranged and facilitated in a professional and timely manner by the
Syrian authorities.

07-27088

17

S/2007/150

98. The Syrian Arab Republic has continued to provide the Commission with
assistance in response to its requests within the appropriate timescales, and the
Commission is grateful for the logistical and security arrangements provided by
Syrian authorities for its activities in Syria. The Commission will continue to
request the full cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic, which remains crucial to
the swift and successful completion of the mandate of the Commission.

C.

Cooperation with other States
99. The Commission continues to rely on the willingness of States to provide
information and expertise and facilitate its work on their territories when required.
During the reporting period, a total of 40 new formal requests for assistance were
sent to 23 States, in addition to the requests for assistance addressed to the Syrian
and Lebanese authorities.
100. The Commission has greatly benefited from the responses of States to its
requests where full and prompt cooperation has been forthcoming. The Commission
is very grateful for this cooperation.
101. As the Commission noted in its last report to the Council, a lack of
responsiveness by certain States to the Commission’s requests could have serious
consequences for the Commission’s work, in areas such as arranging interviews,
providing information on the whereabouts of certain individuals, and technical
assistance.
102. In its last report, the Commission noted that responses to requests from 10
Member States were overdue. In view of the importance of the assistance requested
and the time frame in which it aims to complete its investigative activities, the
Commission concentrated on following up on all outstanding requests for assistance.
The Commission held a series of meetings with relevant ambassadors to discuss past
requests. As a result of those meetings, almost all outstanding matters were resolved
to the Commission’s satisfaction, with responses received, and, where appropriate,
mechanisms introduced to facilitate the resolution of pending issues.

IV. Organizational support
A.

Recruitment
103. During the past three months, the Commission undertook a series of
management measures to streamline its internal processes in operational support
activities and maintain its recruitment initiative to fill its outstanding positions. In
this period, the Commission recruited 35 international and 5 national staff with the
assistance of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. As of March, a further 30
candidates are under active recruitment. These efforts will be maintained until the
Commission has reached a satisfactory level of staffing.
104. The investigation division has 41 staff and consultants in March 2007,
compared to 29 in December 2006. Additional analysts, investigators, legal officers,
forensic experts and a database administrator are currently being recruited.

18

07-27088

S/2007/150

105. The Commission has been working closely with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to afford the Commission the operational flexibility it
needs to carry out its mandate, particularly regarding staffing issues. The
Commission has formally approached several Member States to assist it in the
identification of much-needed database information management specialists.
Positive responses from Member States to this request would be invaluable to the
Commission’s work in this important area.
106. All additional posts requested for 2007 were approved in the budget, bringing
the total number of international posts in the Commission to 188. The additional
posts will assist the Commission to execute its mandate more expeditiously by
allowing more concurrent investigative activity to take place and improving the
efficiency of the operational support aspects of its work. Out of the 188 budgeted
posts, 104 have so far been filled. Of the 51 posts approved for national staff, 41
have been filled with the remaining 10 under active recruitment.
107. Problems remain regarding the recruitment and retention of international
language staff such as Arabic language interpreters, translators and transcribers. The
Commission is experiencing serious difficulties in finding suitable candidates for
recruitment. So far, only 3 of 27 such posts have been filled. This creates significant
bottlenecks resulting in delays in investigative activities. The Commission is
undertaking varied recruitment initiatives in order to acquire resources in this
critical area.

B.

Security
108. Since the Commission’s last report, the security situation in Lebanon and in
the region has remained uncertain and unpredictable. The bombing of the two buses
in Ain Alaq, together with numerous discoveries of explosives and IEDs around
Beirut and beyond, contribute to this unstable security environment. The
Commission continues to enjoy excellent coordination and cooperation with the
Lebanese security forces, who have spared no effort in meeting the safety and
security needs of the Commission in carrying out its mandate. The Commission is
very grateful for this support.
109. Security concerns and restrictions impact the work of the Commission and its
investigative activities, and, as a result, a number of steps to mitigate anticipated
risks have been taken to maintain a safe and secure environment within which all
Commission personnel can function effectively.
110. Emerging security trends are continually being analysed and integrated into
the operational context of the Commission’s work. Crisis management measures,
evacuation procedures and business continuity planning are maintained based on the
variables in the security environment surrounding the Commission’s work.

V. Conclusions
111. The Commission’s primary strategic objective remains the continued
investigation into the killing of Rafik Hariri and 22 others, as well as the provision
of technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in the other cases. In pursuit of
the goals in the Hariri case, the Commission aims to further establish the facts and

07-27088

19

S/2007/150

to continue to seek links between the other cases and the Hariri case. In so doing,
the Commission seeks to conduct its work in the most expeditious investigative
timescale, while respecting a framework of appropriate legal standards.
112. During the next reporting period, the Commission will maintain the
investigative focus discussed in this report. A total of around 250 individuals have
been identified for interview, and the Commission will seek to interview
approximately 50 of them in the next three months. The Commission also plans to
acquire further documentary information, additional electronic material and
communications data for analysis.
113. The Commission is grateful for the full support of the Prosecutor General of
Lebanon in conducting its work, in particular as it relates to sensitive and complicated
investigative steps that have been undertaken and that are being planned. Both the
Commission and the Prosecutor General will continue to create a secure and
confidential working environment for witnesses and for the Commission’s staff.
114. The Commission recognizes the complexities of the Hariri case as it develops.
During the reporting period, the Commission narrowed down possible motives to
those linked with Hariri’s political activities. The Commission’s understanding of
the facts has advanced substantially, producing valuable links within and between
the main components of the case. In the next reporting period, and potentially
beyond that, the Commission believes that it will be able to develop further a
unifying factual theory built upon newly identified linking evidence. The aim
remains to link together the most responsible perpetrators with others who knew
about the crime, those who participated in the execution of it, and those who
assisted in the preparation of the necessary components for its execution.
115. The Commission’s work on the other cases remains focused upon the provision
of technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities by identifying and applying
investigative support that adds value to each case without putting excessive strain
on the Commission’s resources. The Commission also continues to identify
horizontal links between each case, and with the Hariri case, where possible. The
Commission believes that in the next reporting phase, the depth of knowledge of
each case will be further enhanced to allow such potential linkages to emerge.
116. The Commission notes that requests for assistance it has addressed to
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and other States have received mostly positive
and timely responses. Assistance from all these States remains essential to allow the
Commission to carry out its investigative work effectively.
117. The Commission also notes that the volatile political and security environment
in Lebanon and the ability to recruit and retain qualified staff have an impact on the
Commission’s ability to fulfil its mandate in a timely fashion. The Commission will
continue to concentrate its efforts on managing these factors as it works towards its
objectives.
118. Finally, the Commission continues its work in anticipation of the creation of a
special tribunal for Lebanon. In the light of the current and planned investigative
activities outlined in this report, it is unlikely that the Commission will complete its
work before its current mandate expires in June 2007. The Commission therefore
welcomes the request for an extension of its mandate beyond that date.

20

07-27088
