S/PV.7603

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7603

rd meeting
Thursday, 14 January 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2015/1031)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-00735 (E)
*1600735*

S/PV.7603

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2015/1031)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
participate in this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I
welcome Mr. Sidikou, who is joining today’s meeting
via video teleconference from Goma.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/1031, which contains the the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. I will brief the Council in person next March
but, given the prevailing situation in the country, it
seemed appropriate that I remain in the Mission area
for today’s briefing.
My briefing will focus on three issues, namely,
the evolution of the political situation in relation to the
national elections scheduled for later this year, recent
trends in security in the east of the country, and the
planned withdrawal of some of the troops of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I will

2/7

14/01/2016

try to make recommendations to the Council on each of
those issues.
(spoke in English)
The presidential and legislative elections scheduled
for November of this year are a deeply divisive issue,
particularly given the continued absence of an agreed
electoral calendar or a budget for the elections. The
formal preparations for a national dialogue, announced
by President Kabila as a means to forge consensus on
the electoral process, have not yet begun, in part due to
strong opposition against the initiative by many major
opposition groups.
President Kabila is continuing consultations,
including with the United Nations and the African
Union, on the designation of an international facilitator
for the national dialogue. During my meetings with
the President, I have expressed the readiness of
MONUSCO to support an inclusive Congolese process
guided by the country’s Constitution. In that context,
it is encouraging to note that, at the end of December,
the Catholic Bishops Conference met separately with
leaders of the majority and opposition parties, the
Electoral Commission and civil society representatives
to seek their views on reviving the electoral process.
I understand that all participants agreed on the need
for some form of dialogue. I am continuing my
contacts with the committee established by the Bishops
Conference to support further confidence-building
efforts and encourage a way forward. However, many
of my interlocutors have expressed scepticism that the
rift between the majority and the opposition can be
bridged, potentially leading to delays in the electoral
calendar.
In the absence of agreement on the electoral
process, political polarization has heightened tensions
and contributed to an atmosphere of increased
harassment and human rights violations. Since last year,
MONUSCO has registered more than 260 human rights
violations related to elections, mostly against opposition
members, civil society representatives and journalists.
That, combined with the rising number of human rights
abuses by armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, illustrates a worrying trend of narrowing
political space and a real challenge to the conduct of
peaceful, credible elections. However, in other areas
where there have been longstanding human rights
concerns, it is important to acknowledge the significant
steps taken by the Congolese authorities. For example,
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
16-00735

14/01/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo (FARDC) completed 20 trials in the past three
months, finding 19 officers guilty of rape. For the past
nine months, the FARDC has supported the commission
overseeing the action plan against sexual violence, to
which President Kabila recommitted his support last
December.
Turning to the security situation, there has been
a significant deterioration in the eastern part of the
country in recent weeks, particularly in the Beni and
Lubero territories of North Kivu, where activities by
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Force
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), among
other groups, pose ongoing and serious threats to the
civilian populations. In the Beni territory, the ADF
has been the target of operations by the FARDC under
Sukola I operations for the past two years. Nonetheless,
the ADF remains able to coordinate simultaneous
attacks on the FARDC and MONUSCO. The Council
will recall that more than 500 civilians have been
killed by the ADF and its allies since 2014, and since
December of last year there have been 45,000 newly
displaced civilians.
That situation continues today, with some people
displaced as far north as Ituri province, with ongoing
tensions among the communities on the ground.
MONUSCO has responded against suspected ADF
locations, including a 1 December 2014 aerial operation
following ADF attacks around Eringeti and Makembi.
The Mission has taken immediate steps to strengthen
the protection of civilians through increased joint
police and military patrols, and the redeployment of
an additional company operating base of the Force
Intervention Brigade, along with increased outreach
and early warning activities.
On 4 and 5 December, I visited Beni to meet with
local authorities and civil society to assess options for
further action. I returned to the area on 12 December
with a delegation of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region to engage their
diplomatic support. I have also encouraged the
Government at the highest levels to engage directly on
this serious issue. President Kabila’s recent visit to the
east is a positive sign in that regard.
Since October, FARDC Sukola II operations have
intensified against the FDLR in Lubero and bordering
territories. That has been accompanied by an increase
in Mayi-Mayi operations against the FDLR and its
allies. Civilians have been caught up in the fighting
and have been displaced, forcibly abducted or targeted

S/PV.7603

for massacres or harassment, often on the basis of
ethnicity and perceived collaboration with the FDLR.
Reprisal attacks by suspected FDLR elements have
been reported, most recently on 7 January in Miriki,
southern Lubero, where displaced members of the Hutu
community had sought refuge. At least 18 people were
killed in the attack, mostly women and children from
the Nande community. The situation appears to be
worsening in Lubero, and could potentially turn into
an open inter-ethnic conflict between the Hutu and
Nande communities. That dynamic could easily spark
violence in adjoining territories where competition over
land and customary authority has already heightened
tensions. Reports of increased recruitment into selfdefence groups based on ethnicity are a worrying
sign, and the upcoming elections period could serve to
further politicize and instrumentalize the groups on the
ground.
MONUSCO is engaged with the Government
and the FARDC command to encourage increased
military pressure on local militia in North Kivu and
to cooperate with a view to bringing about increased
voluntary disarmament. That, in combination with
ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes and political engagement to resolve conflict,
is a key priority for the Mission in the coming period.
Increased early warning activities to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in this area are also a
key priority.
The crisis in Burundi has produced new risks of
renewed instability in South Kivu. Already there are
13,000 refugees from Burundi sheltering in the camp of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Uvira territory, and a new flow of refugees
into the country has been reported. The Mission has
received worrisome reports of infiltrations by armed
elements into this province, with local actors expressing
fears that some groups are trying to establish rear bases
in Uvira and Fizi territories. We will continue to closely
monitor the situation along the border and the impact
of the Burundian crisis on Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to ensure that appropriate contingency plans are
in place.
The Council is well aware of the proposed
reduction of MONUSCO’s force by 1,700 troops. I am
ready to address questions regarding how the reduction
will be taken forward, in close coordination with
the Government via a strategic dialogue and in line
with resolution 2211 (2015). In that regard, I would

16-007353/7

S/PV.7603

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

highlight that the drawdown will be accompanied by a
process of force transformation, which will ensure that
MONUSCO exercises greater operational capability in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, even as the
force gradually reduces in overall numbers. The key
goal is to continue to project force and to be able to
protect civilians as the number of static sites decreases.
The core of the force transformation is rapid deployment
capability, delivered by rapid reaction brigades, which
will start deployment into MONUSCO next month.
That, combined with greater air reconnaissance
and operational capabilities, is designed to ensure
responsiveness, agility and the ability to take forward
a robust strategy to protect civilians in the coming
period.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to three areas where strong messaging and
engagement would be particularly useful.
First, given the very real risks of civil unrest and
violence related to the electoral process, it is critical
that every effort be made to rebuild confidence among
the stakeholders to find a way forward. I would
encourage the Council to support an inclusive dialogue
that upholds the Constitution. Such a process should
build confidence among the citizens, ease political
tensions, reduce the risk of escalation and contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to the protection of
the fundamental freedoms guaranteed under the
Constitution.
Secondly, there is a window of opportunity now
to deepen our partnership with Governments and
move towards a common vision and joint approach
to addressing insecurity in the east of the country. I
have received clear signals of this from President
Kabila himself and others in the Government. I believe
it is important that every effort be made to work
collaboratively with the FARDC and State authorities
to meet the many challenges and protect civilians
at this difficult time. The resumption of security
cooperation would be a key aspect in that regard, and
could lead to meaningful reductions in the capabilities
and influence of armed groups in the east. The
Council’s encouragement of such an approach would be
particularly useful at this time.
Thirdly, regarding the Mission’s force reduction and
transformation, I am confident that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
will soon resume structured and meaningful discussions
within the framework of the strategic dialogue in order
4/7

14/01/2016

to agree on ways to effectively implement MONUSCO’s
mandate and jointly develop an exit strategy. The
Council’s continued support for such an approach will
be important, particularly upon entering the mandate
renewal discussions in March.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I thank the Security Council and the
Member States for their active support to MONUSCO.
I also express my gratitude to all the personnel of the
Mission and of the United Nations who are working
in difficult and at times dangerous conditions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, I
pay solemn tribute to Staff Sergeant Dyson Mayao, of
Malawi, who lost his life last year serving in the Force
Intervention Brigade tasked with protecting civilians
against attacks in the city of Erengeti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): First and foremost,
I wish to congratulate Uruguay’ on its accession to
presidency of the Security Council and commend the
great skill with which you, Sir, have led the Council
since the beginning of the month.
My delegation also commends the leadership
of Ambassador Samantha Power, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, in the Council in December last year.
Finally, I wish to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to whom my country owes so much for his
remarkable and tireless efforts to ensure that peace
returns to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My delegation notes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as contained in document
S/2015/1031, the content of which we fully appreciate.
With your kind indulgence, Mr. President, I shall briefly
touch on a number of points contained in the report
before us today, including the elections, the inclusive
national dialogue, armed groups, the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations and the strategic dialogue.
As underscored in paragraph 9 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the electoral process in my country
seems to be experiencing some delay but, as was
16-00735

14/01/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

eloquently recalled by His Excellency Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation when he spoke at
the General Assembly in September (see A/70/PV.24),
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is committed to
organizing general elections, which will be the third
after those held in 2006 and 2011, even though the
road towards the elections may seem to be strewn with
obstacles. Despite such challenges, my Government will
do all in its power to meet the challenge of organizing
elections that meet all international standards of
inclusivity, transparency and credibility.
Nevertheless, I am compelled to recall that,
following the political intolerance and the failure of
the losers to accept the results before, during and after
the 2006 and 2011 elections, my country experienced
deadly violence that led to loss of human life and
property. In a bid to avert a recurrence of that situation,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President
of the Republic, engaged the country in national
dialogue so that our political stakeholders, civil society,
and religious and traditional authorities could agree
together on the ways and means that would enable
us to overcome the obstacles we face with a view to
achieving consensus on the electoral process under
way, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Constitution. In that regard, let me touch on the fact
that the aforementioned obstacles are linked first and
foremost with the electoral list, which has raised some
questions on its reliability and inclusiveness.
While there is no guarantee to date that all Congolese
of voting age are on the electoral list — as illustrated
by the problems with those who have recently reached
voting age, Congolese living abroad and refugees
returning home — at the same time there is nothing to
prove that all names on the list are there legitimately.
The International Organization of la Francophonie,
which audited the list, recognized the need to update it.
Therefore, after considering the options, the consensus
is either to have elections based on a flawed voters
list — which could lead to the election results being
challenged — or to address the flaws of the list ahead
of the process and reduce the risk as much as possible.
The second obstacle is the electoral calendar.
Admittedly, there is a general calendar that includes
the organization of elections at all levels. However, as
the Head of State pointed out in his speech to the nation
when he announced the convening of the inclusive
national dialogue, that calendar is not operational at

S/PV.7603

this point because of the multiple dissenting opinions
within the political establishment. Indeed, before it was
published the calendar was demanded by the opposition,
which then promptly challenged it. The differences
concerning the calendar have never been resolved, to
the point that the initial voting planned for October did
not take place.
The third obstacle is providing secure conditions
for the elections. The elections of 2006 and 2011 were
marred by violence in certain constituencies. Indeed,
in 2006 the highest adjudicatory body, the Supreme
Court of Justice, was torched, and following that
election, a war broke out in Kinshasa in 2007 that led
to the loss of several lives because the results were
not accepted. A very similar situation arose in 2011,
when violence broke out in Kinshasa and several other
cities and towns in the country before, during and after
elections because of altercations between activists of
rival political parties. Beyond providing physical and
material security for the candidates and voters, the
problem at this level is that of the role that should be
played by the political establishment in promoting an
environment conducive to a peaceful election process.
The fourth obstacle is the funding of the electoral
process. Funding the process also requires some
dialogue. So far, the National Independent Electoral
Commission has forwarded to all stakeholders in the
electoral process a budget equivalent to $1.2 billion
to finance the entire electoral process. For 2016, the
Government has published a draft financing bill with
an appropriation to the tune of $500 million, which is
less than half of the aforementioned budget, and with
the caveat that we can only disburse tens of millions
of dollars per month, while our current capacity to
mobilize revenue does not allow for that.
To prevent a crisis arising from the failure to
resolve all those problems responsibly, good sense
recommends that we sit down together around the table
and talk — hence, the need for the dialogue among
Congolese. Dialogue is a virtue that we cannot avoid
in democracy. Other voices — such as those of the
Secretary-General, His Holiness Pope Francis, and the
Episcopal Conference of the Congo, composed of all
bishops of the Catholic Church in the country — have
also called for dialogue.
Having thus consulted every sector of Congolese
society, which has largely acknowledged the importance
and necessity of organizing a national dialogue, and
having recognized the urgent need, expressed by many,

16-007355/7

S/PV.7603

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to ensure that this dialogue is supported by international
facilitation, on 17 November 2015 the President of the
Republic asked the Secretary-General to appoint a
facilitator. We are awaiting that appointment so that we
can get started on our dialogue.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, my
Government has put considerable effort into combating
the armed groups. In the Sukola I operations, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, continued
to pursue the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) with
the aim of securing Beni and the surrounding area.
The FARDC also led similar operations against the
Forces de résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri. Both these
and the ADF operations are supported by MONUSCO.
In December, in order to assess the situation on the
ground, the Head of State, as Supreme Commander
of the Congolese armed forces, made an inspection
tour that took him to Goma and Beni, in North Kivu,
and then to Bukavu, in South Kivu. Since then the
necessary arrangements have been made to ensure that
those operations continue smoothly.
Regarding the Forces démocratiques pour la
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the FARDC’s operations
against that negative force have continued in the areas
of Lubero, Rutshuru and Walikale, in North Kivu,
and in the Itombwe forest, in South Kivu, and have
weakened it, enabling us to arrest Ladislas Ntangazwa,
a perpetrator of genocide, on 8 December. In that
regard, I recall my Government’s position concerning
the FDLR ex-combatants and their families who are
cantoned in transit sites. While we are grateful to the
United Nations for taking charge of them, as we had
asked, my Government would again like to see greater
involvement on the part of the international community
in general, and the Security Council in particular, in
repatriating the ex-combatants to Rwanda or quickly
resettling them in a third country outside the Great
Lakes region.
Regarding the former Mouvement du 23 mars
(М-23) and the delay in implementing the Nairobi
Declarations, the assessment made at the Security
Council’s meeting on 8 October 2015 (see S/PV.7529)
still stands. As the Secretary-General emphasizes in
paragraphs 35 and 36 of his report, no progress has
been made in repatriating former М-23 combatants,
owing mainly, as was also noted at the last meeting, to
the bad faith of the leaders of the former M-23. Despite
the appeal made at the special meeting of defence

6/7

14/01/2016

ministers of member countries of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Luanda
on 20 October, urging all those involved to help to
speed up repatriation of former М-23 combatants, the
situation remains unchanged. After two meetings, held
in Kinshasa on 18 November and in Kampala from 3 to
7 December, aimed at agreeing on a repatriation plan
following the expiration of the time allowed, only 12
of the 1,763 former M-23 combatants in Uganda agreed
to be repatriated, making for a total of 194 repatriated
from Uganda since December 2014.
We can say without fear of contradiction that as of
today, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is alone
in implementing the Nairobi Declarations. The former
М-23 combatants, held hostage by their command,
refuse to respect their commitments and continue to
reject voluntary repatriation despite our President’s offer
to mitigate it by allowing unconditional repatriation
first to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
sites and subsequent reintegration to communities
of the former combatants’ choice. My Government
believes firmly that, as the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 81 of his report,
“[t]he full and timely implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations and, particularly, the repatriation of
the ex-М-23 elements cantoned in Rwanda and
Uganda, are critical for peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region”.
My Government’s view, therefore, is that the
Security Council should consider instituting sanctions
against the former M-23 leadership, in accordance with
the decision made by the Heads of States signatories to
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region when
they met in New York on September 29 2015 as part of
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Framework. It is also important that
the countries that are sheltering them be encouraged to
translate their commitments into action and find lasting
political solutions to the obstacles to repatriating these
former combatants and rehabilitating and reintegrating
them into the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The strategic dialogue is ongoing and significant
progress has been made in bilateral discussions between
my Government and the United Nations. In that regard, I
should point out that the Congolese Government, which
remains committed to continuing discussions with the
United Nations in a spirit of mutual trust, is hoping that
16-00735

14/01/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the dialogue will result in a good outcome that, among
other things, will enable us to intensify our pursuit of
the negative forces still operating in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to resume our
joint operations against the FDLR, in accordance with
MONUSCO’s mandate. In that context, my delegation
commends the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to the Security Council, in his letter of 16 December
2015 (S/2015/983) addressed to the President of the
Council for the month of December, on the review of
MONUSCO’s mandate coming up in March, especially
where reducing the Mission’s military strength and
improving its effectiveness are concerned.
In conclusion, my Government has taken note
of the Secretary-General’s comments. We welcome

S/PV.7603

and greatly appreciate the assistance and sacrifices
of the international community in general, and
the peacekeepers of MONUSCO and the Force
Intervention Brigade in particular, aimed at preserving
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country
and ensuring peace and stability for our people. Lastly,
my delegation would like to express the gratitude of the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the Security Council for its dedication
to our country, and to offer the Council our best wishes
for 2016 at the beginning of this new year.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

16-007357/7
