General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R•1ollfflllft

No.

11cm

Tit/•

Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
R.elations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations (A/8082) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2634 (XXV) R.eport of the International Law Commission (A/8147) . . . . . . . . . . . .
2635 (XXV) R.eport of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(A/8146) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2644 (XXV) R.eport of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression (A/8171) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2645 (XXV) Aerial hijacking or interference with civil air travel (A/8176) . . . . . . . . .
2669 (XXV) Pro,ressive development and codification of the rules of international law
relating to international watercourses (A/8202) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2697 (XXV) Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations (A/8219) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2698 (XXV) United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law (A/8213)
2723 (XXV) R.eview of the role of the International Court of Justice (A/8238)

Dolt of

adot,lio"

POii•

2625 (XXV)

Oller tfeeulon,r
Amendment to Article 22 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice (Seat of
the Court) and consequential amendments to Articles 23 and 28 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Prol!"essive ~velopment and codification of the rules of international law relating to
mternauonal watercourses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
R.eview of the role of the International Court of Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aerial hijacking or interference with civil air travel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2625 (XXV). Declaration on Principlee of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among Statee in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2103
(XX) of 20 December 1965, 2181 (XXI) of 12
December 1966, 2327 (XXII) of 18 December 1967,
2463 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968 and 2533
(XXIV) of 8 December 1969, in which it affirmed the
imJ?<)rtance of the progressive development and codification of the principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 1
which met in Geneva from 31 March to 1 May 1970,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security and for the development of friendly relations and co-operation among

States,

1 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth

Seaion, Supplement No. 18 (A/8018).

121

84

24 October 1970
12 November 1970

121
124

86

12 November 1970

125

87
99

25 November 1970
25 November 1970

126
126

91

8 December 1970

127

88

11 December 1970

127

90
96

11 December 1970
15 December 1970

128
128

89

8 December 1970

129

91
96
99

8 December 1970
15 December 1970
25 November 1970

129
129
129

85

Deeply convinced that the adoption of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations on
the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations would contribute to the strengthening
of world peace and constitute a landmark in the development of international law and of relations among
States, in promotini the rule of law among nations and
particularly the umversal application of the principles
embodied in the Charter,
Considering the desirability of the wide dissemination
of the text of the Declaration,
1. Approves the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the text of which is annexed to
the present resolution;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States for
its work resulting in the elaboration of the Declaration;
3. Recommends that all efforts be made so that the
Declaration becomes generally known.
1883rd plenary meeting,
24 October 1970.

122

General AaleDlhl:,-Twenty-fifth Session

ANNEX
l>BCLAilATION ON PIUNCIPLES OP INTERNATIONAL LAW CON·
CERNINO FRIENDLY RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION AMONG
STATES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THI! CHAllTEll OP THI! UNITED
NATIONS
PllEAMBLE

Tiu General Assembly,
Reaffirming in the terms of the Charter of the United Nations that the maintenance of international peace and security
and the development of friendly relations and co-operation
between nations are among the fundamental purposes of the
United Nations,
Recalling that the peoples of the United Nations are determined to practise tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours,
Bearing in mind the importance of maintaining and
atrengthening international peace founded upon freedom,
equality, justice and respect for fundamental human rights and
of developing friendly relations among nations irrespective
of their political, economic and social systems or the levels
of their development,
Bearing ln mind also the paramount importance of the
Charter of the United Nations in the promotion of the rule
of law among nations,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of
international law concernina friendly relations and co-operation among States and the fulfilment in good faith .of the
obligations assumed by States, in accordance with the Charter,
is of the areatest importance for the maintenance of international peace and security and for the implementation of the
other purposes of the United Nations,
Noting that the areat political, economic and social chanaes
and scientific progress which have taken place in the world
since the adoption of the Charter give increased importance
to these principles and to the need for their more effective
application in the conduct of States wherever carried on,
Recalling the established principle that outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use
or occupation, or by any other means, and mindful of the
fact that consideration is being given in the United Nations
to the question of establishing other appropriate provisions
similarly inspired,
Convinced that the strict observance by States of the obligation not to intervene in the affairs of any other State is an
essential condition to ensure that nations live together in peace
with one another, since the practice of any form of intervention not only violates the spirit and letter of the Charter, but
also leads· to the creation of situations which threaten international peace and security,
Recalling the duty of States to refrain in their international
relations from military, political, economic or any other form
of coercion aimed against the political independence or territorial integrity of any State,
Considering it essential that all States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations,
Considering it equally essential that all States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in accordance
with the Charter,
Reaffirming, in accordance with the Charter, the basic importance of sovereign equality and stressing that the purposes
of the United Nations can be implemented only if States enjoy
sovereign equality and comply fully with the requirements of
this principle in their international relations,
Convinced that the subjection of peoples to alien subjugation, domination and exploitation constitutes a major obstacle
to the ,promotion of international peace and security,
Convinced that the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples constitutes a significant contribution to

and

contemporary international law,
that its effective application is of paramount importance for the promotion of friendly
relations among States, based on respect for the principle of
sovereign equality,
Convinced in consequence that any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial
integrity of a State or country or at its political independence
is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Chart.er,
Considering the provisions of the Charter as a whole and
taking into account the role of relevant resolutions adopted
by the competent organs of the United Nations relatin1 to
the content of the principles,
Considering that the progressive development and codiftcation of the following principles:
(a) The principle that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force apinst the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or
in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations,
( b) The principle that States shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security and justice are not endangered,
(c) The duty not to intervene in matten within the domatic
jurisdiction of any State, in accordance with the Charter,
(d) The duty of States to co-operate with one another in
accordance with the Charter,
(e) The principle of equal riahts and self-determination
of peoples,
(f) The principle of sovereign equality of States,
(g) The principle that States shall fulfil in aood faith the
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the Charter,
so as to secure their more effective application within the in•
ternational community, would promote the realization of the
purposes of the United Nations,
Having considered the principles of international law relating to friendly relations and co-operation amona States,
1. Solemnly proclaims the followina principles:

The principle that States shall refrain In their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any Stat•,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations
Every State has the duty to refrain in its international
relations from the threat or use of force aaainst the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or
in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations. Such a threat or use of force constitutes a
violation of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations and shall never be employed as a means of settling
international issues.
A war of aggression constitutes a crime aaainst the peace,
for which there is responsibility under international law.
In accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, States have the duty to refrain from
propaganda for wars of aggression.
Every State has the duty to refrain from the threat or
use of force to violate the existing international boundaries
of another State or as a means of solvina international disputes, including territorial disputes and problems conceming
frontiers of States.
Every State likewise has the duty to refrain from the
threat or use of force to violate international lines of
demarcation, such as armistice lines, established by or pursuant to an international agreement to which it is a party
or which it is otherwise bound to respect. Nothing in the
foregoing shall be construed as prejudicing the positions of
the parties concerned with regard to the status and effects
of such lines under their special regimes or as affecting
their temporary character.
States have a duty to refrain from acts of reprisal involving the use of force.

Resolutions adopted on the reportB of the Sixth Committee

Every State has the duty to refrain from any forcible
action which deprives peoples referred to in the elaboration of the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of their riaht to self-determination and freedom and in-

dependence.

Every State hu the duty to refrain from organizing or
encourasin1 the or1anization of irregular forces or armed
bands, including mercenaries, for incursion into the territory
of another State.
Every State hu the duty to refrain from organizing,
instiptiq, assistin1 or participating in acts of civil strife
or terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized
activities within its territory directed towards the commission
of 111ch acts, when the acts referred to in the present paragraph involve a threat or use of force.
The territory of a State shall not be the object of military
occupation resultin1 from the use of force in contravention
of the provisions of the Charter. The territory of a State
shall not be the object of acquisition by another State resultins from the threat or use of force. No territorial acquisition
ruultiq from the threat or use of force shall be recognized
u lepl. Nothing in the fore1oing shall be construed 81
affectiq:
(a) Provisions of the Charter or any international agreement prior to the Charter r6gime and valid under international law; or
(b) The powers of the Security Council under the
Charter.
All States shall pur111e in good faith ne1otiations for the
early conclusion of a universal treaty on general and complete disarmament under effective international control and
strive to adopt appropriate measures to reduce international
temions and strenJthen confidence among States.
All States shall comply in good faith with their obligations
under the pnerally reco,ruzed principles and rules of international law with respect to the maintenance of international
peace and aecurity, and shall endeavour to make the United
Nations security system based on the Charter more effective.
Nothing in the fore1oin1 paragraphs shall be construed u
en1arsinl or diminishing in any way the scope of the provflions of the Charter concerning cues in which the use
of force is lawful.
The principle that State, 1hall 1ettle their International dl.,pute, by peaceful mean, In 1uch a manner that International peace and ucurlty and Juatice are not endangered
E-very State shall settle its international disputes with
other States by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endaqered.

States shall accordingly seek early and just settlement of
their international disputes by ne1otiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
reponal apncies or arranaements or other peaceful means
of their choice. In se-..kin1 such a settlement the parties
shall a,ree upon such peaceful means u may be appropriate
to the circumstances and nature of the dispute.
The parties to a dispute have the duty, in the event of
failure to reach a solution by any one of the above peaceful
means, to continue to seek a settlement of the dispute by
other peaceful means agreed upon by them.
States parties to an international dispute, u well as other
States, shall refrain from any action which may aggravate
the situation so 81 to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, and shall act in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
International disputes shall be settled on the basis of the
aovereip equality of States and in accordance with the
principle of free choice of means. Recourse to, or acceptance
of, a settlement procedure freely agreed to by States with
reprd to existing or future disputes to which they are parties
shall not be reprded u incompatible with sovereign equality.
Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs prejudices or
derogates from the applicable provisions of the Charter, in

125

particular those relating to the pacific settlement of international disputes.
The principle concerning the duty not to intervene in matter,
within lb,;.....domestic jurisdiction of any State, in accordance with the Charter
No State or group of State~ has the ri1ht to intervene,
directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal
or external affairs of any other State. Consequently, armed
intervention and all other forms of interference or attempted
threats against the personality of the State or against its
political, economic and cultural elements, are in violation of
international law.
No State may use or encourage the use of economic,
political or any other type of measures to coerce another
State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the
exercise of its sovereign rights and to secure from it
advantages of any kind. Also, no State shall or1anize, assist,
foment, finance, incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or
armed activities directed towards the violent overthrow of
the rigime of another State, or interfere in civil strife in
another State.
The use of force to deprive peoples of their national
identity constitutes a violation of their inalienable riahts
and of the principle of non-intervention.
Every State has an inalienable right to choose its political,
economic, social and cultural systems, without interference
in any form by another State.
Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs shall be construed as
affecting the relevant provisions of the Charter relatina to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The duty of States to co-operate with one another In
accordance with the Charter
States have the duty to co-operate with one another,
irrespective of the differences in their political, economic and
social systems, in the various spheres of international relations, in order to maintain international peace and IIOCUlity
and to promote international economic stability and pro,rea,
the general welfare of nations and international co-operation free from discrimination based on such differences.
To this end:
(a) States shall co-operate with other States in the
maintenance of international peace and security;
(b) States shall co-operate in the promotion of univenal
respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and in the elimination of all
forms of racial discrimination and all forms of reliJious
intolerance;
(c) States shall conduct· their international relations in
the economic, social, cultural, technical and trade fields in
accordance with the principles of sovereign equality and
non-intervention;
(d) States Members of the United Nations have the duty
to take joint and separate action in co-operation with the
United Nations in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter.
States should co-operate in the economic, social an,t cultural fields as well u in the field of science and technololY
and for the promotion of international cultural and educational progress. States should co-operate in the promotion
of economic growth throughout the world, especially that
of the developing countries.
The principle of equal rights and self-determination
of people,
By virtue of the principle of equal ri1hts and self-determination of peoples enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine,
without external interference, their political status and to
pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and
every State has the duty to respect this right in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter.
Every State hu the duty to promote, through joint and
separate action, realization of the principle of equal rights

Geaeral Aa!Mlmbly-Twenty-&fth Set•i-

and self-determination of peoples, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter, and to render assistance to the
United Nations in carrying out the responsibilities entrusted
to it by the Charter regarding the implementation of the
principle, in order:
(a) To promote friendly relations and co-operation among
States; and
(b) To brin1 a speedy end to colonialism, having due
reaard to the freely expressed will of the peoples concerned;
and bearing in mind that subjection of peoples to alien
1ubju1ation, domination and exploitation constitutes a violation of the principle, as well as a denial of fundamental
human riahts. and i1 contrary to the Charter.
Every State baa the duty to promote throuah joint and
aeparate action universal respect for and observance of
human riahts and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
the Charter.
Tbe establishment of a aovereip and independent State,
the free association or intearation with an independent State
or the emeraence into any other political status freely
determined by a people constitute modes of implementing
the ri1ht of self-determination by that people.
Every State bas the duty to refrain from any forcible
action wbicb deprives peoples referred to above in the
elaboration of the present principle of their riaht to selfdetermination and freedom and independence. In their
actions a1ainst, and resistance to, such forcible action in
pursuit of the exercise of their riaht to self-determination,
aucb peoples are entitled to seek and to receive support in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Tbe territory of a colony or other Non-Self-Governina
Territory bu, under the Charter, a status separate and
distinct from the territory of the State administering it; and
aucb aeparate and distinct status under the Charter shall
exist until the people of the colony or Non-Self-Governin1
Territory have exercised their riaht of self-determination in
accordance with the Charter, and particularly its purposes
and principles.
Notbin1 in the fore1oing paraarapbs shall be construed
u authorizing or encouraain1 any action which would dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial intearity or political unity of sovereip and independent States
conducting them.aelves in compliance with the principle of
equal ri1hts and self-determination of peoples as described
above and thus possessed of a government representin1 the
whole people belongin1 to the territory without distinction
11 to race, creed or colour.
Every State shall refrain from any action aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial intearity of any other State or country.
The principle of sovereign equality of States
All States enjoy sovereip equality. They have equal
riahts and duties and are equal members of the international community, notwithstanding differences of an economic, social, political or other nature.
In particular, sovereign equality includes the following
elements:
(a) States are juridically equal;
(b) Each State enjoys the riahts inherent in full sovereipty;
(c) Each State has the duty to respect the personality of
other States;
(d) The territorial intearity and political independence of
the State are inviolable;
(e) Each State has the right freely to choose and develop
its political, social, economic and cultural systems;
(f) Each State has the duty to comply fully and in 1ood
faith with its international obliptions and to live in peace
with other States.

The principle that States shall fulfil In ,ood faith th•
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the
Charter
Every State has the duty to fulfil in ,ood faith the
obligations assumed by it in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
Every State has the duty to fulfil in aood faith its obli1ations under the generally recoanized principles and rulee
of international law.
Every State bas the duty to fulfil in ,ood faith its obliptions under international a,reements valid under the pnerally reco1nized principles and rules of intemational law.
Where obliaations arising under international a,reementa
are in conflict with the obliaations of Members of the
United Nations under the Charter of the United Nationa,
the obligations under the Charter shall prevail.
OENl!BAL PART

2. Declares that:
In their interpretation and application the above principles
are interrelated and each principle should be construed in the
context of the other principles.
Nothing in tbia Declaration shall be construed as prejudicing
in any manner the provisions of the Charter or the rilbts
and duties of Member States under the Charter or the riahts
of peoples under the Charter, taking into account the elaboration of these riahts in this Declaration.
3. Declares further that:
The principles of. the Charter which are embodied in this
Declaration constitute basic principles of international law,
and consequently appeals to all States to be ,uided by these
principles in their international conduct and to develop their
mutual relations on the basis of the strict observance of these
principles.

2634 (XXV).

Report of the International Law
CommiHion

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-second
session,2
Emphasizing the need for the further codification
and progressive development of international law in
order to make it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations and to
give increased importance to its role in relations among
nations,
Noting with satisfaction that at its twenty-second
session the International Law Commission completed
itsjrovisional draft articles on relations between States
an international organizations, continued the consideration of matters concerning the codification and
progressive development of the international law n,lating to sucxiession of States in respect of treaties and
State responsibility and included in its programme of
work the question of treaties concluded between States
and international organizations or between two or more
international organizations, as recommended by the
General Assembly in resolution 2S01 (XXIV) of 12
November 1969,
Noting fµrther that the International Law Commission has proposed to hold a fourteen-week session in
1971 in order to enable it to complete the 1CCOnd
reading of the draft articles on relations between States
2 /bid., Supplement No.

10 (A/8010/Rev.1).
