S/PV.7057

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7057th meeting

Tuesday, 12 November 2013, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Atlassi
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 5 November 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/646)

13-55965 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1355965*

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 5 November 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/646)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/646, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 November 2013 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the forty-fourth report of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Allow me to begin by thanking the
members of the Security Council for their ongoing
commitment to our common goal of irreversible peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina still
merits close attention if we are to ensure that the gains
made after the war in terms of stability, rebuilding the
country and reconciling its people are not lost. In my
address to the Security Council in May (see S/PV.6966),
I described how the political situation had reverted to
the negative trends of the past seven years and how the
country’s elected leadership had failed to make a serious
effort towards progress on Euro-Atlantic integration.

2/23

12/11/2013

I regret to say that six months later, with less than a
year left until the next general elections, that is still the
case. In the past six months, the political leaders have
again missed a chance to take a decisive step forward
by agreeing to correct discriminatory provisions in
the electoral system. Those changes are required by
the Sejdić-Finci judgement of the European Court of
Human Rights. Such changes are not only a condition
for the country to move forward towards European
Union candidacy but also a test of the country’s ability
to apply basic human rights standards in the conduct of
elections and to live up to its international obligations.
Similarly, progress has remained elusive in
regulating the question of the ownership of military
property, which has kept Bosnia and Herzegovina from
activating its membership action plan with NATO.
At the beginning of the reporting period, the public
expressed its dissatisfaction with the inertia of elected
leaders in demonstrations throughout the country, the
most dramatic of which were seen outside the building
of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where,
in June, several thousand demonstrators surrounded
the building over nearly two days, with employees and
visitors kept inside for several hours.
At the end of the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina again saw protests of a different nature
on a much smaller scale, related to the ethnic divisions
in the education system. I believe that the international
community as a whole has underestimated the
significance of education as part of the process of postwar reconciliation and reintegration.
While those two protests were of a very different
nature and about very different issues, they reveal
the fundamental dissatisfaction that is present in
many different segments of the country both with the
unresolved divisions within the country and with the
lack of urgency among the country’s leaders in reaching
compromises to address those divisions and to move
forward.
They also reveal, in my view, that the public has
understood something that many Bosnian leaders
have still failed to grasp, namely, that democracy is
something to be exercised not only every four years
through elections but also in between.
Turning to the main political developments of the
past six months, the general trend has been negative
but there have been some exceptions. Significantly,

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7057

the country managed in October to conduct its first
population census since 1991. For 20 years, there
had been no census. It was conducted successfully
in October. That is a significant development and is
vitally important for providing statistical information
on social and economic issues. It is important that the
results of the census not be used to promote divisions or
to exacerbate ethnic tensions.

gaps in the entity’s system of Government and the
ongoing need for reform in the Federation to make the
system more functional, efficient and cost-effective. In
this context, I welcome the initiative of local experts,
supported by the United States Government, to reform
the Federation Constitution in order to improve the
functionality of the entity, which is a process my Office
strongly supports.

Generally, the economic situation has been
difficult. In addition to its own resources, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has continued to rely on external
budgetary support over the past year to pay its bills.
The official unemployment rate is still 44 per cent. That
is of course another indication of the serious economic
hardship suffered by a large portion of the population.
At the same time, it should be stressed that there have
also been some positive developments, for example in
the areas of exports, where we have seen an 8-per-cent
increase this year, and of industrial production, where
we have seen a 7-per-cent to date.

The functional inefficiency of the Federation
stood again in some contrast to the institutions of the
Republika Srpska, which functioned very smoothly.
During the reporting period, they met on a regular
basis — they also had some changes of ministerial
posts — and the Government continued its efforts to
tackle the economic and social challenges facing the
entity. However, from the point of view of future threats
to the stability of the country, I remain concerned about
the continued statements by some of the most senior
officials from the Republika Srpska advocating the
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a country.

From the point of view of my mandate to uphold
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which includes the State
Constitution, I remain concerned by the readiness of
the entities, in particular the Republika Srpska, to
challenge the competencies of the State provided for
under the Peace Agreement. An area of particular
concern is the rule of law, where rhetorical attacks
against the judicial institutions established to exercise
the constitutional responsibilities of the State have
continued. This political interference in the work of the
judiciary was taken a step further in October, when the
Republika Srpska National Assembly issued another
set of conclusions against the State-level judiciary.

The Republika Srpska President remains the
most frequent and vocal critic of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
recently boasting again that he will lead the entity to
independence. During the reporting period, the Serb
member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency,
Mr. Radmanović, also raised the possibility of an
independence referendum should half the States
Members of the United Nations recognize Kosovo. He
presented this as the official policy of the Republika
Srpska, previously adopted by the entity Assembly.

Another concern with the rule of law is the ongoing
failure of the domestic institutions to implement the
verdicts of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court, which are final and binding under the terms
of the Peace Agreement. Over 80 decisions remain
unimplemented.
During the reporting period, the dispute continued
among the parties in Government in the Federation,
which is a bigger entity, but its intensity diminished
and the Government went back to work. My Office also
facilitated a resolution to fill long-standing vacancies
on the Federation Constitutional Court to ensure that
that important institution could continue its work.
Nonetheless, the crisis in the larger entity’s Federation
has continued to reveal functional deficiencies and

In this context, I believe that the continued presence
of the European Union and NATO military missions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina still plays a vital role in
reassuring the public that the country remains safe and
secure despite the difficult political situation. In my
view, the deterrent effect of a relatively small force with
an executive mandate is well worth the investment.
Given the difficult political circumstances and the
chance for further challenges in 2014, I consider their
continued presence to be a critical reassurance, and I
therefore warmly welcome the adoption of resolution
2123 (2013), prolonging the mandate of the military
mission for another year.
I want to conclude my remarks today on a more
positive note, for while we cannot ignore the ongoing
limited progress or the political instability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we must also remember that the

13-559653/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

country, its leaders and its people still have every
chance to work together, to succeed and to prosper.
The European Union (EU) has demonstrated its
commitment to assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
meeting the country’s EU aspirations time and again,
engaging at the highest levels and reinforcing its
presence on the ground with one of its most experienced
and skilful diplomats, Ambassador Peter Sørensen. He
is doing an excellent job and has brought the European
Union to centre stage in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Peter
Sørensen and I and our offices are cooperating closely,
respecting our different but complementary mandates,
in order to achieve synergies for the country.
As we are at the United Nations here today, I should
also mention the very good work that the United Nations
family is currently doing on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the able leadership of United
Nations Country Resident Coordinator Yuri Afanasiev.
To see the potential of what Bosnia and Herzegovina
could achieve, we need only observe how the processes
of Euro-Atlantic integration have already transformed
Bosnia’s neighbours and brought with them enormous
gains. In this sense, Bosnia and Herzegovina has the
benefit of the best regional situation in the past 20
years. The country has benefited from good relations
with Croatia, which is now a State member of the
European Union, under the capable leadership of
President Josipović, Prime Minister Milanović and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Pusić. Croatia also has
1,000 kilometres of common border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which means that the European Union
now has 1,000 kilometres of common border with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country also benefits
from good relations with Serbia, which is a future
candidate country, and the constructive policies of
President Nikolić, Prime Minister Dačić, Deputy
Prime Minister Vučić and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mrkić. Ultimately, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to benefit from good relations with its third neighbour,
Montenegro. We should remember that exactly the
same opportunities are being offered to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders as to the countries in the region
that I just mentioned.
At the same time, the past few years have shown
that the international community should not ignore, in
its approach, some of the specificities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s history, its post-war settlement — it has
been exactly 18 years since the war ended — and risks
to its future stability. Again, this should be cause not
4/23

12/11/2013

for despair, but rather for the international community
to step back and consider whether there is a need to
recalibrate our approach and how we can best help
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its citizens on the track
towards prosperity and political stability.
In this context, we need to stand together to
support all those in Bosnia and Herzegovina who are
ready to help the country progress and stand against
those who would take the country backwards towards
further division and disintegration. With the sustained
attention and goodwill of this body and the international
community as a whole, I am sure that we can help
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders and its wonderful
leaders to reach their common goals.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I wish you and your team every
success. I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
presenting the forty-fourth report on the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2013/646, annex). We welcome the adoption earlier
today (see S/PV.7055) of resolution 2123 (2013),
authorizing the renewal of mandate of the European
Union-led force Operation Althea.
We note that the security situation in the country
continued to remain stable during the reporting period.
According to the report of the High Representative,
the intensity of the political crisis in the Federation
entity diminished. It is particularly encouraging that
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have continued
their path towards completing the “5+2” agenda, which
is necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. In that regard, we note the regular
meetings of the ministerial working group established
earlier this year with the purpose of solving the
State- and defense-property issue and the drafting of
legislation on the matter. We encourage the Government
to continue its efforts to that end.
Among the achievements registered were also
regular meetings of the Federation institutions, the
adoption of a number of new laws and amendments to
existing laws by the Government and the Federation
13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Parliament, and the holding of the first post-war
census of population and households in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
During the reporting period, important progress
was made towards unblocking the long-delayed
appointments to the Federation Constitutional Court
and its Vital National Interest Panel. We commend
the High Representative for his efforts in that regard.
There were also some positive developments on the
economic front during the reporting period, although
the overall economic situation remains complex, with
a high number of persons unemployed and a difficult
fiscal situation. We agree with the High Representative
that much more should be done to realize the country’s
full potential for significant growth.
Despite the aforementioned positive developments,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face a number
of challenges. We once again express our concern
about the continuation of direct and open challenges
to the fundamentals of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
including in particular the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
the dissolution of the State and any action or attempt
to challenge the functionality of the State, its
constitutional responsibilities and the core provisions
of the General Framework Agreement. We would like
to emphasize in that regard that neither the General
Framework Agreement nor general international law
contains any provision invoking the claimed right
to self-determination for the purpose of unilateral
secession from or dissolution of the State. We agree
with the High Representative that those issues deserve
the special attention of the international community.
Another issue of concern requiring attention is
non-enforcement of the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That constitutes
a violation of the General Framework Agreement,
undermines the rule of law and erodes respect for the
authority of the highest judicial body in the country.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all
stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage in
constructive dialogue with a view to addressing the
pressing challenges, overcoming the political stalemate
and strengthening the stability and unity of the country.
It is also important that the Security Council and the
broader international community continue to support
progress towards stability and development in Bosnia

S/PV.7057

and Herzegovina and the efforts of the country’s
political leadership to that end.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his briefing. I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council, and thank the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan and his delegation for the
way in which they led our Council in October.
I endorse the statement to be made by the observer
of the European Union (EU).
We have just adopted resolution 2123 (2013),
reauthorizing the action of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, which
maintains a residual executive mandate to support the
capacity of the authorities of the country to preserve
the security environment if the situation so requires.
However, the Operation also continues to be evaluated
regularly, in particular based on the situation on the
ground, so as to achieve progress towards meeting the
conditions that will enable it to complete its mandate.
Indeed, the security situation on the ground has
remained consistently calm and stable for several years.
Furthermore, as the military authorities of the European
Union have pointed out, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities have to date proved able to cope with any
threats to the security climate.
The reconfiguration of the mission to Bosnia and
Herzegovina therefore should continue. It has already
led to a decrease in the forces deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and enabled them to refocus their role on
capacity-building and training. The action of EUFOR
Operation Althea in the drawdown phase must remain
complementary to that of other stakeholders on the
ground, in particular the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Duplication of efforts would
lead only to confusion and be counterproductive.
Despite a calm and stable situation on the ground, as
I have just mentioned, we remain nonetheless concerned
by the stalemate in the political situation. The successive
political crises distract the Bosnian authorities from
their Euro-Atlantic integration goal. Nationalist
rhetoric continues to fuel tensions and suspicions. We
regret those excesses, especially because other States
of the region have overcome and continue to overcome
historic stages in the Euro-Atlantic integration process.
The Council therefore urges the Bosnian Government
to resume its efforts towards reform, above all with

13-559655/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

by respecting the Sejdić-Finci ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights, which is a decisive question
for progress towards EU membership, as the Council
has chosen to underscore in its resolution.
We should like to see the current Government
bring the Constitution into line with the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. We also call on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to continue their cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the residual mechanisms. That is a
crucial criterion for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s being
accepted within the European family.
However, the absence of action by the Bosnian
authorities is slowing movement towards accession.
We are of course committed to the prospect of seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina joining the European Union
as a unified, sovereign country enjoying full territorial
integrity. However, it is up to the Bosnians and their
leaders to find historic compromises that would endow
the country with effectively functioning institutions.
That clearly would not allow for the current usage of
the current institutional framework inherited from
the Dayton Peace Agreement. A country that is under
supervision and deeply divided cannot as such become
part of the European Union.
Nonetheless, political tensions have never
undermined the security climate. High Representative
Inzko, a guarantor of the peace agreements on behalf
of the international community, has our full support.
But the current governmental crisis reminds us that it
is high time to empower the Bosnian political class to
reclaim its unity for the sake of the singular priority of
the European Union membership being extended to the
country. The functions of the High Representative must
therefore also significantly evolve. The consideration of
how to reconfigure the Office of the High Representative
has been initiated. Those efforts must continue in order
to make that Office more effective based on the key
role of the European Union. We hope that the relevant
decisions will be taken shortly.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his briefing and commend his
valuable work. We have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/646, annex). We welcome in
our midst the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ms. Mirsada Čolaković.

6/23

12/11/2013

Pakistan fully supports the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to uphold its sovereignty and territorial
integrity to strengthen its State and to protect the rights
of all communal entities. We have noted that, as in
previous reports, the negatives exceed the positives.
While the rest of the region seems to be forging ahead,
internal dissension and disagreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina seem to be holding it back. The good news
on the economic front and the end of the political crisis
in the Federation entity are welcome signals. We hope
that this momentum will be maintained.
Lack of progress on the implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative is an indication
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s weak commitment to the
future. While the efforts of the High Representative are
appreciated, we urge leaders on all sides of the political
divide to engage constructively to break the impasse.
Pakistan remains deeply concerned at the
increasing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Actions by the leadership of the
Republika Srpska, including advocating the dissolution
of the State, characterizing entities as States, and
challenging the functionality of the State and its
responsibilities under the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina amount to challenging the core provisions
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unilateral action of the Government of the
Republika Srpska has also led to the crisis on citizen
identification numbers. Such conduct creates unrest
and instability and is a matter of serious concern. We
believe that angry and aggravating rhetoric does not
serve the interests of any community; it vitiates the
atmosphere and undermines prospects for long-term
peaceful coexistence. It is vitally important that all
parties recognize international and legal frameworks
for the division of power in the country. The leadership
of the country needs to resolve its differences through
dialogue. Pakistan will continue to support all efforts
to ensure a safe and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina
working for the improvement of the lives of the people.
The Office of the High Representative should continue
to play its role in that regard. We wish Mr. Inzko
success.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Inzko, for his report (S/2013/646, annex) and for the
work he is doing in the service of the Bosnians.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union.
In his most recent report, the High Representative
highlights the continuing gridlock that prevents reforms
that are nevertheless crucial for achieving the goals
that the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have set
for themselves in terms of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. The ongoing discord between political
officials continues to impede the proper functioning
of Bosnian institutions. Legislative work at various
levels has been insufficient, and the authorities have
been unable to respond to the legitimate aspirations of
their citizens who are demanding an effective system of
governance. The demonstrations in June in the streets
of Sarajevo to protest against the authorities’ inability
to issue identification numbers to its citizens also
testifies to the discontent of the population as regards
that situation.
On a more positive note, the intensity of the political
crisis in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
waned, particularly following the intervention of the
High Representative. Like Mr. Inzko, we also welcome
the fact that last month the Bosnian authorities were
able to carry out a population and household census,
with the support of the European Union. It is the first
census organized since the end of the war.
Despite the political difficulties and a worrisome
level of unemployment, the security situation has
remained calm and stable. The European Union-led
force Operation Althea did not need to intervene in
order to restore peace given that the Bosnian authorities
were able to address potential security threats. That is
a fact that should be welcomed. It fully justifies the
decision of the European Union to focus the Force’s
main efforts on capacity-building and training while
preserving the means to contribute to the deterrent
capacity of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ongoing efforts to prosecute the perpetrators of war
crimes is an key component of reconciliation efforts.
Luxembourg attaches particular importance to that
issue. We share the concerns of the High Representative
as regards the manner in which the leaders of the
Republika Srpska are using the decision issued on
18 July by the European Court of Human Rights in
the case of Maktouf and Damjanović v. Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the purposes of calling into question

S/PV.7057

the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is the duty of the Bosnian State
to ensure that justice is done and that perpetrators of
serious crimes under international law are prosecuted,
tried and punished; that faculty cannot be called into
question. In the same vein, we call upon all communities
and their political representatives to respect the
authority of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, whose work remains crucial.
The European aspiration of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was solemnly reaffirmed by President Željko Komšić
in his speech to the General Assembly on 24 September
(see A/68/PV.6). To fulfil that aspiration, the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must make tangible
progress, including by fully implementing the decision
rendered on 22 December 2009 by the European Court
of Human Rights in the case of Sejdić and Finci v.
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 1 July, Croatia became the twenty-eighth State
member of the European Union. For their part, Serbia
and Kosovo have taken significant steps on their path to
European integration by continuing the implementation
of the 19 April 2013 agreement. We deeply believe that
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united, stable
and multi-ethnic State lies in a European perspective.
As a member State of the European Union and as an
elected member of the Security Council, Luxembourg
will spare no effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
to achieve its European future. It is in that spirit
that we have lent our full support to resolution 2123
(2013), which was facilitated by our colleagues from
Azerbaijan and adopted unanimously this morning by
the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated in favour of strict compliance with the
Dayton Peace Agreement, with its State structure for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its plan for the country’s
unity and territorial integrity. We wish to see the
establishment and the normal functioning of a central
Bosnia-wide authority while preserving aspects of the
status and mandate of its entities as well as the equality
of all three constituent peoples. We are carefully
following the internal political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We see no reason for its being dramatized;
whatever fundamental threat may exist, we see none to
its stability.
Unfortunately, the report (S/2013/646, annex) of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,

13-559657/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. Inzko, to the Security Council on the situation in
the country is once again not objective. First of all,
we would like to point out the biased criticism of the
leaders of the Bosnian Serbs, alleging that they are the
source of all Bosnian ills and that they are undermining
the fundamental bases of the Peace Agreement. In
order to ensure a more objective representation of the
events unfolding in Bosnia, we would recommend that
the members of the Security Council also read the latest
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council,
in which the commitment of the Bosnian Serbs to
international law and the letter and spirit of Dayton is
made clear.
The Russian Federation calls upon all parties to the
settlement process to refrain from counterproductive
emotions and controversy in order to foster inter-Bosnian
dialogue. We are particularly concerned by the calls to
arms sounded by the Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Željko Komšić. The High
Representative must establish constructive dialogue
between the constituent peoples and not provoke enmity
between them.
We are not just talking about rhetoric, however; we
continue to hope for an improved political situation for
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the Federation level. The
Bosnian-Croat problems run quite deep. The ongoing
conflicts between the Bosnian parties have led not only
to paralysis in the Government of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also to a hampering of the
activities of the central Bosnian institutions.
In his report, the High Representative notes that
the demonstrations that took place in Sarajevo in
June confirmed that Bosnians are tired of the political
crisis. In that context, we would like to underscore the
unacceptability of external interference in such actions.
With respect to the reform of the Constitution of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the time has
come to address the matter. However, we need to work
strictly on the basis of the consensus of the entities.
We are seriously concerned by the radicalization
of Muslim circles within Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the recruitment of fighters into the ranks of
anti-Government groups in Syria. It is strange that the
High Representative did not talk at all about that in his
report.
Of particular relevance recently has been the
ongoing work of the Bosnians, with the support of the
international community, in the disposal of military
8/23

12/11/2013

equipment and munitions left over from the Yugoslav
conflict.
It is clear that the institutions of the Serbian entity
are working effectively. The economy is also showing
hopeful signs, with growth in industry and exports.
At this stage of the settlement in Bosnia, we
believe that the international community’s main task
is transferring responsibility for the fate of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In that
regard, we support the abolition of the Office of the
High Representative and a reversion to implementing
the “5+2” programme agreed on by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board. In particular,
the issue of State property should be comprehensively
addressed, encouraging an entire package of the
parties’ agreements rather than isolating its individual
components. In our view, the situation in Brcko District
is developing pretty well along Dayton lines, thus
confirming the validity of the 2012 suspension of the
Supervisor’s mission as a step towards abolishing the
protectorate in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
We welcome the separation of the posts of the High
Representative and the Special Representative of the
European Union (EU). One of the absolute conditions
for the work of these two international presences in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be strict adherence
to their mandates. They should not interfere with
each other’s responsibilities, let alone duplicate their
functions. This has particular relevance with respect
to issues connected to the further promotion of a
structured dialogue between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the EU on justice, where they will work together to
build independent and impartial courts and prosecutors
at every level in Bosnia, in order to rectify the serious
anti-Serb distortions in investigating war crimes during
the conflict in the former Yugoslavia between 1992 and
1995.
At the current stage of the Bosnian settlement
process, the most important thing is to encourage
a full-on intra-Bosnian dialogue and a search by the
parties themselves, without outside interference, for
generally acceptable options for socioeconomic and
structural reform that comply strictly with the Dayton
mechanisms. At the same time, we must work on drawing
down the Office of the High Representative, which
includes continuing the practice of annual budget and
staff cuts, based firmly on the 5+2 plan and admitting
no new criteria for ending the protectorate regime. We
believe that decisions on key issues of the settlement
13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

should be made in agreed-on international forums such
as the Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board, whose consensus-based work
is crucial.
While not a participant in the EU-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Russia supports some of the aims of its mandate for
ensuring security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and helping
to train and instruct staff for the country’s Ministry of
Defence and the Armed Forces. In that regard, we once
again supported the resolution extending the mission’s
mandate this year (resolution 2123 (2013)).
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko
to the Council once again and to thank him for his
comprehensive report on developments over the past six
months in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex).
We greatly appreciate his commitment to implementing
his mandate under the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.
The United States congratulates Bosnia and
Herzegovina on completing its first census since 1991.
Reliably quantifying the demographic changes that
have occurred over the past 22 years is essential for
formulating effective social and economic policy. We
hope the census results will be used constructively
to inform policy decisions as the results are released
in coming months. We also welcome the initiative
under way in the Federation to improve the efficiency
and responsiveness of governance in that entity. We
were proud to be a sponsor of the Federation Reform
Conference in May, and we hope that the Federation
Parliament will soon consider the amendments and
other legislative changes proposed by the Federation
reform experts group, with a view to implementation of
the reforms by next year’s elections.
The United States strongly supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s aspirations for its integration into
the European Union (EU) and NATO. In spite of
recent blockages, we continue to view the Euratlantic
integration process as the surest and most expeditious
path to the long-term stability and prosperity of the
country and the region. We hope the interests of all
citizens will be placed above narrow personal or
ethnic agendas. We strongly support the EU’s efforts
to facilitate an agreement among Bosnians that will
lead to implementation of the 2009 judgement of the
European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finzi
case, a prerequisite for Bosnia and Herzegovina to

S/PV.7057

apply for EU candidacy. Four years after the Court’s
ruling, this case should not hold the country’s EU
future hostage. We also look forward to progress on
registration of defence properties in order to meet
NATO’s condition for activating its membership action
plan. With last summer’s Constitutional Court ruling
confirming State ownership of all former Yugoslav
State property, including defence properties, a path
was cleared to register those properties necessary to
meeting the map condition with the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as soon as possible.
While some Republika Srpska politicians
continue to make divisive, anti-Dayton statements, it
is important to underscore that State institutions such
as the State Court and Prosecutor’s Office are crucial
to strengthening the rule of law and meeting European
integration standards. In addition, a focus on developing
and implementing sustainable economic policies will
assure continued progress for the Republika Srpska.
Finally, we continue to stand by Bosnia and
Herzegovina as it overcomes the past. The continuing
discovery of mass grave sites and the ongoing
politicization of war-crimes cases are further
reminders of the importance of maintaining progress
on reconciliation. In the light of the ongoing challenges
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United States continues
to strongly support High Representative Inzko and his
Office, as well as renewal of the mandate of the EU-led
military force under Chapter VII, which we sponsored
this morning (see S/PV.7055). It remains essential that
the international community retain those stabilization
instruments, given the work that remains to assure
progress on the Euratlantic reform agenda and to see
the continued and full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accords.
The international community must remain
committed to supporting the aspirations of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a peaceful and prosperous
Euratlantic future, and their efforts to promote
reconciliation. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with our partners on the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board, among others, in order to do
so.
Ms. King (Australia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan for his successful
presidency in October.

13-559659/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I also thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his report (S/2013/646,
annex). We support the important work done by his
Office to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement,
strengthen the rule of law, monitor compliance with
the rulings of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, facilitate reforms to ensure the
economic prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
monitor the safe return of displaced people.
Australia fully supports the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call
on those political leaders in the Republika Srpska who
have made corrosive political declarations or used
inflammatory rhetoric to work constructively for the
good of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to fully respect
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also call on
all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to work
productively to reach the compromises necessary to
achieve the five conditions and two objectives set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Mr. Inzko’s report provided yet again a frank
depiction of the protracted political difficulties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continue to hinder
further political, economic and social development
there. We note the concern conveyed in his report that the
State-level Parliamentary Assembly has not been able
to fully adopt a single new law this year. It is regrettable
that the citizens of Mostar continue to be denied the
democratic right to elect their local representatives,
since the 2010 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the city’s electoral system
has not been implemented. It was disappointing that the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina were unable
to craft a timely solution to the citizens’ identification
number issue in the early summer, although we note
that in recent days progress has been made to resolve
that issue. As Mr. Inzko said, the protests in the summer
over that issue reflected widespread disillusionment
with poor governance and clearly indicated that the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina were demanding
results from their political leaders.
We acknowledge recent positive developments. The
holding of the 2013 census of population, households
and dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina was a
significant step, given that it was the first census
taken since 1991. Its results will provide essential
information for the purposes of economic and social
planning and the delivery of services to the people.

10/23

12/11/2013

The easing — albeit partial — of the political crisis in
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and recent
encouraging economic data are also positive
Mr. Inzko has reported that during the period under
review, Bosnia and Herzegovina failed to make concrete
progress on European Union and NATO integration.
We are concerned that the lack of momentum contrasts
starkly when considered against the progress made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s neighbours. We hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will embrace the new era of
political compromise and constructive engagement
emerging in the Western Balkans region.
Amending the country’s constitution to implement
the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdić-Finci case obviously remains a threshold
issue on the path towards European integration. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders to make
progress in that regard.
We acknowledge that the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained stable over the
reporting period, and that is important. We recognize
the valuable work being done by the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO missions,
including in improving the country’s management and
disposal of surplus arms and ammunition. EUFOR
should not stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever, but
at this stage it remains an essential component of the
efforts to ensure stability, confidence and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Our hope remains that the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will take further decisive
action to overcome their political differences and work
towards a more stable, peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of their country.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
presenting his report on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex).
Argentina reaffirms its support for the Dayton
Agreement and the protection and preservation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We underscore their importance, as well as
respect for the rule of law, in ensuring durable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

First of all, we deplore the fact that the negative
trend of previous years has not been curbed, as
underscored in the High Representative’s prior report
(see S/2013/263). We are worried about reports on the
ongoing challenges to the Federation’s institutional
capacities, as well as the non-implementation of rulings
of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We highlight the functioning institutions of the
Republika Srpska and the Government’s further efforts
to resolve economic and social difficulties. However,
there is ongoing concern over reports of statements
made by high-ranking officials of the Republika
Srpska advocating the future dissolution of the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby challenging the
basic provisions of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the country’s
territorial integrity.
My country also welcomes the fact that despite
tensions during preparations, the ceremony to
commemorate the victims of the 1995 Srebrenica
genocide took place without major incident.
With regard to the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Argentina welcomes the fact that the
extended political crisis has ebbed and that tangible
progress has been achieved towards reaching agreement
in the appointment of judges to the Federation
Constitutional Court and the subgroup responsible for
matters of vital national interest. We hope that pending
matters in the way of the group’s resuming its work will
be resolved promptly. In that regard, we highlight the
good offices efforts undertaken by the Office of the
High Representative.
We are concerned about the possibility that the lack
of significant and tangible measures to implement the
pending prerequisites of the five benchmarks and the
two conditions that are necessary for the closure of the
High Representative’s Office will not be met. For that
reason, we welcome the legislative proposals linked
to State property and defense property. We call upon
the political parties to show commitment in seeking
consensus.
Of persistent concern is the fact that it has been
impossible to hold elections in the city of Mostar to
elect local authorities due to lack of implementation
of the 2010 ruling of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court on the city’s electoral system.
Argentina reiterates its call to the political parties to
redouble efforts in order to achieve agreement on the

S/PV.7057

implementation of the ruling of the Constitutional
Court, ensuring respect for the rule of law and thus
enabling the holding of local elections.
With regard to implementation of the decision of
the European Court of Human Rights in the SejdićFinci case, we reiterate the appeal made to the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to renew
the efforts on reaching an agreement to ensure the
protection of the rights of non-constituent peoples.
Finally, Argentina reiterates its support for the work
carried out by the Office of the High Representative in
support of the implementation of the provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the efforts made to ensure
that the governmental entities are able to fulfil the
provisions of the Agreement and the State Constitution.
We consider it necessary to continue to provide support
and sufficient political resources to the Office of the
High Representative to enable it to fulfil its mandate
under the framework of the Dayton Agreement.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council, and express the United
Kingdom’s thanks for his tenth report to the SecretaryGeneral (see S/2013/646, annex). Once again, it is a
detailed and sobering report that documents objectively
the serious challenges that Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face. Against that difficult political
backdrop, the United Kingdom extends its gratitude to
the High Representative for his continued commitment
to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords.
The disappointing lack of political progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period
contrasts starkly with the historic developments that
have taken place elsewhere in the Western Balkans
region. In April, Serbia and Kosovo reached a truly
significant agreement that created momentum for both
of their European Union (EU) perspectives. In July, we
saw the accession of Croatia to the European Union,
marking an important step forward for the region’s
future stability and prosperity. That vital progress
could not have been achieved without political leaders
showing commitment, determination and a willingness
to compromise. The results of such political leadership
are apparent in terms of the further progress towards
European integration structures helping to deliver
tangible benefits for their citizens.
It is unfortunate that there has been no sign
that regional progress has influenced Bosnia and

13-5596511/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina’s leaders. There has been no progress on
the EU and NATO paths and no movement towards
delivering the conditionality of the “5+2” agenda needed
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
While we welcome the conduct of the October
census — the first in Bosnia and Herzegovina in over
20 years — it is disappointing that many chose to use it
as an opportunity for yet more divisive rhetoric, rather
than focus on its potential benefits for the country in
terms of generating accurate data to inform economic
and social planning.
Politicians have shown throughout the reporting
period that they are unwilling to put the needs of their
electorate and their country above their own interests.
That is typified by the continued failure to resolve
the longstanding Sejdić-Finci constitutional issue.
That judgment has now remained unimplemented
for nearly four years. It is a judgment crying out for
rapid implementation, both to tackle a discriminatory
provision in the electoral system and because it is needed
to unlock Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU Stabilization
and Association Agreement.
Yet, despite the tireless work of EU Special
Representative Peter Sørensen to facilitate a solution
through the EU high-level dialogue on the accession
process, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders have once
again failed to reach agreement in October.
It is now becoming increasingly difficult to justify
supporting continued pre-accession, given the absence
of progress towards pre-accession. We support, as a
regrettable necessity, a decision by the European Union
Commissioner, Stephan Fuller, to begin cutting Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s funding for 2013 by €47 million.
The failure to establish an effective mechanism for
coordination with the European Union is now calling
into question future tranches of sizeable pre-accession
assistance funds. Furthermore, the unwillingness
of political leaders to adapt Bosnia Herzegovina’s
Stabilization and Association Agreement following
Croatia’s accession could have a negative impact
on trade between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union.
There is a pattern underlying all of those political
failures. Instead of working to improve the prosperity
and welfare of their citizens by making progress
towards the European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leaders seem locked in short-term, narrowly
focused zero-sum-game mindsets. That is a road to

12/23

12/11/2013

nowhere in terms of the country’s future; indeed, it
risks undermining the hard-earned gains of the past
18 years.
We are also deeply disappointed at the failure
of political leaders to complete the registration of
defence property. That failure continues to block the
implementation of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s NATO
membership action plan. Inspite of promises in February
to the NATO Secretary General and to the Assistant
Secretary General in September, political leaders must
swiftly work together to fulfil their commitment to the
March 2012 agreement and agree a solution.
Protests in June over the single identification
number issue show that citizens are dissatisfied with
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders’ inaction.
That this issue was not resolved until earlier this
month demonstrates the elected representatives’
unwillingness or inability to engage with issues of
significant public concern. The United Kingdom urges
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move
forward from this stagnant political context. They need
to understand they are responsible for the growing
anger and frustration of the public, whose interests are
steadily suffering from a succession of political failures
outlined in the High Representative’s latest report.
We share the High Representative’s concern and
condemnation of those in the Republika Srpska who
continue to challenge the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We join other
Council members in condemning such statements,
which are pointless and irresponsible. There can be no
redrawing of the map, nor can Bosnia and Herzegovina
join the European Union as anything other than a single
sovereign State.
We are also concerned at the continued
non-enforcement of constitutional court decisions,
particularly in Mostar, where local elections have
now been delayed for over a year. Political pressure
has been exerted on State level judicial institutions on
a number of ocassions this year, and we welcome the
recent statement by the European Union, the Office of
the High Representative and the United States calling
on the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to
respect and observe the independence of the judiciary.
Many of the underlying political challenges and
tensions that remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
at risk of worsening as we approach the elections in
October 2014. We support the High Representative’s

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

assessment that the European Union Force-Operation
Althea continues to play a crucial role in efforts to
maintain a safe and secure environment. We welcome
the Council’s agreement to renew its mandate for a
further 12 months.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his presentation. His briefing
underscores the ongoing political impasse in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the little progress that has been
made in terms of the reforms necessary for promoting
development in the country and shaping a multi-ethnic
Bosnian society.
Togo regrets that no tangible progress has been
made on the five objectives and the two conditions for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative and
the revision of the country’s Constitution. Moreover,
when it comes to numerous other areas, the political
parties sharing power in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are struggling to reach an agreement on reforms to
help the country move ahead. The report of the High
Representative (S/2013/646, annex) notably points out
that, as a result of the ongoing paralysis in Parliament,
no new legislation was adopted during the period under
review.
However, in 2012 the Bosnian authorities committed
to implementing the country’s Constitution along with
the recommendations made by the European Court of
Human Rights in order to end political discrimination
against minorities. It is essential that those reforms be
launched before general elections in October 2014.
That is a worrying situation for the international
community, which has made significant efforts to bring
peace and stability to this country, as well as to the
Bosnian people. The demonstrations that took place
in June related to the failure to issue of identifiction
numbers for newborns, a situation resulting from a
dispute between the Federation and the Republika
Srpska on the implementation of a decision by the
Constitutional Court, point to the disquiet of the people
at the procrastination of their leaders in terms of
building tha central State.
We remain concerned by statements and defiant
actions on the part of political leaders of the Republika
Srpska in terms of central State institutions, which
undermine national cohesion. Togo criticizes such an
attitude, which seeks to block the decision-making

S/PV.7057

process of the central State and weakens the country
when it comes to the possibility of partition.
In spite of all sorts of obstacles, the report indicates
that in October, for the first time in 22 years, Bosnia
and Herzegovina carried out a population census. We
hope the main aim of the census was not to establish
a balance of power between the various communities
or to reopen old wounds that have barely healed but,
rather, to implement a reliable system of statistics to
help plan and guide public policy.
While Bosnia and Herzegovina’s neighbours are
progressing towards European integration, Bosnian
political leaders have no choice but to meet the
expectations of their people by tackling the challenges
of national development and shaping a truly functional,
multiethnic State, as stipulated in the Dayton Accords.
In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina should draw on
the positive aspects of its different peoples, rather than
trying to deny the existence of one group or another.
It is essential that all Bosnian political stakeholders
overcome their differences in order to fully join in that
vision. Only then will they be able to undertake a full
set of reforms that will allow Bosnia and Herzegovina
to make progress towards joining the European Union,
allowing its institutions to function more effectively in
order to ensure peace and development in that country.
We call on countries neighbouring Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which have historic ties with different
communities, to work constructively towards the
unity of the Bosnian State. However, it remains the
responsibility of the main political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to shoulder their responsibilities and
to take the initiative of forging harmonious coexistence
among the various ethnic groups.
At this stage, the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina still requires the support and assistance of
the international community. That is why my country
still considers the international presence necessary, in
accordance with the Dayton Agreement.
I would like to reiterate Togo’s support for the
efforts of the High Representative during his mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as for the civilian
and military personnel, in particular those working
for the European Union Force-Operation Althea, who
are striving to ensure that parties abide by the Dayton
Agreement and working for the stability of the country.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and

13-5596513/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-fourth report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex). We commend his
continued efforts to ensure the full implementation of
the Dayton Agreement. Resolution 2123 (2013), which
was unanimously adopted this morning and which
authorized the extension of the mandate of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) for another 12 months, represents the clear
support of the international community, and is a clear
signal of how the international community, including
the Council, is committed to assist the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina towards finding a lasting solution.
In his most recent briefing (see S/PV.6966),
Mr. Inzko addressed the Council on the political and
constitutional crisis that had frozen governance in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is unfortunate
that the current report indicates the same worrying
impasse and lack of progress. We have noted that
disagreements and inflexibility among political parties
are one of the main reasons for the continued stalemate.
We therefore call upon the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at all levels to put national priorities above
their interests and to be more flexible so as to advance
the implementation of outstanding issues.
We are strongly concerned at the continued
negative trend being followed by some representatives
of the Republika Srpska who continue to envisage and
advocate the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the independence of the Republika Srpska. We
believe that the continued challenge to State judicial
institutions and the constitutional State authority
pose a serious threat to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, not to mention
that it violates the provisions of the Dayton Agreement.
We call upon the authorities in the Republika Srpska to
refrain from this kind of rhetoric.
It is our view that abiding by the Dayton
Agreement, the constitutional framework and rule of
law is a prerequisite for long-term stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we urge political
parties to participate positively in the amendments to
the Election Law, which will enable the preparation of
national elections next year. All parties must overcome
political gridlock and resolve their differences on that
issue in order to ensure legitimate national elections.
We call on the international community to redouble its
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in that process.

14/23

12/11/2013

On a positive note, Rwanda welcomes the
appointment of judges to fill vacant seats in the
Federation Constitutional Court under the facilitation
of the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is also hoped that this will enable the
Court to resolve the underlying political dispute in the
Federation. Furthermore, we call on all stakeholders
to support Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve the
outstanding issues in the implementation of the
objectives of the “5+2” agenda as prerequisites for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The visits made by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the wider region, including to the
trilateral meeting of the Heads of State of Turkey,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, held in Ankara on
14 and 15 May, are a very encouraging step towards
the implementation of bilateral relations between
that country and its neighbours, especially Serbia. In
that regard, we commend the statesmanship shown
by President Nikolić of Serbia during his visit by
apologizing for Srebrenica and other crimes committed
during the war. That constitutes a good contribution
to improving the bilateral relations between the two
countries, and to bringing about reconciliation between
their respective peoples.
On the economic side, we welcome the positive
reports showing that exports are up by 8.5 per cent,
and the increase of industrial production by 6.9 per
cent. However, the high rate of unemployment and the
difficult fiscal situation show how much the continued
support of the international community to Bosnia
and Herzegovina is needed. We also believe that the
progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards integration
with the European Union and NATO is one of the key
opportunities for its economic recovery.
However, the recent statement by the European
Union that Bosnia and Herzegovina would lose its
2013 pre-accession funding, totalling €47 million, is
worrisome, and we hope that this will not slow down
the economic recovery of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
the same vein, Rwanda welcomes the census conducted
by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which we
believe will improve economic and social planning. In
that regard, the census is a socioeconomic development
factor rather than an ethnic one.
I cannot conclude my statement without saying a
word on the issue of refugees and their return, which
is central to the full implementation of the General

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Framework Agreement for Peace. We condemn any
ethnically-motivated attacks on refugees that may
hamper their return. While we commend the reaction
by authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina against
those incidents, we also find it very necessary for
the authorities to make more efforts to create an
environment conducive to their return.
Finally, as Bosnia and Herzegovina, like Rwanda,
has faced a dark history of genocide, I would like to
emphasize that justice and reconciliation, marked by
equal access to resources, services and equality before
the law, are the key prerequisites for reaching a lasting
peace and a better future for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the continued cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia can help to achieve that goal.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his excellent briefing
today.
We welcome the successful holding of the first
post-war census in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and note
improvements in its economic performance, including
its export and industrial production growth. As the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina comments
in his report (S/2013/646, annex), we hope that the
census can help bring economic and social benefits to
the country. However, the negative trend that concerns
the Security Council also persists. In that regard, I
would like to make the following three points.
First, it is worrisome that the political gridlock
continues to hinder stable governance. The sustained
political stalemate and the resulting failure to provide
basic governmental services not only affect people’s
daily life, but also threaten the stability of the country.
Secondly, the political crisis has also led to
continuing delays in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We note
that the country lags behind, while other countries in
the Balkans that shared the same experience of war are
moving towards regional integration. In that regard, we
would like to call on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take a forward-looking approach and
make necessary reforms to address the needs of people.
The long-overdue implementation of the European
Court of Human Rights Sejdić-Finci ruling will also be
an important step in that direction.
Lastly, we are concerned about the recurring and
divisive rhetoric against and challenges to Bosnia and

S/PV.7057

Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They are particularly troublesome as they undermine
trust among the country’s diverse ethnic communities
and hinder their genuine national reconciliation.
Commitment to the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as one sovereign country is the very foundation of
the peace agreement that brought the country back
to life 18 years ago. Such genuine reconciliation and
commitment to a shared future are critical to building
the country’s future. We therefore call upon all political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from
divisive rhetoric,and to make every effort towards
national integration and reconciliation.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the extension of the mandate of the European Union
military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
continued role of the international community. We
would also like to reiterate our support for a democratic,
stable and unified Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We take
note of the presentation of his report (S/2013/646, annex),
to which we listened with concern, given the relative
lack of progress achieved in the period under review.
We should like to make five observations.
We reaffirm our firm support for the Dayton
Agreement and for the defence and preservation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is critically important, in our view, for
political leaders and the international community to
continue to focus on recognizing the balance achieved
by the Dayton Agreement and the political structures
subsequently put in place. In that regard, we remain
concerned by the negative rhetoric of certain leaders
who continue to attack the accords and to question
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular because their words are
accompanied by efforts to undermine and, in some
cases, to interrupt the functionality of the Federation
and its institutions.
Secondly, we welcome the first census completed
since 1991. We consider it important to take into account
the large number of displaced persons in the aftermath of
the war. The census also contributes to better economic
and social planning. The significant progress made in
unblocking the naming of judges to the Constitutional
Court of the Federation is also good news. In addition,
we welcome the proposed constitutional reform put

13-5596515/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

12/11/2013

forth following the governmental crisis of 2013. We
will closely follow that process and we support changes
aimed at making the Federation more functional and
efficient.

21 October. One cannot help but notice the contrast
between the dynamic of regional integration at the
European level and the persistent political crisis that
confronts the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Thirdly, we note the ongoing situation in Mostar,
where it has been impossible to elect local authorities
since last year because of non-compliance with
the decree issued by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court. At the same time, we are
concerned by the problem with respect to the
assignment of citizen identification numbers due to the
failure to implement the ruling of the Constitutional
Court. The greatest impact of that situation has been on
newborn children, and it has led to large-scale protests.
Both instances reveal a greater problem identified in
the report, which is the persistent failure to implement
decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court. The failure to comply with the final, legally
binding decisions of that Court represents a violation of
a key provision of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.

Indeed, the implementation of the Dayton accords,
the basis for stabilizing the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, remains a daily challenge due to dissent
among the political parties, the paralysis of political
life, non-compliance with the rulings of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, and above all
to the secessionist rhetoric of the Republika Srpska,
which overtly threatens the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the unity of
the Federation.

Fourthly, we deeply regret that during the reporting
period the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not
achieve a single concrete advance concerning the list of
goals established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council as a prerequisite for closing
the Office of the High Representative. We will keenly
await the results of the next meeting of the Council on
4 and 5 December, which we hope will come up with
specific recommendations on the path to follow.
Fifthly, we recall the application of the judgement
of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of
Sejdić- Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stress the
importance of protecting the rights of ethnic minorities
and, hence, of movement on this important commitment.
Finally, we congratulate Mr. Inzko on his work
and efforts to resolve challenging matters. We believe
that the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization need to maintain their presence in the
country for the time being. Likewise, respect for the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and for the
relevant resolutions of the Council is an indispensable
precondition for achieving long-term stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Valentine Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
tenth report covering the period from 20 April to

16/23

In that regard, regrettably, the prospective rulings
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
will be subject to continued questioning and viewed
as unilateral acts adopted in violation of the Dayton
Accords. The negative impact of that impasse can
be measured by the scale of the demonstrations
in June that were triggered by the inability of the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
adopt amendments that would allow unique individual
identification numbers to be issued to citizens of the
Federation. This trend threatens to return the country
to the torment of the past and to destroy all that has
been laboriously built over decades with the support
of the international community. The parties’ sense of
responsibility to their respective communities and to
the very survival of the Federation is immense. It must
lead them towards the compromises required to ensure
that, in the interests of all concerned, institutions are
able to function.
Despite those major challenges, some measures
taken offer grounds to hope for a return to constructive
dialogue, including the pursuit of discussions on State
and defence property; the regular meetings of the
Council of Ministers of the Federation, which have
allowed for the designation and the adoption of laws
in various areas; and the possibility of a compromise
solution that would permit local elections to be held
in Mostar and the naming of judges to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court.
In the sphere of economics, growth of almost 7 per
cent in industrial output and 8.5 per cent in exports,
and a steady, low rate of inflation are encouraging signs
despite a record rise in unemployment to roughly 44 per
cent and a 61 per cent drop in foreign investment.

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7057

The Dayton accords were the fruit of an exceptional
effort that allowed for the stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region after a murderous
war that still haunts the memory of the populations
involved. The accords have allowed peace and stability
to be maintained for the past 17 years, and represent an
achievement that all the peoples of the region should
preserve and which they should definitively cease to
undermine. We hope that, in the interests of all the
communities involved, through the efforts of the High
Representative, of NATO and of the European Union,
all parties will demonstrate political will and renew
their faith in the ability of the federal institutions to
find equitable compromises and pragmatic solutions to
the complex issues before them.

acts according to his mandate and continues to play a
positive role in promoting the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing
and his report.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained stable, and good progress has been made
in economic development and the rule of law. China
welcomes that progress and respects the independence,
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also respects the choice
made by the Bosnian people with regard to the future
of their country.
We support the harmonious coexistence of all
ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina and their joint
efforts for development. We hope that Bosnian people
of all ethnic communities will consolidate the results
achieved in the political process, solve their differences
through dialogue, comprehensively implement the
Dayton Peace Agreement and continue to advance the
work ahead in various fields.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. Maintaining the peace and stability
and promoting the economic and social development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the common interests of
the international community, especially of the countries
of the region. The international community should take
a balanced and prudent approach with regard to the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina and seek and heed
the views and concerns of all parties concerned.
China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko in advancing the political
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and hopes that he

China welcomes the adoption by the Council of
resolution 2123 (2013), which extends the mandate of
the multinational stabilization force — the Europeanunion-led Operation Althea, which we hope will
continue to closely cooperate with the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and play a constructive role in
maintaining the peace and stability of the country.
China is willing to work with the international
community and continue to make its due contribution
to the realization of lasting peace, stability and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): In its
transition towards becoming a functional, reformoriented and modern European country, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress towards
European integration, despite all the complexities
present within its society.
A genuine commitment to the European path still
remains the highest priority for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we welcome the European Union’s
increased engagement and reinforced role in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the enhanced combined
presence of the European Union Special Representative
and the European Union delegation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a potential
candidate for European Union membership. The
Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union was
ratified in 2011, but has not yet entered into force.
However, the Interim Stabilization and Association
Agreement, the trade-related part of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, came into force upon its
signing and has been successfully implemented ever
since 2008 in all its domains.
Nonetheless, political dialogue aimed at finding
solutions for all open questions has continued so that the
Stabilization and Association Agreement could come
into force, which in effect would enable our country
to submit a credible application for membership to the
European Union. Also, we continue to make additional

13-5596517/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

efforts necessary for completing the “5+2” agenda,
which is necessary for closure of the Office of the
High Representative and the resolution of all other
outstanding issues.
We can state with confidence that the security
situation in the country remains calm and stable. Our
authorities are fully capable of dealing with threats
that could impair a safe and secure environment in the
country. Let me remind the members of the Council of
the fact that, during the end of 1990s, around 60,000
international forces were deployed and present in my
country. Today, that number is only 600. We would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Member States that participated in the multinational
stabilization force established in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are aware that national reconciliation and
trust are basic prerequisites for building a functional
State and society. We still insist on our common
goal of investigating crimes that were committed
and adequately prosecuting the perpetrators of those
crimes, regardless of their ethnicity. Additional efforts
have been made in order to enhance cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, as well as the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
We remain dedicated to further promoting regional
cooperation, which is in the common interests of the
countries in the region as well. We are certain that the
protocol on the exchange of evidence and information
on war crimes, signed between the Prosecutor’s Offices
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, is
serving as an impetus in strengthening communication
and further enhancing coordination.
Moreover, the implementation of the existing human
rights instruments and the sustainable return and local
integration of refugees and internally displaced persons
remain the priority of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
continue to maintain good cooperation between partner
countries in the framework of the Sarajevo process on
refugees and internally displaced persons and believe
that the comprehensive and coordinated return of
refugees and internally displaced persons throughout
the region is crucial to lasting peace.
We are making additional efforts to solve the
remaining border and property issues with neighbouring
countries. Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations form an essential part of Bosnia and

18/23

12/11/2013

Herzegovina’s process of moving towards the European
Union. We continue our active involvement in regional
initiatives and are further developing our bilateral
relations with other enlargement countries and
neighbouring European Union member States.
Bosnia and Herzegovina had the honour to serve
a two-year term as an elected member of the Security
Council from 2010 to 2011. Our experience is proof that
a growing number of countries are willing and capable
of contributing to dealing with issues regarding the
maintenance of the international peace and security.
We are fully determined to promote the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from
being a host country to peacekeeping operations to a
country that is now participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as in NATO and its
member countries’ International Security Assistance
Force operation in Afghanistan.
As for the platform for the participation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the General Assembly, as mentioned
in paragraph 27 of the report of the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex), we
are surprised by the lack of understanding by the High
Representative with regard to that issue. We need to
point out that the platform for the participation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s delegation in the General
Assembly does not represent a legally binding
document, but rather serves as a kind of a plan that
is guiding the position of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
the General Assembly. To be more specific, a platform
for the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Genereal Assembly is not required by any constitutional
or legal provision. Therefore, it does not in any way
discredit any foreign policy decision of the Presidency,
the work of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s representatives
in international organizations and institutions or the
participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the United
Nations framework.
Taking all that into consideration, we need to
remember that, according to the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Presidency, among others, is
responsible for conducting the foreign policy of the
country. Moreover, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina decides by consensus on all key foreign
policy issues. That mechanism proved effective during
two-year non-permanent membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Security Council. Therefore, we

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7057

believe that paragraph 27 of latest report can create
numerous misconceptions among Council members
and cause harmful interpretations that, we believe, are
unnecessary and counterproductive.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU), but
I would like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.

In the light of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s foreign
policy activities, we express our regret that the report
does not clearly emphasize the obvious improvement
in regional cooperation, as one of the foreign policy
priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
region. At the same time, we are happy that the High
Representative mentioned this in his oral statement
today. Regional cooperation is an important element
regarding the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. It also points to the capacity of our
country’s foreign policy. The Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, by maintaining good-neighbourly
relations and exchanging visits at the highest level,
making efforts to resolve outstanding bilateral issues
and participating in the Brdo process, has confirmed
its commitment and dedication to the development of
friendly relations, the process of European integration
and the resolution of the outstanding issues in the
European spirit. We encourage the High Representative
to consult ahead of time with the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to acquire precise information
on the work of the Presidency and the foreign policy
activities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, so as to avoid
any harmful and counterproductive interpretations in
future.

The territorial integrity, stability and functionality
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign and united
country, are of the highest importance to Croatia. They
are also fundamental prerequisites for the stability and
prosperity of the whole region of South-East Europe.

In spite of all of the positive developments, we are
aware of the current standoff in the political process. In
that light, it is necessary to develop a positive atmosphere
that will foster constructive political dialogue and lead
to a resolution of the outstanding issues.
I would also like to point out that all the changes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be based on the rule
of law. The full implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement is therefore imperative.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on
the occasion of your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November.
Let me also extend a welcome to High Representative
Valentin Inzko and thank him for his briefing, his report
(S/2013/646, annex) and his important work.

The specific political system rooted in Dayton
Peace Accords is, in many aspects, based on ethnic
representation, which rests on genuine equality
between three constitutive peoples. At the same time,
that equality is a prerequisite for the stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It provides the three pillars on which
the country rests under the present circumstances.
Removing any one of the three pillars would destabilize
relations and increase the danger of pulling the country
apart and of conflict among the ethnic groups.
At the moment, Serbs have the advantage of relative
ethnic homogeneity in the Republika Srpska; Bosnians
have the advantage of the biggest numbers; and Croats
are in danger of losing representation at the level of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those are the
facts of which we have to be mindful.
It is in the interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
our region, as well as Europe as a whole — something we
are reminded of particularly on the eve of the hundredth
anniversary of the First World War — to achieve a
stable and functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
will inevitably lead in future towards a civic State. But
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not there yet; as a matter
of fact, it is still far from it. Nevertheless, our goal is
the same, and we plea for a strategy that has a chance
of achieving that goal. We have to start by recognizing
the facts on the ground and work gradually towards
achieving a civic State.
Acting as if the goal of a stable, functioning State
in which everybody felt comfortable and represented
already existed would be a little like pretending in the
manner of the well-known fairy tale of the emperor’s
new clothes. Instead of pretending, we need to select
the best strategy for achieving that goal. We believe
that recognizing the need for stability based on three
pillar, instead of two-pillar instability, has the biggest
chance of success.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a State of all its
citizens, regardless of ethnicity or faith. As such, it

13-5596519/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

must implement the verdict of the European Court of
Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case. The fact that
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who do not belong
to one of three constituent peoples are discriminated by
the election process, as well as the fact that Bosniaks
and Croats in the Repubika Srpska and Serbs in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina suffer the same
type of discrimination, is an unfortunate legacy of the
Dayton Peace Accords. The equal constituent status of
all three peoples is of key importance for the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as is implementing the
verdict of the European Court for Human Rights as a
way towards a Bosnia and Herzegovina that belongs to
all its citizens.
As a strong supporter of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
is concerned that some representatives of the Republika
Srpska continue to challenge the territorial integrity of
the State they are an integral part of. As noted in the
report, there continues to be a
“long-running
negative
trend
of
some
representatives from the Republika Srpska
predicting and advocating for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the independence of
the Republika Srpska” (S/2013/646, annex, para. 6).
That must not be taken lightly.
Croatia welcomes the fact that in October the
census was conducted — the first in the post-war
period. However, according to the reports from the
ground that we have received, it appears that the results
of the recent census in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be carefully examined in order to make sure that every
citizen of that country had the opportunity to express
his or her national, religious and other identity.
Croatia strongly supports, and will continue to
support, the European and Euro-Atlantic integration
process of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a fully functional
State of its three constitutive peoples and other citizens.
That is a crucial element for the stability not only of
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also of South-East Europe.
The more Europe in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the better.
We welcome the facilitation efforts of the European
Commission to help political parties to come to an
agreement regarding the constitutional changes.
Bearing in mind the importance of an effective
coordination mechanism in achieving the European
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we hope that that

20/23

12/11/2013

issue will also be solved in the days to come so as to
ensure that the available EU funds can be used.
It is in our interest and is our responsibility to
encourage further reforms and the implementation of
the Sejdić-Finci ruling. Bosnia and Herzegovina must
not be left behind the whole region in the EU integration
process.
Regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina’s advancement
towards NATO membership, we urge the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make additional
efforts for the implementation of the six-party political
agreement regarding the issue of military property and
to work constructively to implement the agreement
without delay in order to start the first cycle of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s membership action plan as soon as
possible.
Regarding the negotiations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the trade regime with the European
Union after Croatia’s EU accession, we regret that the
additional protocol to the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet
been concluded. We particularly regret the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not accept the negotiating
principle on the basis of traditional trade. We therefore
urge the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to come to a viable and sustainable agreement on that
issue as soon as possible.
Croatia wishes to continue the Euro-Atlantic
partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand
ready to cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on all issues relating to Croatia’s EU membership and
to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with firm political
and robust technical support in the process of European
integration.
Let me conclude by saying that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is an important State that needs our full
attention. Unfortunately, its rich and often troubled
history is at present a source of tensions and dispute
rather than the springboard for a better future. But
things can be changed for the better. We need a flexible,
tailor-made approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
methodically somewhat different from the approach to
other European countries.
Recently, Bosnia and Herzegovina proved that it
can compete with the best and secure its place in the top
tier: it qualified for the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. One
might say that football is only a sport but there is no

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

reason why such a remarkable accomplishment could
not be repeated in other fields, not just on the football
pitch. It is up to all of us to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
to secure its proper place in the architecture of a new
Europe and the world of the twenty-first century.
Croatia, as a close neighbour and friend that
shares a 1,000-kilometre land border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, stands ready to be at the forefront of
those efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. On behalf of my delegation, I
wish you every success. Allow me, of course, to extend
our appreciation to the delegation of Azerbaijan for its
excellent presidency for the month of October.
First of all, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Valentine Inzko, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank him for his report to the
Council (S/2013/646, annex).
As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
Republic of Serbia continues to be strongly committed
to respecting the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be decided by its citizens
and political leaders without outside interference and,
in that context, we support any agreement accepted by
the two entities and the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina to be one
of its closest partners and has a very strong interest
in promoting mutual relations to the highest possible
level on the basis of good-neighbourliness. We shall
work for the promotion of those relations at the central
level, as well as for the expansion and intensification
of cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the further deepening and enrichment
of special relations with the Republic Srpska. Since the
formation of the new Governments in the two countries
in 2012, bilateral cooperation has improved, as
evidenced by the frequent meetings at the highest level.
Cooperation within international organizations and in
regional forums has been promoted, too. Particularly
noteworthy is the promotion of cooperation between
the Parliaments of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,

S/PV.7057

which is best reflected in the friendship groups that were
formed in both Parliaments in 2012 and by last week’s
visit of the high-level delegation of the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Serbia. Also
last week, the Serbian Government and the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a security
agreement in Belgrade that will provide for even better
cooperation between the two countries in that field.
In the forthcoming period, cooperation will
be exemplified by a number of practical steps and
measures. On 26 and 27 November, the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina will convene for a joint
session in Belgrade. The President of the Republic
of Serbia, Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, is expected to visit
Bosnia and Herzegovina soon. The Interstate Border
Commission will meet. The Standing Joint Committee
on Succession is also expected to meet. Furthermore,
Serbia is interested in activating the work of the
Interstate Council for Cooperation.
Serbia is a firm supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European integration and the strengthening of mutual
cooperation in that process, particularly in the area of
the work of the commission for the implementation of
the action plan of the memorandum for cooperation
in the field of European integration. We share the
interest of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the exchange of
experiences on fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria for
EU accession and the readiness for coordination on the
road to the European Union. Serbia is ready to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina by making available to it the
part of the questionnaire of the European Commission
for Serbia related to foreign affairs. We also stand ready
to help in respect of the other technical conditions for
membership with which we have already complied.
We support cooperation within the Instrument for
Pre-Accession Assistance programmes for cross-border
cooperation. A total of €11.52 million has been made
available to the two countries for the 2007-2013 period.
Projects worth €3.24 million have been agreed upon
so far, while projects worth €4.68 are currently being
negotiated.
In the field of economic cooperation, Serbia
has a special interest in promoting trade, investment
and military-economic cooperation and ranks the
establishment of the Joint Commission for Economic
Cooperation as a very good step in the right direction.

13-5596521/23

S/PV.7057

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Serbia is ready to address all outstanding issues,
now significantly reduced in number, in good faith
and in mutual interest. That is particularly true of the
questions of demarcation, refugees and missing persons,
as well as those related to succession. We particularly
welcome the concerted position on the need to have
direct contacts and exchanges of views without outside
mediation.
My country firmly supports comprehensive
development and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and has taken a number of important steps towards
promoting reconciliation in the region. We are
committed to extensive regional cooperation and, by
extension, a politically and economically stable SouthEast Europe, which we perceive as a basic precondition
for our own sustainable development. To that end, we
are committed to the strengthening of cooperation,
and welcome the successful cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is being realized within many
organizations and processes, including the South East
Europe Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation
Council, the Central Europe Free Trade Agreement, the
Central European Initiative, the Adriatic and Ionian
Initiative and other forums.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mayr-Harting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first occasion that
I have had the chance to speak under your presidency of
the Council, Sir, I would like to congratulate you and
China on assuming the presidency this month and to
thank Azerbaijan and its Permanent Representative for
their work last month.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate country Montenegro; the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming my friend High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin
Inzko back to the Council. I thank him for his work and
would like to reassure him of our continued support.
While Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to enjoy a
clear European perspective, which has been repeatedly
reaffirmed by the European Union, its institutions
have thus far failed to achieve the necessary progress
in meeting key European Union requirements. The

22/23

12/11/2013

European Union will continue its efforts to facilitate
the necessary domestic political agreements, but it is
up to the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make the necessary progress.
The lack of political will among local political
forces to work out compromises in the interest of the
common good continue to have a negative impact on
the overall reform process. Regrettably, the country
remains unable to consolidate itself as a viable
democracy and make progress on its EU path. Indeed,
the persistent domestic political stalemate is cause of
disappointment for all who wish to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina succeed.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come far since
the end of a tragic war almost two decades ago. The
security environment is now calm and stable, and the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have thus far
proven capable of dealing with threats to the country’s
safe and secure environment. Nevertheless, in spite of a
stable security environment, the political environment
remains complex. Inter-ethnic reconciliation in general
is slow, and the country’s politics remain driven by
ethnic rather than civic principles. It seems difficult for
the political leadership of the three constituent peoples
to reach out across ethnic lines and attempt to build
a broader political consensus. In addition, the fragile
socioeconomic situation of large parts of the population
has the potential to further increase political instability.
A transformation of the country’s politics is long
overdue, as political parties remain entrenched in local
political perspectives and unwilling to see that, as a
result, Bosnia and Herzegovina is increasingly lagging
behind its neighbours in the region.
In accordance with the objectives set out by the
Security Council, the European Union continued
to further strengthen its engagement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to facilitate stability and
progress, using a broad range of political and technical
instruments. The strengthening the European Union’s
field presence in the Brcko district, Mostar and Banja
Luka has also facilitated communication and exchanges
on EU priorities with citizens throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea — the
European Union’s military operation — continues to
support the competent Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in maintaining a safe and secure
environment in the country. EUFOR Althea focuses on

13-55965

12/11/2013

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

capacity-building and training, but also maintains the
means to contribute to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s own
deterrence capacity. The European Union will keep the
Operation under regular review, including on the basis
of the situation on the ground, with a view to making
progress on the conditions conducive to the delivery of
its mandate.
The successful holding last month of the first phase
of the public census, which is the first in the postwar period, needs to be recognized. The census will,
among other results, provide important statistical data,
including as regards the future needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU accession process.
While that progress is welcome, the key
requirements for progress on the EU path remain
unchanged and have not yet been met. As the Council
has also pointed out, the European Court of Human
Rights ruling in the Sejdić-Finci case still needs to
be implemented. That ruling embodies the principle
of ethnic non-discrimination, a core value of the EU
and the United Nations. Despite the strong facilitation
efforts of both Commissioner Füle and European Union
Special Representative Sørensen, political parties have
thus far been unable to come to an agreement on the
relevant constitutional changes. Personal, party and
ethnic agendas continue to block progress on achieving
a compromise on that important question.
The implementation of the ruling and the subsequent
entry into force of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement would allow the European Union to
consider as credible a possible application by Bosnia
and Herzegovina for European Union membership.
Furthermore, it would also generate positive momentum

S/PV.7057

in the overall process of political, economic, social and
cultural modernization.
The continued non-compliance with the ruling
of the European Court of Human Rights, along with
a persistent failure to establish effective internal
coordination on European Union affairs, is putting a
strain on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards
the European Union, and in this context the EU is
currently reviewing its pre-accession assistance.
Through Croatia’s accession, as the Permanent
Representative of Croatia just pointed out, the
European Union now has a 1,000 kilometre-long land
border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. This represents
an opportunity to strengthen mutual cooperation and
further promote European Union values. We call on
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve
outstanding adaptation issues as a matter of priority.
The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. We
remain ready to provide the necessary assistance in all
required areas in order to take the country forward on
its reform agenda towards the European Union. At the
same time, we call on all political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to acknowledge their responsibilities and
to show greater leadership in taking the country forward
on the European path, in line with the expectation of its
citizens.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

13-5596523/23
