S/PRST/2006/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5387th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 March 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its previous statements and
resolutions concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular the statements by
its President of 14 July 2005 (S/PRST/2005/32) and 9 November 2005
(S/PRST/2005/54).
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
21 February 2006 (S/2006/122), and reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and
unity of Somalia, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the President and the
Speaker towards reconciliation and dialogue, particularly the signing, with the
facilitation of the Government of Yemen, of the Aden Declaration on
5 January 2006, which culminated in the convening of the First Session of the
Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP) inside Somalia in Baidoa on
26 February 2006. The Council encourages all leaders and members of the
TFIs to continue their efforts towards inclusive dialogue and consensusbuilding within the framework of the TFIs and in accordance with the
Transitional Federal Charter of the Somali Republic adopted in February 2004.
“The Security Council welcomes and supports the convening of the First
Session of the TFP and looks forward to sustained sessions of the TFP as
Somali leaders seek peacefully to resolve their differences. The Council calls
on the TFP to promote peace and reconciliation in its work towards
implementing the Transitional Federal Charter and encourages the members of
TFP to use this opportunity to address key issues of national concern. In this
regard, the Council urges the members of the TFIs to continue to organize their
work in accordance with the Transitional Federal Charter, such as the
formation of independent commissions and parliamentary committees, which
will provide a framework for addressing the complex and divisive issues of the
transitional period.

06-27281 (E) 150306

*0627281*

S/PRST/2006/11

“The Security Council reiterates the urgent need for a rapid finalization
of an agreed national security and stabilization plan, to include a
comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire agreement, as well as plans for the
restoration of public safety and security institutions and the implementation of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and calls upon all Member States to
provide their full and active support in this regard.
“The Security Council remains seriously concerned over the continued
intermittent fighting and armed violence, kidnapping and other use of force,
particularly in recent incidents in the capital Mogadishu and other parts of
Somalia, which have caused loss of lives among innocent civilians and have
the potential to undermine the current progress achieved by the leaders of the
TFIs. The Council calls on all the parties to cease all hostilities and resolve
their differences peacefully in the spirit of the Aden Declaration through the
framework of the TFIs.
“The Security Council expresses its growing concern over the situation
of 1.7 million Somalis in a state of humanitarian emergency or suffering from
serious malnutrition, severe livelihood distress and the rising civil and food
insecurity in parts of Southern Somalia. The Council urges all Somali leaders
to ensure complete and unhindered humanitarian access, as well as provide
guarantees for the safety and security of the humanitarian aid workers in
Somalia. The Council emphasizes the importance of the international
commitment and coordinated support for improving the humanitarian situation.
“The Security Council commends the neighbouring countries, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
(AU), the League of Arab States, the European Union (EU), the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and concerned Member States for their keen
interest and persistent efforts in support of the peace, reconciliation and
recovery process in Somalia. The Council encourages them to continue to use
their influence in support of the TFIs, in particular to help them in their efforts
to move ahead on the key issues of security and national reconciliation.
“The Security Council welcomes the AU Summit decision of 25 January
2006 on Somalia, including the possible deployment of an IGAD Peace
Support Mission to Somalia (IGASOM), to be followed by an AU Peace
Support Mission. In the event that a national security and stabilization plan
includes the need for a peace support mission, the Council reiterates that it
expects the AU and IGAD to work out a detailed mission plan in close
coordination with and with the broad consensus of the TFIs and consistent
with the national security and stabilization plan. The Council stands ready to
consider an exemption to the arms embargo imposed against Somalia by
Security Council resolution 733 (1992) on the basis of such a mission plan.
“The Security Council takes note of resolution A.979 (24) adopted on
23 November 2005 at the twenty-fourth session of the International Maritime
Organization biennial Assembly, concerning the increasing incidents of piracy
and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia. The
Council encourages Member States whose naval vessels and military aircraft

2

S/PRST/2006/11

operate in international waters and airspace adjacent to the coast of Somalia to
be vigilant to any incident of piracy therein and to take appropriate action to
protect merchant shipping, in particular the transportation of humanitarian aid,
against any such act, in line with relevant international law. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the communiqué of the IGAD Council of Ministers’
meeting in Jawhar on 29 November 2005, which decided to coordinate its
strategies and action plans to face this common challenge in close
collaboration with the international community. The Council further urges
cooperation among all States, particularly regional States, and active
prosecution of piracy offences.
“The Security Council takes note of the annual report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia (S/2005/813) and the midterm briefing of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992). The Council condemns the increased inflow of weapons into
Somalia and the continuous violations of the United Nations arms embargo
and further reminds all States of their obligations to comply fully with the
measures imposed by resolution 733 (1992) and urges them to take all
necessary steps to hold violators accountable. Continued violations of these
measures prevent the establishment of a stable and secure environment and
undermine the efforts of those who seek to establish peace in Somalia.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the peace process in
Somalia and welcomes the commitment of the United Nations to assist in this
regard. In this connection, the Council encourages the TFIs and the
international partners to re-invigorate the Coordination and Monitoring
Committee (CMC) in the interest of a more effective international engagement
in the peace, reconciliation and recovery process in Somalia.”

3
