United Nations

S/PV.6128

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6128th meeting
Tuesday, 26 May 2009, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Hurd
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-34898 (E)

*0934898*

S/PV.6128

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Cuba, the Czech Republic, Israel, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities; His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Maurice Ripert, Acting Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
and His Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
I should first like to give the floor to Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, who will make a joint statement on
behalf of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

2

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which deal with
the issue of terrorism, I would like to give an update on
the continued cooperation among the three Committees
and their experts groups.
During the past six months, the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on Al-Qaida and Taliban, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and their respective
experts groups have increased their cooperation as
requested by the Security Council in recent resolutions
pertaining to the three Committees, notably in
resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008).
The three Committees attach great importance to
the coordination of the activities of and cooperation
among their expert groups, namely the Monitoring
Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee.
The Committees welcome the continuing efforts of the
expert groups to develop common strategies on areas
of common concern, to organize joint workshops, to
coordinate their participation in conferences and joint
country visits and to exchange information on their
activities. The Committees encourage their expert
groups to further enhance their exchange of
information and coordination with regard to capacitybuilding, assistance requests and delivery of technical
assistance activities. In this context, I would also like
to recall that the cooperation and coordination would
be facilitated by the co-location of the experts in the
framework of the Capital Master Plan.
The three expert groups continued to implement
the common strategy on dealing with non- and latereporting States through exchange of information and
joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting Member
States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In particular, the three
expert groups completed a series of three workshops on
reporting for African States by holding a workshop in
Kenya, from 11 to 13 November 2008, for North and
East African States. This was organized in cooperation
with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Vienna. Similar workshops are being planned for
Member States in Asia, including the Pacific countries,

09-34898

S/PV.6128

the Middle East and Latin America and the Caribbean
region.

Security and Cooperation in Europe in Bucharest at the
beginning of April.

In addition to these workshops, the three expert
groups are exploring the use of common video
conferences. These would be conducted from New York,
interacting with officials in the capitals of Member
States — for example, as took place with officials from
the Central African Republic on 11 May — in order to
receive further information and updates on the status of
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Committees believe that such
workshops and interactive discussions with officials
from capitals are very important tools to enhance the
cooperation between the three Committees, and Member
States, to help improve the understanding of the distinct
though connected mandates of the three Committees,
and to assist Member States in the implementation of
the relevant resolutions.

The expert groups also cooperate on issues
regarding the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions by States of the Pacific Islands
Forum. They attend periodic meetings with Pacific
Islands Forum missions to the United Nations in New
York on the implementation of the resolutions. The
three expert groups also continue to work together on
risk management and border security issues.

In response to Security Council resolutions 1805
(2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008), the three expert
groups recently presented another common strategy to
engage with international, regional and subregional
organizations, entities and agencies. The objectives of
this new strategy are to increase coherence and
coordination in the counter-terrorism efforts of the
three Committees in their relations with such bodies
and to facilitate the latter’s efforts to cooperate with
the expert groups of the three Committees. The three
Committees welcome the presentation of a second
common strategy as further evidence of the close
working relationship between the three expert groups,
and are currently considering their joint proposal.
The expert groups continue to coordinate their
visits to Member States and participation at relevant
conferences. CTED and the Monitoring Team also
exchange their schedules of visits to explore whether
these could be conducted jointly. When an expert group
does not participate in a visit, they exchange
information on the Member State that is to be visited.
In addition, the three expert groups also share their
reports on their visits whenever possible. The most
recent visit to Uganda was the twelfth joint trip of
CTED with the Monitoring Team to a Member State,
and more joint visits are envisaged later this year. The
three expert groups also jointly participated in a
regional ministerial meeting on organized crime and
terrorism, organized by UNODC in the Dominican
Republic in February, and a subregional workshop
organized by UNODC and the Organization for

09-34898

The three expert groups also continue to
contribute to and coordinate their work within the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, which was established to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system and to help
implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
In addition to the aforementioned activities, there
are regular meetings of the expert groups in New York.
Moreover, when CTC organizes briefings in the
framework of its official meetings, the Monitoring
Team and the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee are
also invited to participate.
Finally, the three Committees and their Chairmen
have worked to enhance their cooperation. To this end,
we recently organized an informal exchange of views
among the Chairmen of the three Committees. I would
like to note that the 1540 Committee adopted the topic
of “Enhancing ongoing cooperation between the 1540
Committee and other international organizations,
including the 1267 Committee and CTC” in its
programme of work for 2009. For this purpose, it
recently established a working group on cooperation in
order to promote information sharing, coordination on
country visits and workshops, technical assistance and
other issues of relevance to all three Committees.
On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table was issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees and of their expert
groups. That table has served as a useful tool for
Member States, and it has helped them to better
understand the specificities and complementarities of
our work. An updated version of the table is available
today.

3

S/PV.6128

Terrorism and proliferation continue to be a daily
reality and a threat to international peace and security,
faced equally by States and individuals alike.
Cooperation is therefore a crucial element in the efforts
to counter the threat of terrorism, including that from
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons for terrorist
purposes. The three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and their respective expert groups continue to
be committed to cooperating and coordinating their
work, within their respective mandates, in order to
contribute to an effective and efficient approach within
the overall United Nations framework and within
international efforts. In this respect, the Committees
look forward to receiving further guidance from the
Council on areas of common interest in order to better
coordinate counter-terrorism efforts. This concludes
the joint report.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting for his briefing.
I once again give the floor to Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, this time in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I had the honour to
take over the chairmanship of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee in January 2009. I would like to
thank my predecessors, Ambassadors Johan Verbeke
and Jan Grauls of Belgium, for their excellent work in
steering the Committee in 2007 and 2008.
In today’s briefing, I would like to give an
overview of the Committee’s activities since the last
briefing in November 2008. A more detailed version of
this statement will be distributed today and made
accessible on the Committee’s website (http://www.un.
org/sc/committees/1267/chairmanbriefings.shtml)
in
due course. I will therefore concentrate on the
following points.
Almost 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1267 (1999), the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban continues worldwide, especially in South Asia.
However, at the same time, over the years the threat
has evolved considerably. The Committee remains
committed to ensuring that the 1267 sanctions regime
becomes an ever more relevant and effective tool for
fighting terrorism.

4

All Member States have a role to play in helping
to ensure, via timely listing and delisting proposals,
that the consolidated list remains a dynamic instrument
that accurately reflects the current threat. The
Committee will do its part to make sure that the 1267
sanctions regime remains central to the United Nations
counter-terrorism efforts.
On 9 December 2008, after intensive negotiations
under Belgian chairmanship, the Committee adopted a
thoroughly revised version of the guidelines of the
Committee. The updated version is available in all six
languages on the Committee’s website.
By paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Council directed the Committee “to conduct a review
of all names on the Consolidated List at the date of
adoption of this resolution by 30 June 2010”. The
review process is one of the key priorities of the
Committee. It currently pertains to 488 names that
were included on the consolidated list prior to 30 June
2008.
Pursuant to the guidelines, each trimester the
Committee circulates a subset or batch of names on the
consolidated list to the designating State or States and
the State or States of residence and/or nationality. As of
today, the Committee has sent out two batches,
initiating the review of 158 names — 125 individuals
and 33 entities — on the consolidated list. A third
batch of approximately 120 names will be circulated
shortly to the respective States.
In this context, I would like to call upon all
reviewing States to thoroughly review each name and
to do their utmost to submit their replies to the
Committee within the stated period. The Committee
very much depends on the cooperation and assistance
of Member States in order to be able to successfully
complete the review process within the time frame set
by the Council.
Once the replies from the reviewing States have
been received, all information available is circulated to
members of the Committee and the Monitoring Team
for possible further input within a one-month period.
At the end of this process, the respective name is
placed on the Committee’s agenda. On 4 May, the first
five names were placed on the Committee’s agenda,
and so far the Committee has concluded its review of
three names. In the course of the review, the
Committee evaluates all available information,
considers whether listing remains appropriate, and

09-34898

S/PV.6128

considers updating the consolidated list. In cases where
a member of the Committee determines that a listing is
no longer appropriate, it may submit a delisting
request, and the Committee will decide whether to
remove a name under review from the consolidated
list.
In the spirit of transparency, it is my intention to
regularly update Member States about the progress of
the review process, including through periodic
briefings, press releases and updates on the
Committee’s webpage. The Secretariat will also notify
the States of residence and/or nationality and
designating States, as foreseen in the guidelines.
The review of the 488 names on the consolidated
list is, as I have already said, one of the key priorities
of the Committee, and it is my personal commitment to
ensure that this exercise will be conducted seriously
and thoroughly. There are several names of persons on
the list who are reported to be dead or cases where a
continued listing may no longer seem to be
appropriate. Other entries have very few identifiers and
do not contain sufficient information to allow for the
positive identification of the party concerned, as
requested for new designations by Security Council
resolution 1822 (2008). For these entries, the
application of the measures set out in resolution 1822
(2008) is very difficult, but at the same time they can
affect unintended and innocent individuals. For
instance, for 56 individuals there is no full name and
no date of birth; for 14 individuals there is only one
name available. For these reasons, INTERPOL has
been able so far to post only 317 notices for individuals
and 24 notices for entities, as it does not have the
necessary information for the other entries.
Additional identifiers are therefore necessary in
order to create an effective sanctions regime. The
review is an ideal opportunity to check these entries,
add additional identifiers or remove names from the
list for which listing is no longer considered
appropriate. I therefore count on the cooperation of
Member States in order to be able to conduct a
meaningful review and improve the quality of the
consolidated list.
In paragraph 13 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Security Council directed the Committee, with the
assistance of the Monitoring Team and in coordination
with the relevant designating States, to make accessible
on the Committee’s website a narrative summary of

09-34898

reasons for listing for each entry on the consolidated
list. The Committee, supported by the Monitoring
Team, is currently working to produce these
summaries. Since the beginning of this year, the
Committee has published a total of 63 narrative
summaries. The Monitoring Team has prepared the first
draft of another 115 narrative summaries of reasons for
listing, which are currently being reviewed by the
designating States. The summaries are published in all
six official United Nations languages.
As of today, the consolidated list comprises 508
names: 397 persons — 255 associated with Al-Qaida
and 142 associated with the Taliban — and 111
entities. Since the last briefing on 12 November 2008,
the Committee has added to the list the names of seven
individuals associated with Al-Qaida. During the same
period, one delisting request was approved, while four
delisting requests could not be acceded to.
In cases of new listings, as foreseen in the
guidelines, the Committee now includes in
communications to the membership, and in its press
release on new listings, the publicly releasable portions
of the respective statement of case. The Committee
trusts that making publicly available a statement of
case following a new listing will further improve the
transparency and effective implementation of
sanctions.
Since the last briefing, the Committee has
received 11 notifications for exemptions to the assets
freeze for basic expenses under paragraph 1(a) and one
request for an exemption for extraordinary expenses
under paragraph 1(b). One notification under paragraph
1(a) is still under the Committee’s consideration. The
Committee has also received the first request for an
exemption to the travel ban set out in paragraph 1(b) of
resolution 1822 (2008). The request was granted for
the days of travel specified.
Finally, the Committee has considered the issue
of deceased persons and discussed a paper submitted
by the Monitoring Team on listed individuals who are
reported or believed to be dead. Acknowledging the
importance of addressing this issue, the Committee
decided to undertake a review of the list of deceased
persons in the framework of the currently ongoing
review.
Cooperation and interaction with Member States
are essential elements of the work of the Committee.
Visits by the Monitoring Team to countries are an

5

S/PV.6128

important tool for developing a dialogue with Member
States and for gathering information on the
implementation of the sanctions regime. Since the last
briefing, the Monitoring Team has travelled to seven
Member States — Syria, Lebanon, Togo, Malaysia,
Algeria, France and the United States — including two
visits under the umbrella of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
In addition, on 30 April 2009 in Vienna the Team
held its seventh regional meeting for the heads and
deputy heads of intelligence and security services from
selected countries in the Middle East, North Africa and
Pakistan, and its third meeting with regional security
and intelligence services on 22 and 23 April in Nairobi
to discuss Al-Qaida influences in Somalia. On
9 February, the Committee itself met with a high-level
delegation from Algeria, which gave a comprehensive
overview of Algeria’s efforts to counter terrorism
related to Al-Qaida. On 11 December 2008, my
predecessor held an open briefing to interested
Member States in which he provided an update of the
Committee’s work in relation to the implementation of
resolution 1822 (2008). My intention is to hold another
open briefing next month.
At the end of February, the Monitoring Team
submitted its ninth report (S/2009/245) to the
Committee, as requested under resolution 1822 (2008).
The Committee recently started its consideration of the
report and its recommendations. The report has been
transmitted to the Security Council, published as a
United Nations document and put on the Committee’s
website. The Committee will inform the Security
Council of its position on the Team’s recommendations
after careful consideration. The Monitoring Team will
submit its tenth report to the Committee at the end of
July 2009. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the members of the Monitoring Team and the
secretariat of the 1267 Committee for their invaluable
contribution to the work of the Committee.
Let me conclude with a general comment. The
1267 sanctions regime currently faces serious
challenges. There are a growing number of cases
before national and regional courts, filed by listed
individuals and entities taking legal action against
sanctions measures. The review is therefore an
important step towards both improving due process and
strengthening the regime. Either by removing names
from the list where listing is no longer appropriate or
by adding new identifiers and information regarding

6

names remaining on the list, the review will help to
improve due process and the quality of the
consolidated list and to implement the sanctions regime
more effectively. Further steps towards ensuring and
strengthening fair and clear procedures, as stated in
resolution 1822 (2008), may be sought in the next
resolution, which is due at the end of 2009.
However, the success of the review process and
the Committee’s work in general depends not only on
the work of the members of the Committee, but most
importantly on the cooperation of all Member States
involved, in particular designating States and States of
residence and/or nationality. In order to complete the
review process by the deadline in June 2010, it is
essential that all States involved do their utmost to
provide all available information within the time frame
set by the Committee. The continued cooperation and
engagement of all Member States is crucial to achieve
our common and overall objective to counter and
prevent terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mayr-Harting for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
speaking on behalf of the Acting Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): As you
stated, Mr. President, I have the honour of making a
statement on behalf of the Permanent Representative of
France, who is not in New York today and who is the
Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), known
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). It is my
honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Committee since the last briefing of 12 November
2008.
In the past six months, the Committee has
pursued its activities according to its programmes of
work, which have been issued as official documents of
the Security Council. The Committee has continued to
analyse the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
of resolution 1373 (2001), documents that have been
presented to all United Nations Member States by
Ambassador Jurica and Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the CTC, during information meetings.
Since last November, it has approved 21 of them,
which brings the current total to 191 files. It should
formally approve the last two in the coming months.

09-34898

S/PV.6128

One of the major undertakings of the Committee
in this reporting period is the stocktaking exercise.
After receiving their preliminary assessments in 2007
and 2008, Member States were usually given 12
months to send their comments and provide updates.
The first deadlines have expired, and the Committee
has endorsed a proposal on how to conduct the
stocktaking of each Member State’s implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). That process is to be carried
out in stages, involving the Committee and its
subcommittees. The Committee can thus enhance its
regular dialogue with the Member States and identify
the areas where implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) is still inadequate.
In practice, the Committee is called on to provide
follow-up to the recommendations drawn up for each
Member State by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. On the basis of those
recommendations, among other activities, the
Committee requests additional information on the gaps
identified and invites permanent representatives to the
meetings of the relevant subcommittees, at which they
are reminded of their obligation to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). The relevant subcommittee
asks the Member States in question why they have not
responded to the Committee’s communications and
encourages the permanent representatives of those
States to explore additional ways to help the Executive
Directorate to obtain further information and updates.
The Committee has already finalized 16 files in the
context of that activity.
The Committee has continued to organize visits
to Member States with their consent. That is a
fundamental element of its activities to effectively
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Besides such comprehensive visits, which
facilitate analysis of all aspects of implementing the
resolution, the revised organizational plan of the
Executive Directorate envisages a more flexible
approach by planning shorter visits focused on one or
two particular aspects of the counter-terrorism regime
in the Member State concerned. In addition, the plan
forms the basis for regional visits and for missions
given the task of examining best practices and of
resolving vulnerabilities.
Thanks to those innovations, the rate of visits has
significantly increased, which has enabled the
Committee to engage in a more in-depth examination
of the problems in a greater number of countries in all

09-34898

regions. Over the past six months, the Committee has
successfully concluded on-site visits to the following
countries: Kenya, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Belgium, Denmark,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Senegal, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Singapore
and Bangladesh.
The Committee was seized of the results of the
activities of the five cross-cutting technical working
groups established by the organizational plan of the
Executive Directorate, which covers the major areas of
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The aim is to revise and harmonize the criteria
for technical judgements of the elements of resolution
1373 (2001) and to draw up a technical guide that will
facilitate the task of the Executive Directorate. The
Directorate has submitted the guide to the Committee,
which is currently considering it.
The Committee and the Executive Directorate
have done their utmost to strengthen dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries so as to
facilitate technical assistance. In that context, the
Committee continues to look for and match current and
potential donors and beneficiary countries in order to
strengthen their mutual dialogue and to further the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee has approved a report on the
implementation of the plan of action adopted at its fifth
special meeting, held two years ago in Nairobi, Kenya.
The Executive Directorate organized that review in
consultation with the 77 international, regional and
subregional organizations invited to participate in the
meeting. It has been noted that more than 100
conferences, workshops and training sessions had
taken place since November 2007 to promote the
implementation of the plan of action. The Committee
also posts on its website the technical assistance
requests in a table and the directory of its assistance
programmes.
In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to remind them that they
must ensure that all measures taken to combat
terrorism comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and humanitarian law. The expert on
human rights in the Executive Directorate regularly
submits information for inclusion in the preliminary
assessments, prepares the Directorate’s country

7

S/PV.6128

visits — in two of which he himself has taken part —
and promotes a consistent approach to human rights
issues in the Directorate’s activities.
Regarding resolution 1624 (2005), the Committee
has continued to include in its dialogue with Member
States their efforts to implement that resolution. In
total, 99 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
The Committee continues to encourage the States that
have not yet presented a report to do so. Recently, it
endorsed a discussion paper, prepared by the Executive
Directorate, on ways to advance the dialogue.
The Committee also continues to encourage the
Member States to become party to and to implement
the 16 international counter-terrorism instruments. The
Committee plays its part in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Under its guidance, the Executive Directorate has
continued to participate actively in all relevant
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. It has participated in the work of the three
working groups of the Task Force, dealing respectively
with addressing the financing of terrorism, protecting
human rights while countering terrorism, and
integrating assistance for countering terrorism. The
Committee welcomes the intention of the Secretariat to
co-locate the Task Force secretariat with CTED, which
will be conducive to their closer collaboration within
the framework of their respective mandates.
The Committee, mostly through its experts and in
line with resolution 1805 (2008), cooperates and
coordinates its activities with two other subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council that deal with counterterrorism, namely, the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). More
information on this cooperation has been presented
earlier today in the common message of the three
Committees.
Moreover, as part of its cooperation and exchange
of information with counter-terrorism partners during
its meetings in New York, the Committee heard several
briefings by representatives of relevant organizations
and United Nations bodies.
The Committee will need to accomplish a number
of major tasks in the next six months. First, resolution
1805 (2008) requests an interim review of CTED by
30 June 2009. I am pleased to be in a position to report
that the Committee has started informal consultations

8

on this issue and will submit a report to the Council
before the stipulated deadline. Moreover, in the coming
period, the Committee will focus on concluding the
major part of the stocktaking exercise. The Committee
also expects to receive a new revision of the Global
Implementation Survey of resolution 1373 (2001) by
Member States and to further strengthen contacts
within relevant countries in order to facilitate the
delivery of technical assistance.
As terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, the Committee
represents a crucial instrument of the international
community to address that global scourge. The
Committee benefits from the constructive engagement
of its members, which assists it considerably in its
work. Furthermore, support from and cooperation with
Member States remains invaluable, especially in
carrying out the stocktaking exercise. I should
therefore like to thank all Member States for their
important contributions, which enable the Committee
to fulfil its mandate.
Finally, I would also like to extend the
Committee’s gratitude to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and his team for their valuable
assistance. I also appreciate the continuous support
provided by the Secretariat.
Let me conclude with a few words in my national
capacity, while aligning myself fully with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. France is
very committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), the crucial importance of
which is underscored by the very alarming events that
have just taken place in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The obligations imposed by this
resolution make good sense. Compliance has
significant benefits to public health, through control of
biological facilities, taxes through border control and,
of course, security. France, which has just taken the
chair of the 1540 working group on assistance, will
spare no effort to ensure that States receive all
necessary assistance for the full implementation of the
resolution.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee,
as our Austrian colleague said earlier, has started the
important work of reviewing the entire consolidated
list of individuals, groups and entities subject to
sanctions, as requested by the Security Council in

09-34898

S/PV.6128

resolution 1822 (2008). France considers the general
review and the yearly reviews that will take place
subsequently to be among the most important
safeguards for individual freedoms surrounding the
sanctions regime. My country participates actively in
this work and invites all other Member States
concerned to play their full role in this crucial exercise.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jorge
Urbina, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to brief the
Security Council on the main activities of the
Committee during the six months since the last joint
briefing held on 12 November 2008. Among the main
aspects, I would like to refer to the adoption of the
Committee’s annual programme of work and on
outreach activities, assistance and cooperation with
relevant organizations.
In accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution
1810 (2008), the Committee completed preparation of
its programme of work covering the period from
1 February 2009 to 31 January 2010. The programme,
which was circulated as a Security Council document,
calls for intensification of ongoing activities and for
developing new activities. The programme seeks first
to increase the Committee’s knowledge of the status of
implementation by encouraging non-reporting States to
submit a first report and other States to provide
additional information reflecting progress towards a
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004);
secondly, to pursue the Committee’s dialogue with
States on such progress and to organize and participate
in outreach events at the national, regional and
subregional levels; thirdly, as Ambassador MayrHarting mentioned, to enhance the Committee’s
cooperation with other international bodies, including
the Security Council’s Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001);
and, fourthly, to engage actively with States and
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations for the purpose of sharing experiences
and lessons learned.
Moreover, the programme seeks to strengthen the
Committee’s role of facilitating technical assistance in

09-34898

the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
developing further its clearing-house function in
matching offers and requests for assistance and by
encouraging and taking advantage of voluntary
financial contributions to assist States in addressing
their needs.
A major focus of the Committee’s work in 2009
will be to organize a comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The review will assess the evolution of risks and
threats in the areas covered by the resolution, address
specific critical issues that have not yet been
addressed, and identify new approaches for the
implementation of the resolution. The modalities of the
review, to be completed no later than 31 January 2010,
were circulated in document S/2009/170 of 1 April
2009.
In order to implement its 2009 programme more
efficiently, the Committee has established four working
groups open to all its members. They focus on the
following topics: first, national implementation and
monitoring, including the comprehensive review;
secondly, assistance; thirdly, transparency and
outreach; and fourthly, cooperation with international
organizations and subsidiary bodies, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1267
Committee.
(spoke in English)
Outreach activities have been intensified to
encourage and promote the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Since the last joint briefing in
November 2008, 25 conferences and workshops have
been attended by the Chairman or members of the
Committee and by the experts assisting the Committee.
The Committee’s outreach has been worldwide,
covering meetings in Africa, Asia and the Pacific
region, Europe, North America, Latin America and the
Caribbean. The purpose of such participation has
ranged from raising awareness to the encouragement of
submitting national reports on the status of
implementation, and from sharing the experiences and
lessons learned in seeking solutions to explaining
technical issues in the resolution and encouraging the
use of methods and tools to facilitate the preparation of
implementation plans or assistance requests.
Since November 2008, the Committee has
continued to engage in several types of outreach
activities, summarized as follows.

9

S/PV.6128

First, the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs (UNODA) has organized regional workshops
specific to the 1540 Committee. There were three such
regional workshops on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), focusing on building the
capacity of Member States with respect to border and
export controls. The first was organized for the
Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) countries
in São Paulo, Brazil, in late November 2008. The
second workshop, held in Doha, Qatar in March 2009,
was organized for the countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the neighbouring area. The
third, held in Port Vila, Vanuatu in late April and early
May, was organized for United Nations Member States
in the Pacific Islands region. The Committee expresses
its appreciation to the host countries and to the
sponsors of those events: the European Union and the
Government of Norway, who were joined by the United
States in the case of the Brazil and Qatar workshops
and the United Kingdom in the case of the Qatar
workshop, and by New Zealand for the workshop in
Vanuatu.
Secondly, regional workshops were organized in
collaboration with other United Nations bodies. In
addition to the common strategy workshops for nonreporting and late reporting African States, organized
by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC/TPB),
the UNODC/TPB co-organized workshops on the
implementation of the international instruments dealing
with counter-terrorism with other regional bodies, such
as with the League of Arab States in Cairo in
November 2008, the Organization of American States
(OAS) in the Dominican Republic in February 2009
and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) in Bucharest in March 2009. The 1540
Committee expresses appreciation to UNODC and the
regional bodies and host Governments for their
valuable role in organizing these workshops.
Thirdly, other organizations organized meetings.
Those conferences and workshops covered subjects
ranging from the broad issue of implementation of the
international instruments on non-proliferation and
counter-terrorism to a direct focus on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and from
the various non-proliferation measures in the nuclear,
chemical or biological area to a sharper focus on
specific issues such as proliferation, financing, illicit
trafficking and maritime security. Such events included

10

international and regional workshops on the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) organized by the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW); a
European Union-sponsored meeting on the CWC and
non-proliferation; an OSCE meeting on security
cooperation, including non-proliferation initiatives; an
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
symposium on nuclear security; a conference of the
Combined Joint Operations from the Sea Centre of
Excellence; OAS meetings on non-proliferation,
resolution 1540 (2004) and counter-terrorism; and
meetings of the Financial Action Task Force.
Fourthly, there were country-specific events. The
1540 Committee has participated in country-specific
workshops
of
particular
relevance
to
the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In February
2009, a 1540 Committee expert participated in a
workshop in Tashkent devoted to the implementation
of the resolution in Uzbekistan. We appreciate the
initiative taken by the Government of Uzbekistan and
the Center for Nonproliferation Studies of the
Monterey Institute of International Studies in
organizing this event, which facilitated intensive
dialogue with officials from different ministries. It
should be noted that a similar dialogue with officials
from the Dominican Republic was made possible in
tandem with a UNODC-sponsored meeting of the
Caribbean countries held there in February 2009.
(spoke in French)
With regard to assistance, as encouraged in
resolution 1810 (2008), the Committee is intensifying
efforts to further develop its clearing-house function
for channelling assistance to Member States by
matching, as appropriate, assistance requests with
offers of assistance. The number of specific assistance
requests submitted under the Committee’s recently
distributed assistance template has now reached six,
comprising five from Member States and one from a
subregional organization, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), on behalf of its region. Those requests
concern assistance in drafting legislation, organizing
workshops on border and export controls and
appointing
a
regional
1540
implementation
coordinator. They have been referred to Member States
and organizations that may be in a position to provide
the requested assistance, and some offers have already
been made.

09-34898

S/PV.6128

On cooperation with other bodies and
organizations, our joint statement as Chairmen of the
CTC, the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and the 1540 Committee provides more information on
the progress that our Committees have made in
strengthening our cooperation during the past six
months. We expect to continue these joint efforts in
inviting intergovernmental organizations to contribute
to promoting the objectives of the three Committees.
Towards that end, during my visits to Washington
and Vienna last December and again this month as the
1540 Committee Chairman, I was able to meet senior
staff of the OAS, OSCE and the IAEA to discuss new
steps to improve the Committee’s relations with those
organizations. I intend to carry out similar
consultations with other organizations, for example,
the World Customs Organization, in the near future, in
order to strengthen their cooperation with the
Committee to support their roles in facilitating States’
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Improving
the cooperation between international organizations,
States and the Committee is also among the major
objectives of the comprehensive review taking place
during the rest of this year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I was hoping
that the Ambassador would speak a few words in
Russian, but perhaps he will do so next time.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would like to thank the
three distinguished Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
informative briefings and for the continued guidance of
their Committees. There is no doubt that today,
terrorism and the proliferation of the weapons of mass
destruction continue to pose two of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Therefore,
we should remain extremely vigilant and steadfast in
countering those challenges.
To that end, implementation of the three Security
Council resolutions we are discussing today is
important. Indeed, the adoption of each resolution
constituted a concrete and tangible achievement.
However, as we all know, their full implementation
poses an even more challenging task, and that is why
the continuous work done by the three Committees for
the effective implementation of the resolutions is of
critical importance.

09-34898

As to the 1267 Committee, it is imperative that
we continue to do everything possible to deprive the
Taliban and Al-Qaida of financial, logistical and
political support. Indeed, the threats posed by those
extremist groups are not confined to any particular
region; they constitute a serious danger for the entire
international community.
In that regard, I agree with the Chairman of the
1267 Committee that a comprehensive review of the
consolidated list is important for the credibility and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. We believe that
with the successful conclusion of the review process
our endeavours will be more focused and will thus
yield more concrete results.
As to resolution 1373 (2001), we are pleased to
observe that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has also
come a long way in its own stocktaking process. It has
finished the adoption of almost all Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs). We appreciate the
good work done by Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and his dedicated team.
However, we are still far from where we could and
should be in implementing resolution 1373 (2001) in
its entirety. Lack of capacity, political will and a clear
understanding of what needs to be done continues to
undermine our efforts to put up a strong and united
front against terrorism.
Therefore, we should re-energize the work of the
Committee, in particular by focusing more on
identified shortcomings, including those deriving from
unfulfilled obligations by individual countries. In that
regard, we feel that we must not shy away from having
candid exchanges on what is not working and on what
more should be done in this respect.
Likewise, we should start to consider once again
the possibility of preparing a consolidated list, similar
to the one we have in the 1267 Committee, sanctioning
other terrorist groups, individuals and entities. The lack
of such a list seriously undermines international
cooperation against terrorism.
Finally, I also wish to underscore the importance
of resolution 1540 (2004) in our efforts to tackle the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. That is
why we very much welcome the intensification of
efforts to promote the implementation of that
resolution. In this endeavour, outreach is of paramount
importance. Thus, maintaining dialogue with individual

11

S/PV.6128

States and responding to their technical and financial
needs for the implementation of the resolution in a
timely and effective manner are critical. Likewise, we
look forward to the comprehensive review process
called for in resolution 1810 (2008). We hope that this
will provide yet another opportunity that could enable
the Committee to enhance its ability to facilitate
national implementation efforts.
In conclusion, substantial work has been done by
and within the framework of the three Committees
under review. But there is still ample room for further
and decisive progress. Having said that, I would also
like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Chairmen of the three Committees for their
commitment and endeavours in that direction.
As a member of the Security Council, Turkey will
continue to lend its full support to the work of these
Committees with a view to helping strengthen our
abilities in countering terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The international
community has learned the hard way that only through
extensive and solid international cooperation can these
scourges be eradicated.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I should like to
start by thanking Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ambassador Jorge Urbina
for their very comprehensive briefings on the work of
the 1267 Committee, the 1373 Committee and the 1540
Committee over the past six months and for their
continued cooperation. We commend the three
Committees, under the leadership of their Chairmen
and with the assistance of their expert bodies, namely
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the 1540 expert group, for the
achievements made and initiatives taken in carrying
out their mandates.
We continue to acknowledge the threat posed to
international peace and security by Al-Qaida, Usama
bin Laden, the Taliban and other individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with them. The
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1822
(2008) provided further directions and a legal
framework for the 1267 Committee’s work.
My delegation takes note of the fact that the 1267
Committee has given high priority to conducting a
process of review of all names on its consolidated list.
For that purpose, the Committee circulated two batches

12

of names for updated information or additional
identifiers, and it plans to update all entries on the list.
The Committee also worked with its Monitoring Team
to publish on its website 53 narrative summaries of
reasons for listing. We support the commitment made
by the Committee’s Chair to ensure that this review
process will be conducted seriously and thoroughly. We
once again stress that particular attention should be
given to the consideration of cases whose continued
listing may no longer be appropriate, with a view to
removing those names from the list. We believe that all
the aforementioned efforts will positively contribute to
improving the quality of the consolidated list and thus
the effectiveness of the 1267 sanctions regime of the
Security Council.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its
part, has been engaged in a stocktaking exercise on the
implementation by Member States of the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions. Using all
appropriate tools, such as Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs), the country visit reports and
recommendations, the CTC has made further efforts to
improve the dialogue with Member States as well as to
promote technical assistance in the field of counterterrorism. My delegation supports the initiative of the
CTC to facilitate, in the framework of the stocktaking
exercise, direct dialogue between the CTC and the
Permanent Missions of Member States to the United
Nations, aimed at finding ways to assist Member States
in implementing their obligations under the related
Security Council resolutions.
The CTC continues to give guidance to its expert
body, the CTED, in developing a technical guide,
another reference tool to help ensure consistent
analysis and evaluation of States’ implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We look forward to further
discussions with other members of the CTC on the
revised draft of the technical guide.
With respect to resolution 1805 (2008), by which
the Security Council decided to conduct an interim
review of the CTED’s work by 30 June 2009, my
delegation welcomes the CTC’s ongoing efforts in
assessing the CTED’s assistance to the Committee in
delivering its mandate and the impact of the
Directorate’s structural reorganization on its work.
Upon the completion of the interim review, we expect
the Council to be able to agree on recommendations
made by the CTC for the improvement of the CTED’s
work.

09-34898

S/PV.6128

My delegation welcomes the programme of work
for 2009 adopted by the 1540 Committee (see
S/2009124) with a major focus on the organization of a
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee made great
efforts in formulating the modalities of the review,
which is aimed at addressing specific critical issues
that have not been addressed and at identifying new
approaches to promote the implementation of the
resolution, while avoiding the imposition of
unnecessary or overlapping obligations on Member
States.
With regard to cooperation among the three
Committees through their expert bodies, we take note
of further endeavours, such as the common approach
towards
relevant
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations, jointly proposed by the
Monitoring Team, the CTED and the 1540 expert group
for the consideration of the three Committees, and the
fact that experts of the Monitoring Team continue to
participate in the CTED’s visits to Member States. We
support the three expert bodies in their work to find
appropriate ways to strengthen their coordinated
actions within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to help promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam
considers that the mandates of the three committees
and their contributions to the common cause against
international terrorism are important. We wish to
register our continued support for and cooperation with
the three committees in carrying out their mandates.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador
Lacroix and Ambassador Urbina for their briefings on,
respectively, the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) (the 1267
Committee), the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) (the 1540 Committee). We express our
appreciation to them and their teams for their effective
work.
Under the chairmanship of Ambassador MayrHarting, the 1267 Committee has updated its guidelines
in accordance with the relevant provision of resolution
1822 (2008). At present, the review of all the
information on the sanctions list is being carried out in
an orderly fashion. That review is helpful in making

09-34898

the sanctions regime more effective and fair, so as to
help alleviate the concern that some countries have
with regard to the Committee’s procedural aspects.
In order to uphold the authority and status of the
Committee, it is necessary to have the support of each
and every Member State. We encourage all the Member
States to provide the Committee with information that
is as detailed as possible so as to help with the review.
In addition, in order to make the sanctions regime more
targeted, we support the Committee’s continued
improvement of its listing and delisting procedures so
as to make the sanctions list a truly live document.
The CTC, with the assistance of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
has endeavoured to improve its working methods,
based on efficiency and consistency in its work, and
has achieved visible results in areas such as
Preliminary
Implementation
Assessment
(PIA)
consideration, visits to countries and technical
assistance. China expresses its appreciation in this
regard.
At present, one important task facing the CTC is
that of carrying out a new round of PIA consideration.
That work is of great significance in terms of
promoting implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We hope that the CTC, in the process of PIA
consideration, will strengthen its dialogue with
Member States and help them overcome difficulties in
implementing that resolution. We also encourage
Member States to provide, in a timely manner, all the
necessary information to the CTC and CTED so as to
make the Committee’s work more reflective of the real
needs of Member States.
In the most recent period, the 1540 Committee
has carried out a series of activities in areas such as
formulating its programme of work, considering
implementation reports from Member States and
outreach and international assistance. It has played an
important role in bringing about comprehensive and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
China expresses its appreciation in this regard. In the
next period, in accordance with resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1810 (2008), the Committee should
comprehensively and in a fair and balanced manner
continue to promote the achievement of the various
goals listed in its programme of work.
1540

China attaches great importance to the role of the
Committee and has always actively and

13

S/PV.6128

constructively participated in its activities. We are
ready to continue to support the Committee’s work and
to play our role in bringing about a comprehensive,
balanced implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
solidifying the non-proliferation consensus and
advancing the cause of international non-proliferation
cooperation.
In the past few months, despite unrelenting
worldwide efforts in the counter-terrorism field, global
terrorist activities have continued unabated. Terrorism
has continued to be a serious threat to international
peace and security. In our view, the Security Council
counter-terrorism mechanism, with the three subsidiary
committees as the backbone, is an important
component of the United Nations counter-terrorism
regime. The results produced by the Council have
made great contributions to the international counterterrorist effort. At present, under the grave situation of
counter-terrorism worldwide, China considers that the
Council’s
counter-terrorism
mechanism
should
continue to play its due role and to demonstrate to the
international community its resolute determination to
combat terrorism and to increase the effectiveness of
international counter-terrorism cooperation.
China has noted that the three committees have
made further progress in strengthening their
cooperation. We hope they and their experts will
continue to consolidate their resources and efficiency.
We hope that in their work they will pay more attention
to the counter-terrorism requests of developing
countries and heed their views in this process.
The United Nations counter-terrorism strategy is
among
the
most
important
counter-terrorism
resolutions of the United Nations. China supports the
participation of the three committees, within the scope
of their respective mandates, in relevant activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) and their facilitation of comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the global counterterrorism strategy. They should make sure that the
activities carried out by the Council are complementary
and are coordinated with those of the General
Assembly so as to uphold the central role of the United
Nations in the global counter-terrorism cooperation.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda welcomes the
comprehensive briefings by the three Chairmen of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. Terrorism
and proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological

14

weapons and their means of delivery remain a danger
to international peace and security. These are matters
that this Council has continued to handle. Uganda has
given unwavering support to the Council, and will
continue to do so, for all measures aimed at
strengthening its work in this regard.
Uganda commends the three committees and their
expert groups for developing common strategies and
making joint country visits and exchanges of
information on their activities. We encourage them to
continue to assist Member States in submitting timely
responses on implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions. Their common strategy to engage with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
entities and agencies is a step in the right direction and
should be encouraged. However, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) should be able to make
an in-depth assessment of what it has been able, and
what it has not been able, to achieve and possibly of
what it intends to do in order to realize maximum
output of these interactive initiatives.
The visit to my country by CTED and the
Monitoring Team between 17 and 21 November 2008
was very welcome. It assisted the Team to deepen their
understanding of the intricacies involved in the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions,
particularly the technical aspects essential in such
implementation. My country’s experience in handling
terrorist activities can be a point of recall in
understanding the role of the individual State
initiatives,
bilateral
approaches
and
regional
interventions in stemming these threats.
Uganda has had to confront terrorist groups of the
Lord’s Resistance Army and Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) largely out of these approaches. In the recent
past, we have worked closely with some of our
neighbours in that regard. This approach is consistent
with the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Those initiatives, it must be said, reinforce the efforts
of the Council to achieve its mandate in the fight
against terrorism.
Uganda welcomes the revised technical
assistance strategy of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, which is intended to leverage bilateral,
regional and international partnerships in order to
enhance dialogue with recipient countries and the
further implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

09-34898

S/PV.6128

Uganda will continue to support the fight against
terrorism and against the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery, and all other efforts of the Security Council to
achieve international peace and security. We will
continue to support and encourage cooperation at the
bilateral, subregional, regional and international levels
in that regard.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate. I would also like to thank
the Chairs of the Council’s three counter-terrorismrelated Committees for their respective briefings on
developments during the past six months. Terrorism
continues to be a serious threat to the international
community.
Countering
terrorism
requires
a
comprehensive and multifaceted approach, as well as
enduring engagement. The three Committees play a
significant role in that context and should continue
their efforts to develop further effective measures.
The threat of terrorism posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban continues unabated. The sanctions imposed
under resolution 1267 (1999) — namely, travel bans,
the freezing of assets and arms embargoes — continue
to play a crucial role. In order to fulfil its
responsibilities, the 1267 Committee is now devoting a
substantial amount of work to reviewing the
consolidated list, but adequate information from other
Member States, in particular from designating States, is
indispensable in order to have a meaningful review. As
the Chair of the 1267 Committee stated in his report,
some entries lack adequate and relevant information to
ensure necessary sanctions and, in order to retain them
on the list, additional information is required. In that
regard, we join the Chair of the 1267 Committee in
strongly requesting the relevant States to consider the
request for updated information seriously.
The circumstances in Afghanistan and Pakistan
remain acute. With regard to Afghanistan, Japan is
committed to supporting the effort by the Afghan
Government to improve the security situation,
including through its vigorous assistance to the Afghan
police sector and the disbandment of illegal armed
groups, as well as other forms of assistance. As
concerns Pakistan, the Pakistan donors conference and
the Friends of Democratic Pakistan Group ministerial
meeting were held on 17 April in Tokyo. Participating
States affirmed their intention to assist and support
Pakistan’s efforts to counter terrorism. At the meeting,

09-34898

Japan pledged to enhance its assistance to Pakistan.
Japan believes that a regional approach and close
relations with neighbouring countries are indispensable
in combating extremists who conduct activities across
borders.
Given the increasingly international nature of
terrorism, each Member State needs to strengthen its
counter-terrorism capacity. In that regard, enhancing
assistance for capacity-building is a matter of urgency.
During its term as Chair of the G-8 last year, Japan
took the initiative to strengthen cooperation between
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). We
commend this year’s Chair, Italy, for furthering that
effort.
We welcome the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and CTED in promoting assistance
for countering terrorism in close cooperation with the
other two Committees. We hope to see further such
efforts. CTED should also continue its active
contribution to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), bearing in mind
the clear distinction between the work of CTED and
that of CTITF. Whereas CTED identifies assistance
needs and promotes the provision of assistance in
cooperation with donor States, CTITF ensures overall
coordination and coherence of counter-terrorism
activities within the United Nations system.
The CTC’s Preliminary Implementation Assessment
(PIA) is a crucial tool, as it provides the only objective
assessment conducted by the United Nations of the
implementation of counter-terrorism efforts in each
State. We welcome the fact that the first review of the
PIA has been undertaken, as that stock-taking exercise
enhances the tailored dialogue between Member States
and the Committee. We also welcome the submission
by CTED of the technical guide, which aims to ensure
the consistent assessment of the PIA.
Nuclear terrorism continues to pose what is
potentially the gravest threat to the international
community. Japan includes the prevention of nuclear
terrorism as one of the 11 benchmarks of its global
nuclear disarmament policy. In that connection, we
welcome United States President Obama’s proposal to
undertake new international efforts to strengthen the
control of nuclear material and to hold a global summit
on nuclear security.

15

S/PV.6128

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays an important role in preventing
terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). Japan attaches great importance to
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) in the context of
worldwide engagement on the non-proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery. In order to
promote implementation, it is useful for the 1540
Committee to have dialogue with other international,
regional and subregional actors. Japan will continue
and enhance such dialogue through other forums,
including the G-8.
Lastly, I would like in this context to mention the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. The Convention, which has been
ratified by 52 States, will be an effective tool in the
prevention of nuclear terrorism. We therefore
encourage those who have not yet done so to join the
Convention without delay.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
would like to thank Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Lacroix and Urbina for their briefings and their joint
statement of cooperation. We would also like to
express our gratitude for Ambassador Jurica’s
dedicated leadership. The Committees they chair are
doing vital work to curb terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Today is an
opportunity to recognize the accomplishments of those
Committees and to encourage all Member States to
cooperate fully with their efforts.
Global terrorism and the threat of non-State
actors obtaining weapons of mass destruction are two
of the greatest challenges of our time. None of us is
immune to that modern-day plague. That is why the
international community joined together to create
interlocking, complementary tools to respond to
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. These include not only the Security
Council’s Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, but
also the General Assembly’s Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. Those bodies demonstrate our seriousness
of purpose.
The Council’s adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
to renew the 1267 regime and implement a number of
ground-breaking requirements has helped the 1267

16

Committee to conduct its business in a fair and
transparent manner. When combined with the existing
procedures, those new safeguards — such as
publishing information justifying the listing of terrorist
entities and conducting a mandatory review of all the
names on the 1267 list — represent a new standard for
equitable clear procedures. We encourage all those who
are interested in the future of this regime to pay
attention to the sweeping nature of these reforms.
The Committee now faces a mountain of work to
fully implement resolution 1822 (2008). As a State that
has designated or co-designated more names than any
other Committee member, the United States is
committed to facilitating this work and helping the
Committee meet the ambitious timeline set forth in
resolution 1822 (2008). Full implementation of this
resolution is crucial to ensuring that the regime
continues to enjoy widespread legitimacy and support.
To guarantee the credibility of the consolidated
list, we also encourage the Committee to remove
outdated or poorly justified listings. The list must be
able to withstand rigorous scrutiny. As nations work on
the requirements of resolution 1822 (2008) and on their
own national processes for imposing Security Council
sanctions, we must remember that while the decision to
impose sanctions is taken very seriously by all Member
States, it is not a judicial process. Resolution 1822
(2008), however, was only the most recent step in an
almost decade-long evolution of the regime.
In addition to developing this new web of
procedural protections, the regime has sought to adapt
to the changing nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. The Committee must continue to
respond nimbly and effectively to new challenges. The
United States hopes that this tool remains the
international community’s pre-eminent mechanism for
targeting those responsible for some of the most
heinous violence of our age. We stand ready to help the
Committee fulfil this important function and to help
Member States implement their obligations under the
regime.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) have
done
excellent
work
in
facilitating
States’
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We also
commend Mr. Smith for his leadership of CTED. The
United States strongly supports focused national visits
by CTED to address specific technical needs. The

09-34898

S/PV.6128

revised organizational plan has given CTED a more
flexible and effective approach to assessment missions.
We also see regional visits as a good way to assess
several countries simultaneously and a wise economy
of travel funds.
In addition to these assessment missions, since
November 2008 CTED has assisted the Committee in
conducting a first review, or stock-taking, of the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments of more than
60 countries, most of which had not regularly reported
to the Committee in the past. The United States fully
supports any initiative CTED can take to enhance the
capacity of the South Asian region to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).
We welcome the establishment of four working
groups to support the eighth programme of work of the
1540 Committee. These working groups will enhance
the focus and transparency of Committee members’
efforts in achieving a common goal. The United States
is looking forward to our new role as the coordinator of
the transparency and media outreach working group,
which will have its first meeting tomorrow.
The United States places great importance on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We are now
seeking broad geographic expansion of the G-8 Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction to address threats posed
by weapons of mass destruction worldwide, which will
provide foreign assistance in support of the aims of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have promoted regional
initiatives across the globe as a means of helping to
build other States’ capacity to implement the
resolution, as called for in the renewal mandate for the
Committee in resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), and we have partnered with a range of regional
organizations.
Moving ahead, the United States looks forward to
consulting with our partners and allies to capitalize on
the benefits of a full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Effective non-proliferation is not just the work
of one committee, nor is it the responsibility of just a
few States. The proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction threatens all of us. We call on all Member
States, large and small, to share the burden and reap
the rewards of implementing comprehensive nonproliferation mechanisms.
These three Committees constitute a vital
Security Council contribution to the United Nations

09-34898

counter-terrorism strategy. We are committed to
continuing to work with them and other counterterrorism bodies to confront and stop all those involved
in terrorist activity.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to express our gratitude to Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Lacroix and Urbina for today’s briefing on behalf of
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Czech presidency of the European
Union.
Croatia supports the work of the three Security
Council Committees, which constitute essential
elements of the United Nations counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation structure. Croatia also supports the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
are committed to working with the counter-terrorism
bodies of the United Nations system in a coordinated
way. Furthermore, we will continue to reiterate that all
measures undertaken to prevent and combat terrorism
must comply with our obligations under international
law, in particular human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law.
Regarding the 1267 Committee, we would like to
emphasize the need for further improvements to the
consolidated list in order to increase its legitimacy and
ensure that it accurately reflects the continuous threat
that Al-Qaida and the Taliban pose to international
peace and security. The list needs to be regularly
updated if we want to retain the effectiveness of the
1267 sanctions regime.
The adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
represented a significant step in the evolution of this
targeted sanctions regime and contains important due
process innovations. We welcome the adoption this
past December of the revised guidelines, which
allowed the Committee to move forward. The review
of all names on the list is currently a priority in the
work of the Committee. We believe that it is necessary
for all Member States involved to assume their share of
responsibility to do a proper review and to ensure that
this process is concluded before the deadline set by the
Council. In this context, we fully support the intention
of the Chairman to regularly update Member States on
the progress in the review process.

17

S/PV.6128

The implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime, particularly the listing and de-listing
procedures, is increasingly subject to challenges in
national and regional courts. In this respect, we believe
that the Committee must continue to ensure that fair
and clear procedures are strengthened in order to
enhance the efficiency and transparency of the regime.
We agree with the Chairmen that further steps in this
regard may be included in the new resolution to be
adopted by the end of 2009.
Croatia attaches great importance to the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and highly values
the assistance provided to it by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). We support the ongoing
activities in the Committee, with particular emphasis
on the stock-taking exercise. This review of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all
Member States should enable the Committee and
CTED to understand in greater detail the progress and
the remaining shortfalls in counter-terrorism measures
employed by countries around the world. Continued
cooperation by Member States is vital if we want the
Committee to conclude the stock-taking exercise
expeditiously.
In the same vein, we expect the Committee to
adopt the remaining two Preliminary Implementation
Assessments as soon as possible. We are pleased to see
the positive effects of the revised organizational plan
of CTED, which introduced a more flexible approach
to controversies, particularly by engaging in shorter,
focused visits, in regional visits and in visits to
developed countries. We commend the proactive
approach by CTED in facilitating technical assistance,
especially by nurturing closer contacts with potential
donors.
We look forward to receiving the revised version
of the survey of implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), with priority recommendations for the
Committee’s future actions. The revised survey should
be based on more fine-tuned assessments of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) as a result of
the stock-taking exercise and the work of the five
technical groups in CTED.
We also recognize the importance of the technical
guide that is currently under consideration in the
Committee. As we speak, the Committee has conducted
an interim review of CTED and should soon submit a
report to the Council. We see this as a good

18

opportunity for the Council to consider past
achievements and to provide guidance to CTED on
how to more effectively deliver on its mandate.
We welcome the adoption by the 1540 Committee
of its annual programme of work, as well as its
continuous efforts to actively engage all States in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through
continuing dialogue and participation in numerous
outreach events. At the same time, we deem of
particular importance the continuation of productive
cooperation between the Committee and other
international bodies and relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations.
Keeping in mind the important assistance
function entrusted to the Committee under resolution
1810 (2008), we salute the Committee’s intensification
of its efforts to develop its clearing-house function for
channelling assistance in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) through matching, as
appropriate, assistance requests with available offers
for assistance. We welcome the establishment of the
four working groups, assigned with the principal task
of ensuring the effective implementation of the
programme of work, and we express our readiness to
contribute actively to their activities.
We look forward to the comprehensive review of
the status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
and we hope that early next year, following the
completion of the review, we will have a clear picture
of the risks and threats that await us on the path
towards the fullest possible implementation of the
resolution, as well as the ways and means to address
them. We are ready to take part in this important
process, which should eventually result in new and
inventive approaches to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, as we expressed in the joint statement,
we welcome closer interaction between the Committees
and their expert groups, and we appreciate the support
and assistance provided by the experts to the
Committees in our joint action against terrorism.
Mr. Hurd (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Lacroix and Urbina
for their briefings, and to welcome Ambassador MayrHarting to his first briefing in his capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999). It was also, I believe, Ambassador
Lacroix’s first such briefing. I am sure that he will not

09-34898

S/PV.6128

mind my saying that I hope it is also his last, as it will
be if our best wishes for the speedy recovery for the
full-time Chair, Ambassador Jurica, are granted. We
hope that Ambassador Jurica is able to resume his
duties soon. I thank Ambassador Lacroix and his
colleagues for their additional work in providing the
necessary continuity and for keeping the Committee’s
business on a forward trajectory.
The significance of the roles of all three
Committee’s in countering the serious threat of
terrorism has already been well underlined. I should
like to say first a few words about the joint work
undertaken by all the Committees. The United
Kingdom welcomes this because it demonstrates the
growing reality of cooperation among the three
Committees. It is part of a broader trend towards more
joined-up and effective United Nations work on
counter-terrorism. While each Committee has a clear
and specific mandate, this collaboration between the
Committees can be particularly helpful to States
receiving joint visits rather than a succession of
delegations. It is also helpful in terms of spotting
synergies in domestic implementation.
The participation of all three Committees in the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is also welcome. In particular, the co-location
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) of the Task Force, under its first
full-time head — who I understand will be arriving
within a couple of weeks — should also help us
progress towards the goal of one United Nations for
counter-terrorism activity.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the United
Kingdom is pleased with progress on a number of
fronts. The new team of 1540 Committee expert staff is
now fully in place. The Committee has a new
programme of work and a new working group structure
to implement it. It has made a start on planning the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) based on an open meeting of
the Committee. The United Kingdom was pleased to be
able to sponsor the regional workshop on
implementation in Doha, Qatar, in March.
While the universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) remains the vital goal, the United
Kingdom would like to see the emphasis shift towards
effective implementation in States where there are the

09-34898

more serious deficiencies. Bilateral meetings in the
margins of regional outreach events are one way in
which these issues are beginning to be picked up. We
would like to see more of this.
As for the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
United Kingdom is pleased with the continuing
progress in capacity-building and standard-setting. The
ongoing stock-taking exercise needs to be used as an
opportunity for dialogue with States where the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is still not
adequate. We are pleased that focused visits have given
the CTED greater flexibility and allowed it to conduct
a larger number of more targeted, shorter visits
focusing on the main issues of concern. We thank
Mr. Smith for his leadership of the CTED. Looking
ahead, we look forward to the Security Council’s
interim review of the CTED, due next month, and the
update of the global survey of resolution 1373 (2001)
implementation at the end of the year.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we are pleased
with the progress made since the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008) and that the comprehensive review of the
consolidated list is well under way. We are working to
ensure that our part in the process is meaningful. We
urge others to continue to do the same. With that in
mind, I would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Monitoring Team, which is assisting us in
this task.
However, the review of the current list should not
mark an end to our efforts. The Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime is a vital counter-terrorism tool that
enables the international community to disrupt terrorist
activity on a much greater scale than through domestic
measures alone. But as we know, its legitimacy is
under threat. The concerns expressed by European
courts over recent months should not be taken lightly.
These are genuine concerns which are wide-reaching
and which affect the heart of the regime. We are
determined, with our partners, to address those
concerns and to work to strengthen the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime so that it can be used with
increasing effectiveness and efficiency while being
seen to be transparent and fair. My Government will
continue to play a constructive role in ensuring that
this regime remains credible as a tool for maintaining
and restoring international peace and security. We look
forward to working with our partners on a new
resolution for the regime at the end of the year.

19

S/PV.6128

Finally, I would like to associate the United
Kingdom with the statement which will be made by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset, through you, Sir, to
thank the Chairmen of the three counter-terrorism
sanctions Committees. We express our deep
appreciation for their efforts.
The briefings we have heard demonstrate how far
the work of the Committees has come and give us a
sense of future plans and many of the Committees’
concerns, most of which we understand. In that
context, Libya wishes to reiterate the following points.
We appreciate the positive developments in
counter-terrorism efforts and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, under the leadership
of Mr. Smith; the work being undertaken to ensure
transparency, compliance with and adherence to
resolution 1373 (2001); the preliminary review, annual
reports on the implementation of the resolution, and the
regional visits to developed and developing countries
alike; and cooperation with the other subsidiary organs
of the Security Council and several regional
organizations.
We also welcome the efforts to build national
capacity in developing countries. In that connection,
we hope that there will be further progress in the
technical assistance provided by the United Nations in
place of bilateral assistance. We especially welcome
efforts to implement all the objectives and provisions
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the work being carried out by various
United Nations bodies and agencies.
Over the past few years, our efforts have focused
on a particular objective of the Strategy, that of
preventing and fighting terrorism. We understand that
preventing terrorism calls for ever more effective
measures. My country believes that blocking the
financing of terrorism requires special attention and
even more comprehensive measures. Refugee status
should go hand in hand with protective measures that
guarantee true enjoyment of the relevant rights in the
noble humanitarian context of that status.
Moreover, it is time to strengthen efforts to attain
other strategic objectives and elements and to rectify
the circumstances that facilitate the proliferation of that

20

phenomenon and that strengthen its root causes, while
respecting human rights for all. We must put an end to
an occupation that remains at the root of many acts of
violence and much tension. We cannot put an end to
such acts by accusing an entire civilization or by
denying some people their right to fight against
occupation or by applying double standards and
selectivity and neglecting international law. All those
practices are condemned daily worldwide.
With regard to the 1267 Committee, we
appreciate the Committee’s efforts to improve its
working methods, in particular in the context of the
two important Security Council resolutions 1452
(2002) and 1822 (2008). We are glad that there has
been some progress in reviewing the names on the
consolidated list and we hope that that review will
clearly establish the credibility of the sanctions lists.
The Chairman’s briefing indicated that many people on
the list are still under sanctions even though they have
died — which prevents the family of the deceased from
claiming their inheritance. Moreover, a number of
those on the list should not be there at all. There are at
least 56 persons whose names, nationality, date, place
of birth and all other relevant identifiers are not
present, which naturally makes it difficult for States to
implement the sanctions and which might lead to
sanctions being applied against an innocent person
solely because of a similar name, in the absence of
other identifiers. We must rectify that situation as soon
as possible in the Committee by ensuring that all other
identifiers are added and that unsubstantiated names
are deleted from the list.
Resolution 1730 (2006) provides for focal points
to receive de-listing requests, which we believe was an
important step forward towards transparency in the
sanctions regimes. However, further measures of that
type are needed to guarantee greater transparency,
fairness and clarity in such measures.
I would like to reiterate the importance of
exceptions under resolution 1452 (2002). These
exceptions cover the impact of sanctions on the
families of listed persons and address humanitarian
circumstances to ensure that sanctions do not constitute
collective punishment by affecting the families of
persons on the list. In other words, those sanctions
should not deprive the family by freezing assets and by
depriving them of income. Thus, it is important that the
Committee speedily review requests for exceptions.

09-34898

S/PV.6128

Turning now to the 1540 Committee, my country
is aware of the great dangers posed to international
peace and security by weapons of mass destruction —
biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, their
delivery vehicles and all related materials. The
international community has based its response on
multilateral legal instruments, but those instruments
have not attained the required universality and are not
respected by all States in the world. Thus, they are
unfortunately insufficient.
Here, Libya has reflected in practical national
measures its position on the complete elimination of
weapons of mass destruction and remains convinced
that their complete elimination is the best guarantee to
prevent non-State actors from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. We believe that
disarmament and non-proliferation are two mutually
supportive processes and that both must advance in
parallel for the best results.
Resolution 1540 (2004) sets out obligations for
all countries with regard to non-proliferation. Recently,
we have noted progress in that context. Libya was
among the reporting countries to submit the required
information and we call on all countries to honour their
commitments. We are pleased to note progress in the
Committee’s work — its adoption of a programme of
work for the coming year and the establishment of
working groups to help carry out that programme. We
also appreciate its efforts to conduct a comprehensive
review of the resolution’s implementation, to identify
gaps and provide assistance to Member States.
In conclusion, we also support the counterterrorism efforts of the Security Council Committees,
and all efforts to achieve the international community’s
objectives with regard to eliminating all aspects and
manifestations of terrorism so as to ensure global peace
and security.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank and congratulate
Ambassadors Ripert, Urbina and Mayr-Harting in their
capacities as Chairmen of the 1373, 1540 and 1267
Committees, briefings on which have just been
presented to us.
First of all, we note with satisfaction the adoption
by the 1540 Committee of its programme of work for
the period from 1 February 2009 to 31 January 2010
(see S/2009/124).

09-34898

For Burkina Faso, exchanging experiences with
regional and subregional organizations and continuing
training and awareness-raising activities, in particular
regional workshops, constitute important tools for the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The last subregional workshop organized for the
Pacific Island States, in April 2009 in Vanuatu, clearly
demonstrated that by contributing, through direct
dialogue and proximity, to familiarizing concerned
States with the provisions of the resolution and to
helping them better understand their obligations and
identify the difficulties that they are facing, as well as
their assistance needs. We cherish the hope that the
regional workshop for African States will be held in
2009 and that it will be just as successful.
We also await with interest the comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution that the
Committee is about to launch, which will enable it to
assess the situation and to better orient its activities.
Turning now to the 1373 Committee — the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) — the country
visits and the consideration and adoption of the 191
Preliminary Implementation Assessments demonstrate
the depth and quality of the Committee’s work during
the reporting period. In addition, we are convinced that
the review launched by the Committee with the
assistance of Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) will make possible recommendations
on the situation in individual States.
Regarding CTED specifically, we are reassured
by the fact that its restructuring has enabled it to
greatly improve its productivity via the activity of five
thematic working groups, the harmonization of
assessment criteria and, especially, the organization
and conduct of assessment visits. The draft technical
guide on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
proposed by CTED is currently being considered by
the Committee and is another laudable result.
Regarding the assessment visits, we would like to
renew our thanks to the CTC and CTED for their good
cooperation with our country, both during the
preparatory period and during the visit to Burkina
Faso. We welcome the results achieved.
The provision of appropriate technical assistance
to support the commitment of Member States that need
it remains a crucial necessity. It is encouraging here to
see that Ambassador Ripert’s report, just presented by
Mr. Lacroix, notes an improvement in the dialogue

21

S/PV.6128

both with donors and potential recipients of this
assistance.
Let us now turn to the activities of the 1267
Committee. We welcome the progress achieved,
including the adoption of new guidelines for the
implementation of resolution 1267 (1999). These
guidelines, which were adopted at a time when the
Committee was facing significant criticism regarding
its methods of work, will be very useful in the efforts
for increased transparency that the Committee is
currently demonstrating, and in the difficult work of
reviewing of the consolidated list and sanctions,
pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). They will thus
ensure in the future a reliable and clear procedure as
far as listing and de-listing of individuals and entities
on the consolidated list is concerned, as well as
waivers on humanitarian grounds.
In this respect, we encourage the efforts
undertaken by the Committee to make the consolidated
list dynamic in nature, guided by the expertise of the
Monitoring Team and with the contribution of Member
States in this process. One should also note that taking
into account views expressed by national or regional
jurisdictions could, generally speaking, have a positive
impact on strengthening the sanctions regimes.
Along the same lines, the posting on the
Committee’s website of the reasons for listing
individuals and entities on the consolidated list
represents, in our opinion, significant progress in the
sense of greater transparency. We are encouraged by
the ongoing activities for information, training and
awareness-raising for Member States. As is the case
with the two other Committees, that activity is
especially important for strengthening knowledge of
resolutions and of the obligations stemming from them.
Indeed, it enables capacity-building for States and their
interaction and cooperation with the Committees and
thus guarantees better implementation of the
resolution.
Because the fight against terrorism must be fully
developed to be fully effective, we wish to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the need to take
urgent steps in the face of the growth of the threat of
terrorism in Africa, especially in West Africa. Indeed,
at a time when all information is in agreement that
terrorism today constitutes a genuine threat in a
subregion already facing numerous challenges, the
Security Council Committees, like the international

22

community, should immediately address the issue and
strengthen their cooperation with both the relevant
subregional organizations and all the member States of
the Economic Community of West African States.
Given the current state of a situation marked by the
permeability of borders, direct assistance to services
for monitoring and implementing laws, to judicial
services and to institutions such as those that process
financial information will help States in West Africa to
confront the already real threat of terrorism.
Finally, we would like to convey our gratitude to
the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees for their efforts
to harmonize their actions and step up their
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. We reaffirm the need for all actors to
comply with human rights within the framework of the
fight against terrorism, as reflected in relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would to thank our colleagues from Austria,
France and Costa Rica who act as chairmen of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council entrusted
with the fight against terrorism — namely, the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) — for their
detailed update on their activities and for the joint
briefing on cooperation among themselves.
The simultaneous presentation of these reports in
an open debate of the Security Council sends a positive
signal as to the coordination that already exists among
the three Committees and the importance attached to
the participation of the entire membership in this topic.
We have heard a report on a series of activities in
which the three Committees have coordinated their
efforts to find more efficient conditions to carry out the
Council’s work in combating terrorism. Among these
efforts, what stands out are the start of the common
strategy to reach out to countries that are late in
reporting or that have not reported to the Committees,
and the idea of organizing seminars in different parts of
the world to facilitate the presentation of this
information.
Despite all of these efforts, Mexico believes that
it is still possible to achieve greater coordination. One
concrete measure is to strengthen the linkages with
regional and subregional organizations. In this regard, I
would like to point to a good model of cooperation,

09-34898

S/PV.6128

namely, the relationship between the Committees of the
United Nations and the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States. This type of interaction should be developed in
all parts of the world.
Mexico feels that measures taken by the
international community to combat terrorism, and most
particularly the activities promoted by the three
Committees, should not endanger protection of or
respect for human rights. The challenge of the
Committees’ work is to achieve a balance between the
universal protection of human rights and the capacity
to respond to terrorism. Member States have at all
times and in all circumstances the obligation to adapt
any measure to the measures for the protection of
human rights based on the United Nations Charter and
international law. We must recall that that is one of the
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted by the General Assembly.
Turning now to the work of each of the
Committees, Mexico has a few specific comments to
make.
With regard to the work of the 1267 Committee, I
wish to emphasize that Mexico has been gratified by
the positive development of the Committee during the
past years. The Committee has made particular efforts
to bring to fruition resolutions 1526 (2004), 1617
(2005), 1730 (2006) and 1822 (2008), among others,
which has resulted in very important steps towards
greater transparency and legitimacy of that subsidiary
organ.
To the extent that the Committee’s procedures, in
particular those that directly affect individuals and
legal entities throughout the world, are in keeping with
the standards of international human rights law and the
principles recognized by the great majority of nations
with regard to due process, the implementation of the
sanctions regime that began with resolution 1267
(1999) will be more successful. Effectiveness and
legitimacy go hand in hand in the international struggle
against terrorism. Resolution 1822 (2008) is not only
part of the framework of that process, but in fact takes
it a qualitative step forward because it introduces a
series of measures designed to improve the operation
of the key aspect of the sanctions regime — the
consolidated list.
Mexico agrees that the consolidated list should be
a dynamic instrument, not a static one. My delegation

09-34898

was gratified to observe that efforts of the Committee
and of the Monitoring Team to update and review the
list achieved concrete results in less than one year. The
adoption of the Committee’s guidelines at the end of
last year, the inclusion of narrative summaries and the
implementation of the review process show that we are
moving towards genuine compliance with resolution
1822 (2008).
Nevertheless, as aptly noted by the President,
much remains to be done if we are to finish the review
process by June 2010. The inclusion of more specific
identifiers as to persons and entities proposed for
incorporation, as well as the problem of people alleged
to have died yet who remain on the list, are some of the
examples of the remaining obstacles we must
overcome. The dynamic element mentioned earlier
refers both to updating the persons and entities that
represent a risk to international security and to the
suitability of maintaining certain names on the list.
As regards the work of the 1373 Committee, we
have heard that, basically due to the most recent
innovations put into practice, this Committee has
strengthened its capacity and improved the quality of
its work. Here we should pay tribute to Mr. Mike Smith
and his team for the excellent work carried out in
leading the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.
It must be recognized that the assessment
exercise is a task of great magnitude, serving to
identify with great precision in what areas Member
States require better implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). For Mexico, the exercise should also serve to
identify the concrete needs of each country and, as
appropriate, to provide technical assistance and
strengthen national institutional capacity.
Mexico also wishes to highlight the visits carried
out by the Committee. The more flexible approach
adopted through the organization plan of the CTED for
certain visits that are shorter and more focused on
specific aspects has already produced concrete results.
We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
continue with that type of visit in order to establish
direct contact with national authorities specifically
dedicated to combating terrorism. Establishing that
kind of dialogue is fundamental to achieving full
understanding of the challenges confronted by each
Member State of the Organization.

23

S/PV.6128

Turning to the 1540 Committee, my delegation
recognizes the merit of the workshops organized by the
Committee jointly with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs as well as with other
organizations in the system and with regional
organizations. We are also gratified by its work in
terms of assistance, and we hope that the requests by
some Member States will meet with a response from
the countries or organizations that are in a position to
provide such assistance. Mexico believes the
Committee should quickly follow up on those requests.
My delegation considers that the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will be an excellent opportunity to explore any
areas that remain to be addressed in its implementation
and will provide specific recommendations to rectify
them. My delegation is pleased to coordinate a working
group that will tackle that issue. In that vein, we
believe it is indispensable that, in addition to a general
assessment of the measures adopted, consideration of
the issue should lead to concrete recommendations to
increase the effectiveness of the Committee concerning
assistance, as that is an area particularly relevant to
most developing countries.
In conclusion, Mexico wishes to again thank the
speakers for presenting their reports and to reiterate its
commitment to continue supporting the activities of the
Security Council in its fight against terrorism through
its specialized Committees.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
At the outset, allow me to convey my gratitude to
the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee
for their comprehensive reports and their work carried
out to bolster international counter-terrorism
cooperation.
The
Russian
Federation
backs
development, coordination and cooperation between
the three counter-terrorism Committees of the Security
Council, whose main areas of work are reflected in the
joint statement made today by Mr. Mayr-Harting.
The Russian delegation views future cooperation
between the Committees and their expert groups as
important conditions in bolstering the effectiveness of
efforts taken by the Security Council in countering the
global threat of terrorism.

24

Turning now to the activity of the CounterTerrorism Committee, I wish to state the following.
In recent months, the Committee has made
substantial progress in dialogue with States on the
basis of the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
of resolution 1373 (2001). At the centre of attention
today is the first round of stocktaking, including States’
responses to and comments on the recommendations of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate (CTED). We welcome that progress, which
is closely related to the CTC’s preparation of an
updated comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).
In that respect, we note the increased role played
by subcommittees of the CTC, which, under the
chairmanship of the representatives of France, Russia
and Viet Nam, are actively discussing country
assessments and are ready to promote that work. It is
important to insure that the CTC’s bilateral
communication mechanisms with States operates as
effectively as possible.
We note that steps to improve the organizational
structure of the CTED and its methods of work, as
provided for in resolution 1805 (2008) are yielding
tangible results.
The CTC’s move to use a variety of formats for
country visits — regional, repeat, focused, fullassessment and comprehensive visits — has proved
itself. The geographical scope of such visits has
expanded, and the number of States involved has
grown. While previously the main focus of visits was
to study States’ technical assistance needs, it has now
become possible to assess in depth the capacity of
relevant potential donor States. We expect that this,
alongside other measures to expand the CTC’s capacity
to coordinate international technical counter-terrorism
cooperation, will make the Committee’s work more
focused and more effective.
We support the CTC’s participation, within the
framework of its current mandate, in the activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the use of CTED’s unique expert capacities to that end.
We welcome the good cooperation between the CTC
and
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, which has of late yielded mutual
benefits. Here, let me once again draw attention to the
current task of convening a sixth meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with international,

09-34898

S/PV.6128

regional and subregional organizations; we propose
that CTED step up its work on making practical
preparations for that event.
In our view, it is necessary to continue efforts to
expand dialogue with States on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005), which is aimed at countering
the ideology of terrorism, inter alia by prohibiting
incitement. That resolution remains an important
element of the Committee’s mandate. It is important to
continue to include issues relating to the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) in CTED’s
country visits; endeavours towards the broad adoption
of relevant best practices in this field should continue
as well.
We expect the interim review of the activities of
CTED, carried out pursuant to resolution 1805 (2008),
to enable the Security Council to assess the
Directorate’s progress and to clarify the tasks before it.
The regular review mechanism should remain as an
important tool for the Security Council to provide
political leadership for the activities of the CTC.
We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
an effective and viable Security Council counterterrorism mechanism. We express our grave concern
about the continued spread of Taliban influence and
extremist ideas in Afghanistan and beyond. This
reflects the continuing drive by radical forces to seize
power and gain control throughout the region. In those
circumstances, we consider it to be inappropriate and
dangerous to move away from a policy of isolating
extremist leaders to forge political contacts with
leading members of the Taliban, especially in breach of
the existing sanctions regime. We urge all States to
unswervingly impose restrictive measures against
individuals listed pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions and the guiding principles of the work of
the 1267 Committee.
We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and the Monitoring Team to keep the sanctions list up
to date, reflecting the true nature of today’s terrorist
threat. Substantial progress was achieved in this area
with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1822
(2008). We note that the Committee, pursuant to
paragraph 25 of that resolution, has begun a
comprehensive review of all names on the sanctions
list, which has yielded its first practical results. We call
upon States to continue to submit request for the listing

09-34898

of individuals or groups associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, including those financing their terrorist
activities with proceeds from the illicit cultivation,
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan. We
call upon them also to provide additional information
regarding individuals already on the list.
The success of our common efforts to counter the
real and changing threat to international peace and
security posed by the Taliban and Al-Qaida depends on
all States fully and in good faith meeting their
obligations.
As an initiator and sponsor of resolutions 1540
(2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), the Russian
Federation is interested in the comprehensive
development of international cooperation in the full
implementation of the provisions of those Security
Council decisions. We note that over the past six
months the 1540 Committee has engaged in
painstaking work and agreed upon and adopted two
important documents: one on modalities for the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and the Committee’s
programme of work for the current year. A priority for
the Committee in the near future is to successfully
carry out that comprehensive review. We hope that the
review process will contribute in the future to
enhancing the international community’s efforts to
counter the risks and threats posed by proliferation. We
hope too that the activities of the four working groups
that were recently established will enhance the
effectiveness of the Committee’s efforts in key areas of
its work.
It is important that the Committee continue to
increase assistance to States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and to coordinate wide
international cooperation in that sphere, including
through participation within the framework of its broad
programme of outreach activities.
We are prepared to continue our active support
for these measures, including in the context of our
ongoing cooperation with members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on issues related
to the mandate of the 1540 Committee. Russia will
continue its focused efforts to carry out the tasks set
out in resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), with a view to establishing a reliable system,
under United Nations auspices, to combat black-market
weapons of mass destruction.

25

S/PV.6128

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of New Zealand, Ms. Rosemary Banks, who is
participating in a Security Council meeting for the last
time as Permanent Representative of her country. I
wish on behalf of the Council to thank Ambassador
Banks, who, over the past four years, has participated
in many Council meetings and who has made a
substantial contribution to our work. I now give her the
floor.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for those kind words as I prepare to
leave New York.
New Zealand welcomes these reports from the
United Nations counter-terrorism committees. In
responding to the threat of global terrorism, the United
Nations, through the work of the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the agencies, is best placed to
coordinate international efforts. It does this in the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, the 16 international counterterrorism instruments, and Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
New Zealand is encouraged by the significant
work the 1267 Committee has done pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008) to improve the procedures for
listing and de-listing terrorist entities. In particular,
New Zealand welcomes the concrete steps that have
been put in place to review all names on the
consolidated list by mid-2010 and the work that is
under way to make narrative summaries of the reasons
for listing entities available on the Committee’s
website. These initiatives, along with the other
measures mandated by resolution 1822 (2008), will do
much to improve the listing process, and to increase
public confidence in the United Nations counterterrorism framework.
New Zealand’s approach to countering terrorism
continues to be guided closely by the United Nations
framework. The spread of terrorist attacks and the
globalization of terrorist networks show that no region
or country can be complacent about measures to
combat terrorism. That principle underlies New
Zealand’s commitment to building counter-terrorism
capability in the small island States of the Pacific
region.

26

Pacific island countries face particular challenges
in meeting international counter-terrorism obligations.
The political will is firm, but resources are limited.
New Zealand continues to assist those countries meet
the requirements of the international counter-terrorism
agenda, and we are encouraged by the progress that
they have made in improving counter-terrorism
legislation, policy and operational capability in the
Pacific.
We very much welcome the work of United
Nations counter-terrorism agencies in the Pacific. In
the past month, New Zealand has co-sponsored two
regional workshops arranged by the United Nations
Office
for
Disarmament
Affairs,
on
1540
implementation, and by the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, on maritime counter-terrorism. New Zealand
also hosted a workshop on radioactive source security
and safety under the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, which complemented the event of
the 1540 Committee. Next week, we will convene the
annual meeting of the Pacific Working Group on
Counter-Terrorism, which is the primary forum for
counter-terrorism policy discussion in our region. We
hope to have the participation of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the 1540 Committee.
In South-East Asia, New Zealand continues to
support a number of counter-terrorism capacitybuilding initiatives. We are also continuing our
programme of counter-radicalization activities, in
particular in the areas of media, education and youth,
aimed at preventing recruitment into terrorism.
Domestically, New Zealand remains determined
to take all necessary measures to prevent and combat
terrorism to ensure that our country is neither a target
nor a source for terrorist activity. We continue to
improve our legislative, policy and operational
capabilities in line with international standards and
obligations, including prioritizing work to ratify all 16
international counter-terrorism instruments.
Last month, New Zealand welcomed a team of
experts from the Financial Action Task Force. We look
forward to a visit to New Zealand in July by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, which will
provide a valuable opportunity to ensure that New
Zealand’s domestic and international counter-terrorism

09-34898

S/PV.6128

efforts are coordinated with the United Nations
framework.
The threat of international terrorism requires a
comprehensive, multilayered and long-term response.
New Zealand remains steadfast in its commitment to
that response, along with our regional partners on the
frontline of this struggle.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to thank the Chairmen of the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee,
the
Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their informative briefings. Switzerland is
firmly committed to combating terrorism and has a
great interest in effective and legitimate measures to
ensure the full implementation of United Nations
sanctions.
I shall limit my remarks to two issues: first, the
challenges in implementing the sanctions regime of the
1267 Committee and, secondly, the need to improve
coordination in order to increase the effectiveness of
the collective response to terrorism.
Switzerland commends the efforts of the 1267
Committee to improve listing and delisting procedures.
We welcome the important improvements that are
reflected in resolution 1822 (2008) and in the
Committee’s revised guidelines adopted last December.
However, some concerns remain, as highlighted by
recent studies, including the report by the Eminent
Jurists Panel on Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism and
Human Rights and the latest report of the Monitoring
Team. Critics see the continuing lack of fair and clear
procedures within the current sanctions regime as
undermining the effective implementation of targeted
sanctions. Several States face major legal challenges in
implementing the 1267 Committee’s sanctions regime.
Member States find themselves in a dilemma when
national or regional courts question the legality of
domestic measures to implement sanctions.
Switzerland itself is a defendant in a case before
the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
The applicant is challenging the legality of our
domestic measures to implement United Nations
sanctions, while in fact targeting the United Nations
sanctions system as a whole. The outcome of this case

09-34898

will affect not only Switzerland but also the 46 other
States members of the Council of Europe. The proposal
by Switzerland and other countries last year to
establish an experts panel appointed by the Security
Council to assist the sanctions Committees in the
consideration of delisting requests could be a way to
strengthen the existing procedures and to help targeted
sanctions to withstand appeals in national or regional
courts.
In the new resolution that will review the
measures set forth in resolution 1822 (2008), the
Security Council may wish to take into account
growing concerns about the respect of human rights in
the fight against terrorism. By doing so, it would
enhance the effectiveness and legitimacy of its
sanctions regime.
Switzerland welcomes ongoing efforts to increase
coordination between the three counter-terrorism
Committees of the Council. It is essential to ensure the
integrated implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and coordination between the
relevant parties in that regard. In that context,
Switzerland, along with other States, launched an
international process on global counter-terrorism
cooperation in 2007. One of the recommendations that
emerged was to hold regular meetings of national
coordinators and focal points of Member States to
review the status of efforts to combat terrorism at the
national and international levels.
With the support of the relevant bodies of the
United Nations, Switzerland envisages the holding of
informal international and regional meetings that
would provide Member States with a platform to
address their practical counter-terrorism needs. Such a
platform could also serve as an informal forum to
increase interaction between representatives of national
agencies with the relevant United Nations bodies.
Switzerland and the other sponsors will soon provide
more detail about this idea.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
appreciates and strongly supports the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We also
acknowledge the able assistance provided by their
respective expert bodies. A global effort is needed to
oppose terrorism effectively, and the United Nations

27

S/PV.6128

has the unique capacity to set and enforce international
norms and standards in this area.
Australia welcomes recent developments within
the Committees, including the commencement of the
review of all names on the 1267 Committee’s
consolidated list and the conclusion of procedures for
drafting narrative summaries on the reasons for listing
each entry. The effectiveness of the 1267 Committee is
directly related to the relevance and currency of the
consolidated list. We remain committed to full
cooperation with the Committee.
We also welcome the recent attention given by
the 1540 Committee to institutional issues, including
the conclusion of its work programme, the completion
of its selection process for new experts and its decision
to instigate a comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution.
In order to capitalize on the unique role that the
United Nations can play in addressing terrorism,
Australia encourages the Committees and their expert
bodies to continue to explore ways to work more
closely together. We see scope for further cooperation,
especially in relation to streamlined reporting regimes,
assessment missions and the facilitation of technical
assistance. It is also important that the Committees
continue to cooperate with the General Assembly
through close engagement with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and with the broader
United Nations system.
Australia strongly supports the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). In
that context, we commend the work of CTED and its
energetic head, Mr. Mike Smith, in particular for the
Directorate’s focus on effective technical cooperation
and assistance in its work with the Counter-Terrorism
Action Group.
Constructive relations with Member States —
particularly donor and recipient countries — are
critical to the success of the work of CTED. We look
forward to the upcoming CTED visit to Australia in
July and to the opportunity to share with CTED our
approach to counter-terrorism efforts domestically and
in the region.
An effective international legal framework is
fundamental to addressing the global terrorist threat. In
addition to fully implementing our obligations to freeze
terrorist assets, Australia has ratified 13 of the 16

28

international counter-terrorism instruments of universal
application, and we are currently assessing the
legislative changes necessary to implement the
remainder.
We have also signed 14 bilateral counter-terrorism
memorandums of understanding with partners, which set
out our framework for counter-terrorism cooperation and
the sharing of best practices. Australia also co-chairs, with
Belgium, a project team of the Financial Action Task
Force, which is developing new guidelines on bestpractice implementation of obligations regarding terrorist
asset-freezing.
In closing, a significant challenge remains: to
continue efforts to equip all States to deal effectively
with the international terrorist threat. Australia hopes
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will continue to provide impetus for the
international community to adopt practical measures
that facilitate counter-terrorism cooperation by way of
extradition, prosecution, information flows and
capacity-building. We will continue to work to promote
cooperation between Member States to implement the
Strategy in full.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on an
item that relates to one of the most significant
challenges to international peace and security. I thank
Their Excellencies the Chairmen of the three Security
Council Committees for their briefings. The briefings
were of great importance because, although the work
of the Security Council counter-terrorism Committees
is of interest United Nations Member States, their only
chance to learn about this and formally make
comments on it is at these open biannual briefings.
With each of these meetings, we see progress in
the work of the three Committees, but we continue to
have the same concerns about their work. Today, I
would like to touch again on issues such as the lack of
a definition of terrorism, the need to observe legal due
process and human rights in counter-terrorism efforts,
the importance of objectivity and transparency in the
work of the Committees and the importance of
coordination with other United Nations organs,
especially the General Assembly.

09-34898

S/PV.6128

At their summit meeting in Doha in March, Arab
States condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its source, its motives or
its justifications. They stressed the need to work to
address the roots of terrorism and to eliminate the
factors that fuel it. We are fully aware of the difference
under international law between terrorism and the
legitimate right to struggle for liberation from foreign
occupation. We call upon all Member States to work
professionally in the month ahead during the review of
the draft comprehensive convention on terrorism,
which will deal with the question of the definition of
terrorism.
The work of all United Nations organs, including
the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, should
be guided by the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which the General Assembly
adopted at its sixtieth session and reaffirmed this past
September. Consideration must be given to the
objectives and elements of the Strategy, including the
need to take human rights and international law into
account in the context of combating terrorism: the
Strategy was not adopted to guide the work of the
General Assembly alone.
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) too
called for respect for human rights while countering
terrorism, as also stipulated in resolution 1456 (2003).
Moreover, efforts must be intensified to strengthen
system-wide coherence, as work is under way on
Council reform, in order to achieve genuine
coordination with the General Assembly in the field of
counter-terrorism.
We have repeatedly called for greater objectivity
in the Council’s methodology for assessing the
progress made by States in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). We therefore welcome the adoption this
past December of procedures to be followed by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to assess
progress, and we look forward to the balanced
implementation of those procedures in practice.
Resolution 1822 (2008) was the culmination of
tireless efforts to emphasize due process in the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). The resolution stated that sanctions measures
are not based on specific criminal criteria, but are
solely preventive and political in nature, but this does
not absolve the Council or the Committee of the
responsibility to respect the judgements of national,

09-34898

regional and international courts. Furthermore, the
adoption of these procedures, especially in including
individuals and entities on the consolidated list,
enhances the credibility of the Security Council and of
the actions it takes to combat terrorism.
Accordingly, it was encouraging to see
communication between the Committee and the
European Court of Justice last year. It was also
encouraging to note that in December the Committee
set out to implement the provisions of resolution 1822
(2008) regarding amending its guidelines, and that it
has started the de-listing, as necessary, of certain
entries on the consolidated list and the granting of
more humanitarian exemptions. The Committee should
continue to review all the names on the consolidated
list and complete the task as soon as possible, before
next year’s scheduled date, with a view to remedying
certain unacceptable situations, such as the inclusion
on the list of the names of deceased persons. To that
end, throughout our membership of the Council, two
years ago, we strove to have the names reviewed
periodically, in accordance with the Committee
guidelines.
In stressing the commitment of the State of Qatar
to the aforementioned principles, allow me to note that
a few days ago the capital of my country, in
cooperation with the United Nations, hosted a regional
workshop on the observance of human rights in the
context of the fight against terrorism, with a view to
raising awareness about the legal framework for
combating terrorism, respect for human rights and
international cooperation in that area.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to
emphasize that no political issue should interfere in the
Committee’s non-proliferation work. The Committee
must remain focused on preventing the flow of
weapons of mass destruction to non-governmental
actors. That being said, the best way to achieve that is
to eliminate such weapons, prevent their proliferation
and enforce relevant international instruments, in
particular the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
In the same vein, resolutions relevant to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
should not be used as a pretext to hinder the use of
materials, equipment and advanced technology for
peaceful purposes or to prevent countries from

29

S/PV.6128

enjoying their rights to such use, in accordance with
relevant international instruments.
Like other Member States, the State of Qatar
recognizes the importance of the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, I note that, last March, Doha hosted a regional
workshop on the implementation of the resolution,
which highlighted the importance of regional
information-sharing and provided an opportunity to
improve understanding of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
There can be no doubt of the importance of
regional information-sharing and of convening similar
workshops in the countries of the North, with the
participation of other countries. All such workshops to
date have been held in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean or
the Middle East, while none have taken place in
developed countries. The problems discussed in these
meetings are not exclusive to the countries of the

30

South. Similarly, the convening of international rather
than regional workshops is essential to the sharing of
information, since smuggling can occur between two
countries on different continents.
Finally, I should like to join previous speakers in
emphasizing the need for all States and regional
organizations to cooperate with the Security Council’s
counter-terrorism Committees. In that regard, I stress
the commitment of the State of Qatar to cooperating
directly and through regional organizations, pursuant to
the decision on countering international terrorism
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the League of
Arab States in March.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

09-34898
