38

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Further concerned by the adverse effects which the
international economic situation has caused to the frail
economy of Sao Tome and PJ"incipe,
Noting that Sao Tome and Príncipe has not been
included in the list of the most seriously affected countries,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system to extend assistance to the newly independent
and emerging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 133 particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States of Africa,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States and the
international institutions concerned, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to assist the Government of Sao Tome
and Príncipe in an effective and continuous manner so
as to enable it to establish the necessary social and economic infrastructures essential for the well-being of
the people;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financia!, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to give favourable consideration at its thirteenth
session, as a matter of priority, to the question of the
inclusion of Sao Tome and Principe in the list of the
least developed countries and to submit its conclusions
to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third
session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations of the United Nations system to grant Sao Tome
and Príncipe the same benefits as those enjoyed by
the least developed among the developing countries in
the light of prevailing conditions in Sao Tome and
Príncipe;
5. Strongly recommends that Sao Tome and
Príncipe should be included in the list of the most
seriously affected countries;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
this matter under review and to report to the General
133 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
part one, sect. A.

Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/188.

Assistance to Angola

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the widespread destruction and
damage caused to the social and economic infrastructure during the course of the struggle for independence
in Angola and in defence of its national sovereignty,
Taking note of the inadequate base of socio-economic
development in the rural areas inherited from the
colonial period,
Considering the urgent problem of absorbing and resettling the large numbers of returning refugees into
the permanent fabric of society,
Further concerned by the adverse effects which the
international economic situation continues to impose
on the weakened economy of Angola,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specializcd agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emcrging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 134 particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistancc should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States of Africa,
W elcoming the efforts of the Government a:nd the
people of Angola aimed at national reconstruction,
Taking note of the statement made by the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Angola befare the General Assembly on 1 Deccmber 1976 135 proposing thc establishment of an international fund for the national reconstruction of Angola,

l. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize an
international programme for financial, technical and
material assistance with a view to channelling the
proceeds into a:n international reconstruction fund for
Angola to meet its long-term and short-term development needs;
2. Urgently appeals to all Member States and to
the international economic and financial institutions
concerned to respond generously to the needs of Angola
and to provide assistance on a bilateral and/ or multilateral basis;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its thirteenth session, as a matter of priority,
to consider the question of the inclusion of Angola in
the list of the least developed countries and to submit
its conclusions to the Economic and Social Council at
its sixty-third session;
1:14 !bid.
13,í Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Plenary Mcctings, 84th meeting, paras. 145-221.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committce

4. Invites, in the meantime, Member States and
the organizations of the United Nations system to grant
Angola benefits comparable to those enjoyed by the
least developed among the developing countries in the
light of prevailing conditions in Angola;
5. Strongly recommends that Angola should be
included in the list of the most seriously affected coun-

89

tries and be considered by the United Nations Special
Fund for urgent assistance;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
this matter under review and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
