S/2021/1015

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 December 2021
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2567
(2021), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to 15 March 2022 and requested the Secretary-General to
report on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. The report
covers political and security developments, the humanitarian and human rights
situation and progress towards the implementation of the Missi on’s mandate from
1 September 2021 to 30 November 2021.
2.
The Mission continues to implement the three-year strategic vision as requested
by the Security Council in its resolution 2567 (2021). In this connection, the Mission
is moving into a new phase of political engagement. Furthermore, with the successful
transition of four out of the five protection of civilian sites, UNMISS enhanced its
focus on hotspots throughout the country where the protection needs are the greatest,
and on stabilization, outreach and political engagement, while recalibrating capacities
and resources between the Mission components towards increased mobility,
partnerships, coordination and innovation.

II. Major political developments
3.
Since its reconstitution on 30 August, the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly has made minimal progress owing to delays in the formation of various
specialized committees as a result of disagreements among the parties on the structure
and composition of the committees. This has hampered legislative oversight and
delayed the passage of critical legislation.
4.
After a significant delay, the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, reconstituted
and appointed members of the State assemblies in Central E quatoria, Lakes, Upper
Nile and Western Equatoria States on 6 November, in Eastern Equatoria, Warrap,
Jonglei and Northern Bahr el-Ghazal States on 17 November and in Unity on
26 November. The State assembly in Western Bahr el-Ghazal is yet to be
reconstituted.
5.
Following President Kiir’s intervention on 16 September, the disagreement
among the Other Political Parties coalition over how to divide its parliamentary seats
was resolved. Subsequently, on 17 September, President Kiir appointed 28 members

21-17512 (E)

091221

*2117512*

S/2021/1015

of the coalition to the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and 8 to the Council
of States.
6.
On 18 October, the Council of Ministers reviewed and adopted the Constitution Making Process Bill 2020/2021. Once the reconstituted Transitional National
Legislative Assembly is fully operational, the bill will be debated and is expected to
guide the permanent constitution-making process. On 18 October, the Assembly
passed the Conduct of Business Regulations 2011 (as amended in 2021).
7.
Addressing the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) National Youth
League meeting in Juba on 11 September, President Kiir stressed that the end goal
was to conduct free, fair and credible democratic elections and called on youth to
prepare for peaceful campaigns and engage at the grass-roots level.
Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan
8.
On 12 September, South Sudan marked three years since the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The international community, religious leaders and members of civil society
expressed concern over the delays and missed deadlines in the implementation of the
Agreement, especially in the implementation of provisions related to the transitional
security arrangements.
9.
On 7 October, the presidency met with the chairs of the security mechanisms
and discussed security-related issues in the Revitalized Agreement, including the
graduation of the Necessary Unified Forces. To date, despite numerous reassurances
that the establishment of a single, unified command structure was imminent, no
tangible progress has been achieved. UNMISS has been requested to assist in
transporting audit teams to the 18 training centres, a preliminary step before
unification. The Mission has agreed to assist but the visits have yet to start.
10. On 28 October, the 19th meeting of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission raised concerns about the lack of progress in the
implementation of the transitional security arrangements, especially the unification
of forces and their deployment, and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. The Commission called on the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity to expedite the approval of the critical bills and make
financial resources available to complete the transitional security arrangements.
11. Addressing the governors’ forum held on 29 November, President Kiir
associated the delays in the implementation of the transitional security arrangements
with the arms embargo against South Sudan and the continued disagreement over the
command-and-control structure and share ratios of the Necessary Unified Forces. He
called on the Community of Sant’ Egidio to resume the Rome peace talks with the
non-signatory parties.
Split in the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition
12. On 19 September, President Kiir announced that he had authorized his
Presidential Adviser on National Security, Tut Gatluak, to negotiate with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) Kitgwang faction.
On 22 September, a Kitgwang faction leader, General Simon Gatwech Dual, confirmed
the group’s readiness to engage in a negotiation with the Government or the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). Subsequently, on 2 October,
under the auspices of the Government of the Sudan, the Kitgwang faction leaders,
General Gatwech and General Johnson Olony, met with a delegation of SPLM led by
Tut Gatluak in Khartoum. The meeting confirmed the readiness of the Kitgwang faction

2/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

to participate in the next round of formal talks with the Government under the mediation
of IGAD. On 3 October, the Kitgwang faction published its position paper for the t alks,
in which it called for the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, especially the
transitional security arrangements. Civil society groups welcomed this development as
a pathway for resolving political grievances within the opposition and a posi tive move
towards the implementation of the Agreement.
13. Subsequently, SPLM/A-IO stated that the meeting between SPLM and the
Kitgwang faction had violated the terms of the Revitalized Agreement, which
prohibited the switching of allegiances. It alleged that one of the parties to the
Agreement had been encouraging defection from the opposition to weaken and
undermine the implementation of the Agreement.
14. While the talks between SPLM and the Kitgwang faction have been delayed due
to political unrest in the Sudan, General Gatwech has rejected the SPLM proposal to
move the talks to Juba. General Gatwech was reported to have returned to M egeinis
on 8 November.
Regional developments
15. On 10 and 11 October, President Kiir made an official visit to Egypt, during which
South Sudan and Egypt signed several agreements on irrigation, trade and industry.
16. Following the military coup d’état in the Sudan on 25 October, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation issued a statement affirming the
country’s solidarity with and unwavering support for the Sudan. The statement
expressed confidence that Sudanese leaders would make the best decisions for their
people. On 31 October, the Ministry indicated that Tut Gatluak had travelled to
Khartoum to deliver a message from President Kiir urging the Sudanese leaders to
resolve their differences through dialogue.
Economic situation
17. The macroeconomic situation remained stable, including the foreign exchange
rate, which remained at about 400 South Sudanese pounds per United States of
America dollar. Despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, trading
throughout the country saw some recovery. The decade-long closure of the border
with the Sudan had been scheduled to come to an end on 1 October, but its reopening
was delayed due to the security situation in the Sudan.
18. The approval of the national budget for 2021/22 and the launch of the revised
national development strategy were delayed. Challenges continued, as commercial
debt and oil advances constitute about 65 per cent of the country ’s public debt. To
sustain economic recovery, the Government will need to continue with the public
finance reforms already initiated and the implementation of the public finance
management reform strategy.

III. Security situation
19. South Sudan continued to experience conflict at the subnational level, especially
in Upper Nile, Unity, Jonglei, Warrap, Lakes, Central Equatoria and Western
Equatoria, where factional fighting, intercommunal and intracommunal competition,
lack of security and resource scarcity fuelled conflict and violence. Clashes involving
non-signatory groups in the Equatorias threatened civilians. United Nations agencies
and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) remained the targets of
criminality and faced threats of violence from youths in Upper Nile, Jonglei and
Western Equatoria over job opportunities.

21-17512

3/18

S/2021/1015

Greater Upper Nile region
20. The situation in Upper Nile continued to be affected by the split within SPLM/A IO. While fighting between SPLM/A-IO and its Kitgwang faction appeared to have
subsided, isolated clashes continued. On 13 September, the two sides fought in Khor
Amut, about 25 kilometres from Megeinis, resulting in at least 65 casualties among
the Kitgwang faction. The number of casualties among SPLM/A-IO is not known.
Instances of violence also followed the switching of allegiances. O n 7 September,
some SPLM/A-IO forces based in Nyitut village (a few kilometres from Nasir)
defected to the Kitgwang faction and relocated to Mandeng, following which some
White Army elements supporting these defectors opened fire at the remaining
SPLM/A-IO forces at the Nyitut base. In a separate incident on 6 October, SPLM/A-IO
forces clashed with their defectors in Wandang, along the Ulang -Akobo border, after
attempts to reintegrate them had failed. Clashes also occurred in Longochuk on 6 and
7 September between SPLM/A-IO and its defectors led by General Thomas Tut Ding,
who joined the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF).
21. In Unity, tensions rose between the Government and SPLM/A -IO over political
appointments and access to resources and revenues. Appointment-related altercations
in Mayendit culminated in clashes between the security forces of the Mayendit
County Commissioner and SPLM/A-IO on 29 and 30 September. On 6 October, the
protection force of the Koch County Commissioner and SPLM/A -IO soldiers
escorting civilian commuter boats clashed at Port-Nyaruob over the collection of
revenues from traders and boat passengers.
22. In Jonglei, tensions within SPLM/A-IO arose from the secession of the
Kitgwang faction. On 26 September, a small group of SPLM/A-IO in Pieri declared
their defection to the Kitgwang faction and moved to Parateat village in Uror County,
where they clashed with SPLM/A-IO on 30 September. Jonglei also saw recurrent
small-scale incidents of attacks in Duk, Akobo, Uror, Nyerol, Twic and Bor Counties,
which were attributed to the Murle.
Greater Equatoria region
23. The National Salvation Front (NAS) remained active in southern Central
Equatoria, engaging in attacks, forced recruitment, harassment and abductions. At
least 10 clashes took place between alleged NAS forces and SSPDF and SPLM/A -IO.
Suspected NAS soldiers attacked a security checkpoint in Lutaya, along the Yei -Lasu
road, on 16 September and on 19 and 20 October. NAS and SSPDF also clashed on
multiple occasions throughout Central and Western Equatoria.
24. Tensions and violence continued in Western Equatoria, especially Tambura, due
to conflict between the pro-Azande and pro-Balanda armed factions. Forces loyal to
Major General James Nando and SPLM/A-IO troops, supported by their associated
armed militias, engaged in multiple skirmishes. High-profile attacks were directed at
prominent figures from both ethnic groups. In Yambio, the houses belonging to the
Mayor of Yambio and the State Minister of Information came under attack. General
Nando’s house in Yambio and the Renzi Primary School in Tambura, which was
occupied by Nando’s forces, were also attacked. Additionally, on 13 and 14 October,
General Nando’s convoy was ambushed by armed youth loyal to SPLM/A-IO at
Mabaiku, 5 kilometres from Tambura. At the end of October, after the intervention of
the Joint Defence Board select committee, the opposing forces started moving to the
Maridi training centre, while on 27 October General Nando and pro -Balanda militia
leader Angelo Davido signed a memorandum of understanding committing
themselves to restoring peace and stability in Tambura. On 30 October, General
Nando and his deputy arrived in Juba. On 4 November, a ceasefire transitional
security arrangement monitoring and verification mechanism team observed 484
4/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

forces loyal to General Nando at the SSPDF Division VI headquarters, along with
some 88 SPLM/A-IO forces at the Maridi training centre.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
25. The security context in the greater Tonj area (Warrap) was dominated by cycles
of revenge attacks between armed Dinka Lou Paher from Marial Lou (Tonj North
County) and allied Dinka sub-clans of Thiik, Akok, Adoor, Apuk-Patoc and Awan (Tonj
East County) on one side and the Dinka Luanyjang (Tonj East) on the other. On
3 October, in Kacuat, fighting occurred between Luanyjang and Thiik youth fro m
Kacuat, drawing in Lou Paher youth and resulting in the killing of over 30 people. On
16 October, in Marial Lou, armed Luanyjang youth attacked the family of the Warrap
State Minister of Labour and Public Service (a Lou Paher). On 20 October, the Lou
Paher shot and killed two Luanyjang men during an attack on the Nyangor cattle camp
in Paweng Payam, Tonj East. On 25 October, suspected armed Luanyjang youth
attacked a Lou Paher cattle camp in Mangany village, killing one youth and injuring
another. From 29 to 31 October, multiple armed clashes took place in Greater Tonj
between Luanyjang, Thiik and Lou Paher communities, in which at least 24 people were
killed.
26. Local cattle-related violence in Lakes affected Cueibet, Rumbek East and
Rumbek North Counties. From 5 to 7 September, there were two clashes between
armed civilians and security forces in Rumbek East and Cueibet Counties, which led
to the deaths of nine people, including two soldiers.

IV. Humanitarian situation
27. Widespread flooding, ongoing violence and subsequent displacement continued
to deepen humanitarian needs in South Sudan. Since May, an estimated 850,000
people have been affected by flooding. Some of them fled their homes after their
communities were submerged, taking refuge on higher ground or in communal
structures. Flood-affected and displaced people in Bentiu, Unity, are in a dire
situation. As at 12 November, some 310,000 affected people had received some form
of assistance. Physical access remained a major challenge to humani tarian response.
Despite ongoing efforts to address the immediate needs of flood -affected people, the
level of need is high and varied. Resources and funding are needed urgently.
28. Similar to previous years, flood-induced displacement of some groups into areas
perceived to be traditionally associated with other groups continued. In Bentiu town,
people have been forced to move due to rising water, which could stoke tensions over
land rights.
29. The food security situation remains precarious. With farmlands and crops
inundated and destroyed by the floods, the situation is at risk of further deterioration.
Increased food insecurity, illness and poor access to clean water, hygiene and sanitation
heightened malnutrition levels among children under 5 years of age. Some 1.4 million
children and 480,000 pregnant or lactating women were estimated to be acutely
malnourished and in need of treatment in 2021, the highest number since 2013.
30. Subnational violence in Tambura displaced an estimated 80,000 people.
Fighting in Lainya and Yei Counties in Central Equatoria displaced people to
surrounding areas and into neighbouring countries.
31. Humanitarian access remains challenging. Between 1 September and
5 November, 89 humanitarian access incidents were reported, including 13 ambushes
and 5 lootings, a 47 per cent increase compared with the previous reporting period.

21-17512

5/18

S/2021/1015

Insecurity forced the relocation of 82 aid workers from Pibor and Gumuruk in J onglei,
and Tambura in Western Equatoria, between 1 September and 5 November.
32. Access violations continued, including looting and destruction of humanitarian
supplies, which had a significant impact on the ability of humanitarian workers to
respond to people in need. Threats and operational interference remained, resulting
in the disruption and suspension of humanitarian action. A humanitarian convoy
carrying 121 tons of food supplies was attacked in Yei County on 17 September.
Threats by youth groups had led to the suspension of non-life-saving humanitarian
activities in Pibor, Renk and Tonj in recent months. Through engagement at various
levels, youth groups in Pibor and Renk withdrew the threats they had made against
aid workers and agreed on the unconditional resumption of humanitarian operations.
Meanwhile, poor road conditions, compounded by heavy rain and floods, led to access
challenges and slowed the response in the flood-affected areas.
33. With the rains and floodwaters, the risk of malaria and other waterborne diseases
remains high. The cumulative number of confirmed hepatitis E cases since the
beginning of 2021 among people living in the Bentiu internally displaced persons
camp is 1,136, with 5 deaths. Humanitarian organizations are respondin g to contain
the outbreak. South Sudan remained on alert for an increase in COVID -19 cases.
However, the World Health Organization has flagged the limited capacity to cope with
an increased caseload of in-patient requirements. A declaration of an Ebola outbreak
in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo on 8 October is a cause for
renewed concern.
34. Between January and September, nearly 4.7 million people were reached with
humanitarian assistance and protection services. As at 30 November, $1.1 3 billion
had been secured against the $1.68 billion requested in the 2021 humanitarian
response plan.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
35. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his deputy continued
to exercise their good offices by engaging the parties and stakeholders to address
critical outstanding issues in the implementation of the Agreement. In this connection,
on 16 September, UNMISS led an international delegation, composed of
representatives from IGAD, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Norway, the Sudan and Uganda, and the
acting Humanitarian Coordinator, to Yambio and Tambura, Western Equatoria State,
to defuse tensions and ensure a cohesive response. The delegation met with the State
and local government authorities, displaced civilians and the Joint Defence Board
team in the area. On 19 September, in a joint press statement, the delegation cautioned
that without urgent action by the Government to end the fighting, there was an
imminent risk of further escalation. The delegation stressed that the root causes of the
conflict could be addressed only through the full implementation of the Agreement,
especially the unification of forces and their deployment, and called on the
Government to implement the recommendations of the Board.
36. On 30 September and 1 October, UNMISS hosted a two-day civil society forum
on the role of civil society during the electoral process. The forum discussed the
electoral framework of South Sudan, including key legislation and the interaction
between constitution-making and electoral processes, requirements and strategies for
holding peaceful credible elections, the timing and sequencing of electoral operations,

6/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

strategies to enhance the political participation of women and an overview of the
United Nations electoral assistance framework.
37. On 7 September, UNMISS and Community Empowerment for Rehabilitation
and Development, a local NGO, organized a two-day stakeholders’ consultation
workshop on the draft constitution-making process bill. A follow-up session, with
facilitation by the South Sudan Democratic Engagement, Monitoring and Observation
Programme, a local NGO, was held on 30 September to review observations and
finalize suggested amendments. Both events enhanced understanding of the draft bill,
reviewed the text, identified gaps and points of entry for reforms and generated
recommendations to the Transitional National Legislative Assembly on possible
amendments. On 16 and 17 November, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and UNMISS supported the Union of Journalists
of South Sudan in convening a capacity-building workshop for 35 media practitioners
on the constitution-making process and parliamentary reporting. On 25 and
26 November, UNMISS supported Community Empowerment for Rehabilitation and
Development and the South Sudan Democratic Engagement, Monitoring and
Observation Programme in holding a workshop on a legitimate and effective
constitutional framework for 94 parliamentarians and youth. The workshop dis cussed
the constitution-making process and youth legislative priorities.
38. On 26 and 27 October, UNMISS and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) jointly organized a political parties forum, in which political
leaders discussed the challenges, opportunities and priorities for the transitional
period, including the role of political parties in oversight and implementation. Over
90 members (17 of them women) representing national and subnational political
parties and civic organizations deliberated and issued a communiqué on key
governance, security, financial management and transitional justice issues.
39. UNMISS facilitated governors’ forums bringing together State executives and
representatives of civil society, women and youth in Warrap (23 –25 September) and,
jointly with UNDP, in the Pibor Administrative Area (14–16 September). In Warrap,
the participants drafted a strategic document to work collaboratively on key priorities
for security, governance and the rule of law. In the Pibor Administrat ive Area, the
participants developed strategies to address recurrent intercommunal violence, child
abductions and cattle theft. In Jonglei State, UNMISS facilitated a capacity -building
workshop on 15 October to orient the newly appointed State authorities to the guiding
principles of local governance, the decentralized system of local government, the
powers and functions of legislative councils, and the state executive.
40. To foster closer working relationships between political entities of the State
governments, UNMISS hosted a two-day retreat for the Central Equatoria State
executive in Juba on 2 and 3 November. A total of 31 participants (including 11
women) discussed building consensus in work, ensuring security and the rule of law,
protecting human rights, reducing gender-based violence, enhancing local capacity
and service delivery and reviewing the local tax system and the management of public
funds. Participants issued a communiqué outlining the way forward.
41. From 16 to 18 November, the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and UNMISS
held a three-day workshop on coordination and harmonization of work between the
national and State ministers and other senior staff. Over 60 participants, including 8
women, explored the links between the Ministries of Parliamentary Affairs and
Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
42. By hosting 11 Radio Miraya round-table discussions, UNMISS enhanced
political participation by young women parliamentarians and promoted a culture of
peace through equality and social stability. Citizens have been engaged with regard

21-17512

7/18

S/2021/1015

to peacebuilding processes, elections, the national budget and the proposed laws to
prevent gender-based violence, as well as the role and impact of UNMISS.

B.

Protection of civilians and mitigating intercommunal conflict
43. The Mission responded to threats against civilians through proactive mobile
deployment, a robust force projection and posture of peacekeepers, sustained
engagements with military and political leaders, community-level conflict resolution
initiatives, the provision of support to rule of law and justice institutions, and other
targeted programmatic activities. During the reporting period, 24 temporary operating
bases were operational.
44. UNMISS applied an integrated and cross-Mission approach to address conflict
hotspots in Western Equatoria and Warrap. In Tambura, Western Equatoria, UNMISS
reinforced its temporary operating base to provide a security deterrent and facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Mission stepped up its political
engagement and preventive diplomacy with stakeholders in Juba, supported by local
conflict resolution initiatives. Concurrently, UNMISS organized a stakeholders ’
forum in Yambio to reduce tensions in Tambura. The participants included State
cabinet members, chiefs, members of civil society, youth, elders and religious leaders.
A total of 30 individuals, of which 12 were women, attended the forum.
45. In Tonj, Warrap State, UNMISS overcame adverse weather and accessibility
challenges and established a temporary operating base in Marial Lou to reconcile and
mediate between the conflicting communities of Tonj North and Tonj East. The base
enabled engagement with the surrounding communities and provided community
safety, including for humanitarian partners. According to local partners, the base’s
presence helped build confidence among the local community and internally
displaced persons and enabled a primary school to reopen after it had closed due to
insecurity.
46. UNMISS also continued to promote inclusive dialogue, reconciliation, and
social and interfaith cohesion at the subnational level. In this regard, UNMISS
conducted 31 workshops, forums, community dialogues and capacity -building
programmes for communities, State and local authorities, tr aditional leaders, women
leaders and youth. A total of 1,804 participants (521 of them women) were reached
through these activities.
47. The Mission supported local authorities in assuming their responsibility for
protecting civilians. From 22 to 24 September, it organized a conference in Morobo
County, Central Equatoria, on strengthening the role of local authorities in local
conflict management. In Unity State from 27 September to 14 October, UNMISS
facilitated three forums for payam administrators, traditional chiefs, women civil
society leaders, youth and faith-based leaders from Koch, Guit and Rubkona
Counties, at which the participants adopted resolutions on social and political
cohesion, governance and the prevention of intercommunal violence. On 23 and
24 September, UNMISS facilitated a peace dialogue in Wulu County, Lakes State,
where conflicting communities adopted recommendations t o resolve a long-standing
conflict over land ownership and boundary issues.
48. The Mission advanced its efforts with regard to the full, effective and
meaningful participation of youth in the peace and security agenda. On 5 and
6 October, UNMISS and UNDP organized a capacity-building forum for the State
youth union of Warrap on conflict management and dialogue to promote social
cohesion and peacebuilding. Participants developed strategies for peer outreach in
cattle camps to prevent recurrent violence. From 25 to 27 October, UNMISS and
UNDP organized a three-day reconciliation forum in Warrap to mitigate

8/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

intercommunal violence between Thiik, Luanyjang and Lou Paher communities. The
participants signed a communiqué outlining immediate, medium and long -term
actions to promote peace in the area. On 28 October, in Upper Nile, UNMISS
organized a panel discussion between 80 students and teachers (40 of them women)
drawn from the protection of civilians site and Malakal town and discussed their role
in promoting local peace.
49. UNMISS continued to provide physical protection to 34,056 persons (including
17,375 women) in the Malakal protection of civilians site. Planning for the site ’s
eventual redesignation as an internally displaced person camp is ongoing.
50. UNMISS continued its support for the redesignated former protection of civilian
sites in Bor, Juba, Wau and Bentiu. Bentiu experienced challenges associated with
population increase as communities from flood-affected areas sought humanitarian
support. Capacity-building activities, such as technical advice and training
workshops, were delivered for the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission, the South
Sudan National Police Service and community leaders representing internally
displaced persons to ensure unimpeded delivery of humanitarian and protection
services. UNMISS also collaborated with humanitarian agencies to defuse tensions
between internally displaced persons and humanitarian actors following the reduction
of food rations in the Malakal protection of civilians site and the redesignated
protection of civilians sites.
51. To prevent crimes, build confidence and trust, enhance the safety and security
of the internally displaced persons sites and foster a secure environment for free,
voluntary, informed and dignified returns of internally displaced persons, the United
Nations police conducted 1,104 coordinated patrols with the South Sudan National
Police Service. The United Nations police also conducted 2,002 patrols, comprising
765 confidence- and trust-building patrols, 129 short-duration patrols, 88 longduration patrols, 63 dynamic air patrols and 957 high -visibility patrols. Of these
patrols, 1,081 included female officers.
52. The process of redesignating protection of civilians sites has enabled the United
Nations police to reinvest resources in training activities, workshops and community
policing, including support for strategic policy development for the South Sudan
National Police Service. To that effect, the United Nations police continued to
co-locate with the Service at all police stations and posts located close to the Bor,
Wau, Juba and Bentiu redesignated protection of civilians sites.
53. To address the resource constraints of the South Sudan National Police Service,
strengthen relationships between communities and police and address crime and
public disorder, the United Nations police increased efforts to establish police
community relation committees, which increased from 177 in the previous reporting
period to 193.
54. The UNMISS force conducted 42,299 patrols, including 1,634 short-duration
patrols, 548 long-duration patrols, 205 dynamic air patrols and 27 riverine patrols. A
total of 637 patrols were conducted in and around the protection of civilians sites.
Some 11.4 per cent of patrols included women uniformed peacekeepers.
55. Across the country, the Mine Action Service conducted 98 explosive ordnance
disposal tasks for the Mission, the South Sudan National Police Service and
communities, which resulted in 1,643 items of unexploded ordnance being destroyed.
In Ngulere, Central Equatoria, 22 items of explosive ordnance and 5,866 rounds of
small arms ammunition were destroyed as part of a Safe Ground event, a global
campaign to turn minefields into playing fields. To celebrate the newly cleared
playing field, participants from the Ngulere Primary School held a football match on

21-17512

9/18

S/2021/1015

30 September. The Service also provided explosive ordnance risk education to 1,517
internally displaced persons in Malakal.
56. The Mine Action Service also provided survey, clearance and destruction of
explosive ordnance as requested by humanitarian and development actors, including
for a hospital in Leer and for a new field office and accommodations for the Office
of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees in Bentiu. In Leer, 21 explosive
items and 38 rounds of small arms ammunition, identified by communities, were
removed and destroyed. The Service removed and destroyed three explosive items as
requested by the World Food Programme during a patrol from Torit to Kapoeta.

C.

Rule of law and accountability
57. To promote accountability, enhance fair trial rights and contribute to decreasing
intercommunal tensions, UNMISS supported special courts in Greater Tonj, Rumbek,
Yirol and Cueibet to try serious crimes related to “sectional” conflicts, including rape,
culpable homicide, robbery and grievous hurt. In total, these courts adjudicated
almost 190 cases.
58. To strengthen the capacity of the judiciary outside of urban areas and promote
access to justice, throughout the month of November, UNMISS monitored and
provided substantive technical expertise to local justice actors through the
deployment of mobile courts supported by UNDP in Maban and Kapoeta.
59. UNMISS continued to advance the South Sudan reconciliation, stabilization and
resilience multi-partner trust fund project to mitigate livestock-related violence in the
border areas of Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Warrap States. From 4 to 8 October,
UNMISS organized a five-day skills development workshop on investigation and
prosecution skills. The workshop developed the capacity of prosecutors, investigators
and defence attorneys to conduct effective investigations and trials of cases to be
adjudicated by the joint special mobile court.
60. On 15 and 16 September, UNMISS supported the Military Justice Directorate
of SSPDF in holding a debriefing conference for 31 judge advocates (including
2 women) who participated in the general court martials in Yei, Bentiu, Maridi, Bor,
Renk, Juba and Malakal. Participants requested UNMISS to facilitate training
sessions on case management and investigations, and to deploy more general court
martials to key hotspot locations where conflict-related sexual violence had been
reported. UNMISS will continue to engage with the Military Justice Directorate to
implement these recommendations.
61. In partnership with the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, UNMISS supported the Strategic Defence and Security Review Board
in advancing the finalization of a security policy framework through a workshop held
on 6 and 7 October. The completion of the review process remains a key benchmark
of implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. On 23 November, UNMISS also
briefed the Board, led by the Minister of Defence, as well as members of the
diplomatic community, on the UNMISS strategy for support for the security sector
reform process of South Sudan during the transitional period.

D.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
62. The flexible deployment of temporary operating bases provided a security
umbrella for the provision of life-saving assistance (in Marial Lou, Warrap), built
confidence for beneficiaries of local peace-humanitarian-development nexus

10/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

programming (in Koch, Unity) and created conditions for the return of assistance that
had previously been withdrawn due to conflict (in Tambura, Western Equatoria).
63. To support the delivery of assistance and ensure the protection of humanitarian
workers, UNMISS conducted 281 long-duration patrols and 292 short-duration patrols.
It provided force protection to 1,421 integrated missions. In addition, it conducted 35
force protection patrols supporting convoys and humanitarian partners, including
NGOs. On 9 September, UNMISS supported a United Nations agency with air
transportation of non-food items to flood-affected areas of Mayendit County, as well as
a humanitarian needs assessment in 16 flood-affected payams in Panyijiar, Unity.
64. To maximize humanitarian service delivery, the United Nations police
coordinated with the South Sudan National Police Service on 16 occasions in the Juba
and Wau internally displaced person camps, through static deployments and dynamic
mobile patrolling around the event locations. On two occasions, the United Nations
police provided security for humanitarian food distribution inside the Malakal
protection of civilians site.

E.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
65. UNMISS documented 145 incidents that negatively affected the human rights
and protection situation, including arbitrary killings, extrajudicial executions,
injuries, abductions, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detention
(including proxy detention), torture and ill-treatment, forced military conscription
and the looting and destruction of civilian property. These incidents resulted in 353
civilian casualties (208 killed and 145 injured), including 17 women and 13 children.
Of these incidents, 82 were attributed to community-based militias, 27 to Azande and
Balanda militias allegedly affiliated with parties to the conflict, 17 to SSPDF, 5 to the
National Security Service, 5 to SPLM/A-IO, 4 to NAS and 2 to the South Sudan
National Police Service. Attribution of three other incidents remained pending.
66. Attacks carried out by community-based militias remained the primary source
of violence affecting local populations, accounting for 78 per cent of civilian
casualties. However, violence involving parties to the conflict and affiliated Azande
and Balanda militias in Tambura continued to pose a significant threat to civilians,
resulting in at least 65 casualties, as well as continued displaceme nt, looting and
destruction of civilian property.
67. UNMISS continued to engage with Government officials to implement lawful
measures to address localized violence, including the deployment of mobile courts.
This notwithstanding, UNMISS documented three extrajudicial executions in Lakes
and five in Warrap. The Mission also confirmed the executions of two death row
inmates in Wau. The use of capital punishment remains a concern, in particular owing
to the limited ability of the justice system to fully com ply with fair trial standards.
UNMISS continued to support legal aid providers representing juveniles and other
defendants on death row.
68. The Mission also facilitated the release and family tracing and reunification of
27 abductees (11 women and 16 children) held by members of the Murle, Dinka and
Nuer communities in Jonglei and the Pibor Administrative Area as part of an ongoing
project led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
with the support of the South Sudan reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust
fund which has led to the release of 127 abductees since March 2021.
69. UNMISS continued to receive reports of censorship, harassment, and arbitrary
arrest and detention by the National Security Service of journalists, activists and other
civilians expressing criticism of the Government. At least 16 journalists and human

21-17512

11/18

S/2021/1015

rights defenders were threatened, arbitrarily arrested or detained in connection with
their professional activities. The Government also pursu ed supporters of the People’s
Coalition for Civil Action and on 6 October issued a directive to freeze the domestic
financial assets of five Coalition leaders. A day of protests, planned for 29 November,
did not occur, amid a continued crackdown against Co alition members.
70. UNMISS conducted 144 capacity-building sessions for a total of 4,225 national
stakeholders (of whom 1,381 were women), including members of the security forces,
State officials, community and traditional leaders, women’s and youth organizations and
other civil society representatives. These included a validation workshop for the national
report for the universal periodic review, in addition to ongoing support for national and
State human rights commissions. On 4 November, the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women convened an interactive dialogue to consider the initial
treaty report of South Sudan, prepared with technical support from UNMISS, marking
the country’s first such engagement with an international human rights treaty body.
71. UNMISS carried out 17 human rights-related due diligence policy risk
assessments before travel, and material assistance was provided to non -United
Nations security forces in support of the implementation of the peace process.
Children and armed conflict
72. During the reporting period, 81 grave violations against 70 boys and 10 girls
were verified. A total of 54 boys and 2 girls were recruited and used by forces loyal
to General James Nando (18 boys and 2 girls) and SPLM/A-IO (10 boys). The killing
of five boys and the maiming of two boys and two girls were attributed to SSPDF (1)
or remained unattributed as they were caused by crossfire between forces loyal to
General James Nando and unidentified perpetrators (1), crossfire betwee n
SPLM/A-IO and an armed youth (1) or explosive remnants of war (6). Two girls were
survivors of rape attributed to SSPDF (1) and NAS (1). Two girls were abducted by
SPLM/A-IO and one by NAS.
73. Violations were verified in Western Equatoria (20 boys and 4 girls), Lakes
(18 boys), Upper Nile (16 boys), Western Bahr el-Ghazal (10 boys), Central Equatoria
(3 boys and 4 girls) and Jonglei (4 boys and 2 girls). One attack on a hospital by NAS
was verified in Central Equatoria.
74. In support of the implementation of the comprehensive action plan to end and
prevent all grave violations against children, UNMISS delivered 11 capacity -building
training sessions on child protection for 573 participants (102 of them women),
including 60 division commanders (of whom 4 were women). UNMISS also
supported the formation of the State technical committee for the Pibor Administrative
Area on the comprehensive action plan on 12 and 13 September.
75. UNMISS delivered 47 child protection awareness-raising sessions to 2,373
participants (1,055 of whom were women), including 601 members of the
Government security forces (including 221 women), 1,664 community members (of
whom 793 were women) and 108 Government officials (41 of them women).
Additionally, 55 advocacy meetings with the armed forces and Government officials
were held on child protection concerns. In Lakes, the efforts resulted in the
identification of 18 boys associated with SSPDF at Panda Barracks.
Conflict-related sexual violence
76. UNMISS continued to observe concerning levels of sexual violence perpetrated
by the parties to the conflict, community-based militias and other armed elements
involved in localized violence. The Mission verified 15 incidents of conflict -related
sexual violence, involving 15 survivors, including 5 girls and 1 boy. Victims ranging
12/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

in age from 7 to 47 years were subjected to rape (9), gang rape (3), attempted rape
(1), threat to rape (1) and forced nudity (1). Seven incidents were attributed to SSPDF,
two to the National Security Service, two to the South Sudan National Police Service,
one to SPLM/A-IO and one to other armed elements. Attribution for two incidents
remained pending.
77. In addition, the Mission documented and verified 21 incidents of conflict related sexual violence that occurred prior to the reporting period, involving 63
survivors, including 5 girls and 7 men. Nine of these incidents were attributed to
community-based militias, five to SSPDF and three to the National Security Service.
Attribution for three incidents remained pending.
78. On 30 November, with technical support from UNMISS, the Government
officially launched the joint implementation committee of the action plan of the armed
forces on addressing conflict-related sexual violence, comprised of SSPDF,
SPLM/A-IO and the South Sudan Opposition Alliance.

F.

Women and peace and security
79. Following the reconstitution of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly,
UNMISS supported the participation of women in the legislative and con stitutionmaking process. On 1 and 2 September, UNMISS organized an orientation workshop
in Juba with the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network to introduce some 20
young women members of parliament to legislative procedures and practices of the
Assembly. On 7 and 8 and on 21 and 22 October, UNMISS facilitated two workshops
for about 120 women members of parliament in coordination with the South Sudan
Women’s Peace Monitoring and Advocacy Group on gender-responsive governance
and leadership. On 14 and 15 October, UNMISS supported the Group in bringing
together 40 women members of parliament and 30 civil society leaders to enhance
their engagement in the constitution-making process and the integration of gender
perspectives into the legislative agenda.
80. The Mission continued its support for the implementation of gender provisions
of the Revitalized Agreement. On 27 and 28 September, UNMISS facilitated a
consultative workshop in Western Bahr el-Ghazal to strengthen the advocacy skills of
women leaders and male gender champions with regard to the affirmative action
targets. From 28 to 30 September, UNMISS organized a workshop for 54 senior South
Sudan National Police Service officers (including 20 women) from Juba headquarters
and five States to promote gender equality and effective responses to sexual and
gender-based violence.
81. Together with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and UNDP, throughout October the Mission
supported the implementation of a project on gender mainstreaming in security sector
reform by providing technical expertise for gender-sensitivity training of the South
Sudanese uniformed forces in Rumbek, Kuacjok and Bentiu. On 14 and 15 September,
UNMISS facilitated a capacity-building initiative with over 50 journalists, human
rights defenders and lawyers (35 women and 15 men), who identified strategies to
enhance the meaningful political participation of women at the national and
subnational levels.

21-17512

13/18

S/2021/1015

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments, and conduct
and discipline
82. As at 30 November, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,644,
comprising 852 international staff members, including 239 women (28 per cent);
1,396 national staff members, of whom 207 (15 per cent) were women; and 396
United Nations Volunteers, 164 of them (41 per cent) women.
83. The police strength stood at 1,440 (of an authorized 2,101 personnel),
comprising 544 individual police officers, including 213 women (39 per cent); 865
personnel in formed police units, of whom 212 (24 per cent) were women; and 31
corrections officers, 16 of them (52 per cent) women.
84. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 13,902
military personnel, comprising 222 military liaison officers, including 50 women
(23 per cent); 425 military staff officers, 80 of whom (19 per cent) we re women; and
13,255 military contingent personnel, 721 of them (5 per cent) women.
85. In line with Action for Peacekeeping Plus, UNMISS continued enhancing the
accountability of peacekeepers by updating its misconduct risk registers and action
plans through field visits to Wau, Kuacjok and Malakal. The Mission intensified
efforts to strengthen the community-based complaint mechanisms, including through
increased visibility and support from internal and external partners in conducting
outreach activities, through the creation of a social media platform to share conduct
and discipline information (especially on sexual exploitation and abuse) among the
members of such mechanisms.
86. In accordance with the applicable policy, information on possible unsatisfa ctory
conduct and/or misconduct was processed in a timely fashion. Between 1 September
and 30 November, 34 allegations were recorded in the case management tracking
system, with no allegations of sexual exploitation. All identified victims of the
previously reported allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse continued to receive
support from the Senior Victims’ Rights Officer in South Sudan.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and the security of United Nations personnel
87. UNMISS and the Government continued to make significant progress in
improving overall communication and coordination to facilitate the Mission ’s
operations, particularly freedom of movement for the Mission’s patrols. In this regard,
the third high-level coordination meeting was held on 21 October to assess the
progress made thus far regarding UNMISS freedom of movement. These initiatives
led to fewer incidents of access denials affecting UNMISS patrols.
88. As at 30 November, UNMISS had recorded 27 violations of the status-of-forces
agreement, which is a reduction compared with 62 such violations during the previous
reporting period. Of the total number of violations, eight involved movement
restrictions imposed by Government security forces between September and
November. Of that number, five incidents took place in September due to the late
communication of UNMISS movements by the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism to the Government security forces manning the checkpoints. One
restriction in October was related to the denial of flight safety assurances for an
UNMISS casualty evacuation flight in Torit, Eastern Equatoria.
89. After delays, the Mine Action Service was permitted to deploy teams along the
roads in Central Equatoria, with the last restrictions along the road from Juba to Yei
and Nimule being lifted on 19 November.
14/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

90. Three incidents of access denial by SPLM/A-IO and armed militia elements
impeded the Mission’s ability to monitor and investigate the human rights si tuation
in areas controlled by SPLM/A-IO.
91. The whereabouts of two national staff members arrested in 2014 remain
unknown. During the reporting period, Government security personnel arrested 12
members of UNMISS without informing the Mission and without following the
procedures set out under the status-of-forces agreement for the arrest or detention of
staff members. Eleven of the arrested staff members were released on bail within
seven days of their arrest, but one national staff member arrested on 18 A ugust
remains in detention in Juba. The arrest and detention of UNMISS members without
following the procedures set out under the status-of-forces agreement has an impact
on the Mission’s ability to account for the whereabouts of its staff and undermines
the commitment of the Government to ensuring an environment conducive for
UNMISS personnel to work without impediments in support of the Government and
people of South Sudan.
92. UNMISS continued to notify the Government of violations through notes
verbales and regular engagement. Monthly matrices of the incidents prepared for the
Security Council have also been shared with the Government.

VIII. Performance and safety and security of uniformed components
93. Seven UNMISS force enabler contingents (two level II hospitals, a petroleum
platoon and a force engineering unit) and two sector headquarters were evaluated
during the reporting period. The reports were completed using online tools, and one
is currently in progress. Evaluations covered areas such as mandate comprehension
and support, command and control, training and discipline, sustainment and health.
Three contingents were assessed as above average and five others as excellent.
94. From 1 September to 30 November, four formed police units of 848 personnel (212
of them women) were evaluated. The performance of the units was rated satisfactory.
The evaluation assessed the operational and logistical ability to perform mandated tasks
and associated levels of performance. It found some shortfalls related to contingentowned equipment, which, however, do not compromise overall performance.
95. Harassment of United Nations staff members and general criminality has an impact
on the safety and security of peacekeepers, which the Mission continues to actively
address through interactions with the Government security services, strengthened
physical security measures and security training. Overall, 52 such incidents (10 directed
at uniformed personnel) were registered during the reporting period.

IX. Observations and recommendations
96. On the third anniversary of the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, I call on
the parties to demonstrate their continued commitment to the Agreement, which
remains the only viable road map for consolidating peace. While I am encouraged by
the progress thus far, I am concerned about missed benchmarks and critical tasks that
remain outstanding, in particular those related to constitutional reform and the
transitional security arrangements. South Sudan stands to make significant progress
in implementing the Agreement if it takes up the legislative programme set out in the
Agreement and also undertakes steps that the Government has reiterated that it will
take to implement the transitional security arrangements. I therefore urge the
Presidency to urgently unify the command of the armed forces and graduate the
necessary unified forces.

21-17512

15/18

S/2021/1015

97. UNMISS continues to implement the Security Council three-year strategic
vision to achieve its key mandate priorities, including support for the conduct of free,
fair, credible and peaceful elections at the end of the transitional period. In this regard,
in line with the outcomes of the electoral needs assessment (see S/2021/661) and the
27 October 2021 statement of the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2021/20), my Special Representative will establish an integrated electoral
assistance team, which will provide early technical support to the Government to
deliver an inclusive and legitimate electoral process.
98. I acknowledge the efforts of the Council of Ministers to review and adopt the
Constitution-Making Process Bill 2020/2021. This bill, once approved by the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly, will initiate and guide the permanent
constitution-making process, which is a prerequisite for elections. I therefore call on
the parties to operationalize the Assembly so that it can consider key legislation,
including the establishment of the legal framework to adva nce election preparation. I
also urge the parties to establish State assemblies and other institutions of governance
and request them to continue efforts towards reaching the 35 per cent quota for women
envisioned in the Revitalized Agreement.
99. While I am encouraged that the permanent ceasefire continues to broadly hold,
clashes in the Equatorias, intercommunal violence elsewhere and, separately, isolated
skirmishes between the factions of SPLM/A-IO have the potential to derail the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. I call upon the SPLM/A-IO factions to
resolve their differences through dialogue. I welcome the mediation efforts of IGAD
in this regard and look forward to its continued support.
100. I am mindful that regional developments risk diverting attention from the
situation in South Sudan, which requires sustained international engagement. I am
extremely concerned about the unfolding political crises in the Sudan and Ethiopia
and the likely impact of further population movements across the borders of South
Sudan, where humanitarian efforts are already stretched in meeting the needs of
326,000 refugees and asylum seekers and 1.7 million internally displaced persons.
These crises also severely affect IGAD, which remains in the lead of the pol itical
process in South Sudan.
101. South Sudan is prone to riverine and flash flooding, which has been of such scale
and intensity for the third consecutive year that the affected communities have
significantly reduced chances of recovery before the next climatic events could hit. This
year’s flooding emergency affected a staggering 846,000 people, resulting in new mass
displacements and contributing to increased food insecurity, waterborne diseases and
heightened malnutrition. Droughts and floods of increasing frequency in recent years
demonstrate the high vulnerability of South Sudan to climate change, with implications
for peace and security fuelled by competition over dwindling resources. I commend the
unrelenting efforts of UNMISS engineers in Unity State, who have made every effort to
protect Bentiu town from flooding. I also thank the donor community for its support in
meeting immediate relief requirements and note the allocation by the Government of
South Sudan of $10 million for flood relief. I further acknowledge the unity of purpose
demonstrated between the Government, the United Nations, Member States, NGOs and
civil society to strengthen humanitarian, development and peace collaboration to
mitigate climate impacts and collectively respond to the escalation of insecurity and
intercommunal and intracommunal conflict.
102. The increasing trend of threats and attacks against humanitarian workers by
youth groups and the disruption of aid programmes remains concerning, especially
when such animosity fuels ethnic and intercommunal conflict. Humanitarian actors
must have firm security guarantees that they are safe from harm. At the same time,
these developments underscore the need for viable education and productive
16/18

21-17512

S/2021/1015

livelihood opportunities for youth, who are facing persistent economic hardship and
limited incentives and should refrain from resolving their grievances through violent
means.
103. I am encouraged that UNMISS and the Government continued to make
significant progress in improving overall communication and coordination to
facilitate the Mission’s operations, particularly freedom of movement for the
Mission’s patrols, which has dramatically reduced access denials. I am, however,
worried about security threats to humanitarian partners, which has ha d an impact on
their ability to deliver assistance to those in need. I condemn the attacks on
humanitarian convoys and the looting and destruction of humanitarian assets and
supplies. I call upon the Government to hold perpetrators accountable and to provi de
necessary protection to humanitarian workers to avoid disruptions in the delivery of
life-saving aid.
104. I am also concerned over reports of cases of conflict-related sexual violence and
other serious human rights violations, including the extrajudic ial executions reported
in Lakes and Warrap. I urge the Government, as well as State Governments, to uphold
the rule of law and internationally agreed standards and norms contained in
international agreements to which South Sudan is a signatory. As South S udan
embarks on the preparations for free and fair elections, it is imperative that the
authorities recognize and respect the need for freedom of expression and political
space for an open national dialogue on the country ’s future.
105. Finally, I convey my deep appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing
countries and commend the efforts made by the IGAD Heads of State and the African
Union. I thank my Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, the uniformed and
civilian personnel of UNMISS and the United Nations country team, who have
continued to work towards peace to improve lives in South Sudan.

21-17512

17/18

S/2021/1015

18/18

21-17512
