Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committe_e
___

3. Requests the Secretary-General urgently to invite
those Member States that have not yet done so. to com­
municate to him not later than 30 April 1985 their views
and comments on the matter and to transmit those views
and comments to the Ad Hoe Committee as soon as possi­
ble;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in considering the
matter, to take due account of the views and comments of
Member States, including their recommendations, and to
submit a progress report to the Security Council for its
consideration and comments and to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session, and a final report to the Assembly at
its forty-first session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Implementation of the
collective security provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/159. Inadmissibility of the policy of State terror­
ism and any actions by States aimed at
undermining the socio-political system in
other sovereign States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of any State, as well as the inalienable right
of all peoples to determine their own form of government
and to choose their own economic, political and social sys­
tem free from outside intervention. subversion. coercion
and constraint of any kind whatsoever,
Expressing its profound concern that State terrorism has
lately been practised ever more frequently in relations
between States and that military and other actions are
being taken against the sovereignty and political indepen­
dence of States and the self-determination of peoples,
Noting that all this seriously endangers the independent
existence of States and the possibility of ensuring peaceful
relations and mutual trust between them and leads to a
sharp exacerbation of tensions and a growing threat of war,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples freely to
determine their own destiny and the course of their devel­
opment,
Convinced that the interests of maintaining peace
require that relations between States, regardless of ideolo­
gies, should be based on strict observance of the Charter of
the United Nations. as well as on generally recognized
principles and norms of international relations, inter alia.
renunciation of the threat or use of force against the terri­
torial integrity or political independence of any State, non­
intervention and non-interference in the internal and
external affairs of States, permanent sovereignty of States
and peoples over their natural resources and self-determi­
nation and independence of peoples under colonial domi­
nation, foreign occupation or racist regimes.
Categorically rejecting all concepts, doctrines or ideolo­
gies intended to justify actions of States aimed at under­
mining the socio-political system of other States,
l5I See also sect. X.B.I, dec1s1on 391424
152 Resolution S-10/2.
153 Official Records o(the General .-ll1c111/,/1 /"111n, mnrh Snrn>n, S1,r111/e
ment No. 42 (A/39/42).

___

_
____ _
9 9

l. Resolutely condemns policies and practices of terror­
ism in relations between States as a method of dealing with
other States and peoples:
2. Demands that all States take no actions aimed at
military intervention and occupation, forcible change in or
undermining of the socio-political system of States,
destabilization and overthrow of their Governments and,
in particular, initiate no military action to that end under
any pretext whatsoever and cease forthwith any such
action already in progress;
3. Urges all States to respect and strictly observe, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the
sovereignty and political independence of States and the
right of peoples to self-determination. as well as their right
freely. without outside mterference and intervention, to
choose their socio-political system and to pursue their
political. economic, social and cultural development.
102nd plenarv meeting
17 December 1984
39/160.

Relationship between disarmament and
development 111

!'he General Assemh, r.
Recalling its resolution 38/71 B. of 15 December 1983.
Recalling the provisions of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 152 con­
cerning the relationship between disarmament and devel­
opment.
( ·ons1dermg-.
(a) That world-wide military spending has acquired a
staggering magn itude and the global trend continues to be
towards a faster rate of annual increase in these expendi­
tures.
(h) That this situation stands in dramatic contrast to
the sombre state of the global economy and has serious
implications for the economic prospects of the world, par­
ticularly those of the developing countries,
(c) That the world economy, particularly that of devel­
oping countries, would benefit from appropriate interna­
tional action that took into account the close relationship
of disarmament and development,
4/so considering that in view of the importance and
urgency of giving international consideration and practical
expression to that relationship, the time has come for a
comprehensive discuss1,on of the subject at a high political
level,
Taking note of the report adopted by the Disarmament
Commission at the end of its 1984 session. 151
l'akmg note, in particular, of the recommendation con­
tained in the report of the Disarmament Commission
according to which efforts should be continued to enable
the General Assembly to reach, at its thirty-ninth session.
a broad measure of agreement on the subject. taking into
account the views expressed in the report, 154
I. Decides to convene an International Conference on
the Relationship between Disarmament and Develop­
ment, which should be preceded by thorough preparation
and should take decisions by consensus;
2. -J/so decides thal the purposes of the Conference
should be:
-,.,1 lh11 i, para 27

100

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

(a) To review the relationship between disarmament
and development in all its aspects and dimensions with a
view to reaching appropriate conclusions;
(b) To undertake an examination of the implications of
the level and magnitude of the continuing military expend­
itures, in particular those of nuclear-weapon States and
other militarily important States, for the world economy
and international economic and social situation, particu­
larly for the developing countries, and to make recommen­
dations for remedial measures;
ISS At its 105th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1984, the General
Assembly entrusted its President with the task of appointing the members of
the Preparatory Committee. The membership of the Committee will be
announced subsequently.

(c) To consider ways and means of releasing additional
resources, through disarmament measures, for develop­
ment purposes, in particular in favour of developing coun­
tries;
3. Further decides to set up a Preparatory Committee
for the International Conference on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development composed of
fifty-four members, 155 which should formulate and submit,
by consensus, to the General Assembly at its fortieth ses­
sion, recommendations as to the provisional agenda, pro­
cedure, place, date and duration of the Conference.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December I 984
