UNK!-“D

NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

i,

26 OCTOBER

I977

YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ( .

Page
I

. . . : .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
ketter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Tunisia to
the United
Nations addressed to the President
of the Security
Council
(S/12420).............................................

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2040)

Adoption

of the agenda

SlPV.2040

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

204OTH
Held in New York

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
IJnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2040)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12420)
The meeting wascalled ro order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
Theagenduwasadopted.
The questionof South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisionstaken
by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
representativesof Algeria, Botswana,Guinea, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal,Togo, Tunisia and Viet Nam to take the
placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria),
Mr. Tlou (Botswana), Mr. Cumara (Guinea), Mr. Garba
(Nigeria), Mr. Baroody (Suudi Arabia), Mr. Kamara (Senegal), Mr. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. Mcstiri (Tunisia) and
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi, (Met Nam) took the placesreservedfor
them at the sideof the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform membersof
the Council that I have receivedletters from the reprcsentatives of Guyana, Lesotho, the Niger and the United
Republic of Cameroon in which they have requestedthat
they should be invited to participate in the discussionof
the question on the agenda. In accordancewith the usual
practice. I propose, with the consent of the Council, to

MEETING
26 October

1977, at 3.30 p.m.

invite those representativesto participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table. I invite the representativesof Guyana,
Lesotho, the Niger and the United Republic of Cameroon
to take the places reserved for them at the sideof the
Council chamberon the usualunderstandingthat they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when they
wish to addressthe Council.
At the invitation of the President,Mr, Jackson(Guyana),
Mr. Molapo (Lesotho), Mr. Poisson(Niger) and Mr. Ovono
(United Republic oj’ Cameroon)took the placesreserved
for them at the sideof the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: Membersof the Council havebefore
them the revised texts of the four draft resolutions
sponsored by the delegationsof Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius in documents S/12309/Rev.l,
S/12310/Rev.l, S/12311/Rcv.l and S/12312/Rev.l. At a
later stage in our proceedings, I shall call upon the
representativeof Mauritius to introduce thesedrafts.
5. Mr. RIOS (Panama)(interpretation jiom Spanish):At
the request of Ambassador Mestiri of Tunisia and the
representativeof Sri Lanka, AmbassadorAmcrasinghe,and
becauseof the prcssurcof the international community, the
Security Council
is meeting once again as the supreme
organ for the maintetiancc of international peace and
security in order to adopt measuresfollowing the resurgenceof the violence upon which the racist Pretoria
r@gimehasembarked with unprecedentedvirulenceagainst
the native population of southern Africa. The information
media which appealedfor conciliation or demanded
justice
have, in a surprisemove, been closedand their publishers
threatened or gaoled. Faced with such outrages,even the
traditional friends of South Africa have been forced to
think seriously about the gravity of the problem.There is
every indication that they will no longer remainunmoved
witnessesof the African tragedy. Some have recalledtheir
ambassadorsfor consultation in a pathetic gesture of
repudiation of the out ragesof unleashedracism.
6. It is a most interesting coincidence that, under the
guidance of a representative of India, we are once more
going to consider, at one of its critical stages,the question
of South Africa. It was the immigrants from India who,
under the leadership of the venerable Mahatma Gandhi,
raised for the first time the flag of rebellion againstthe

revolting practices of discrimination in South Africa.
Today, when racism, fearful and beleaguered, resorts to the
most reprehensible excesses, the descendants of those who
rose up with Mahatma Gandhi together with their African
brothers to face terror, are there determined to give even
their lives in exchange for the right of their children to be
truly free.

which are representedin the Council--to exercise,honestly
and with the utmost seriousness,
their
influence on those
who governSouth Africa so that they tnay seethe light of
reasonandtry to find the way to proceed, without delay,
towards a majority Government that will assurefundamentalfreedomsfor the people.They had better do it soon
beforeit istoo late.

7. Men and women throughout the world were disturbed
and justly indignant at this new outbreak of aggression
against human rights and fundamental freedoms on the part
of the arrogant racists. The matter has become so grave that
there is no longer room for palliatives or partial solutions.
The Council has only one course before it, which is none
other than to adopt energetic measures that will put an end
once and for all to the killings and torture that have
become institutionalized under the apart/& Government
headed by Vorster.

12. We do not wish to dwell on a lengthy enumerationof
the crimescommitted by the apartheid system;they are all
so well known that to repeat them would not serve any
purpose.I repeat that we are certain that the time for
speeches
and lengthy expositionson this distressingsubject
is running out; in other words, the time for decisionshas
come,and the delegationof Panamais ableto support any
proposalfor arriving at those decisionsand particularly for
implementingthetn faithfully.

8. We have listened most carefully to the statements made
before the Council by the representative of Tunisia on
behalf of the Organisation of African Unity [203&h
meeting], by Mr. Sibeko,representative
of the PanAfricanist Congress[ibid./,
and by other outstandingsonsof
Africa. They have all 1nadea dramaticappealthat cannot
be left without an adequateresponse
by the Council.From
what they have said, the conviction clearly emergesthat
any hesitationor abstentionwouldonly serveto encourage
the fanatics among the white minority of South Africa to
strengthentheir repressivemeasures
and further jeopardize
peacenot only in Africa but throughout the world. As we
see it, the time for makingamendsis past. Now we must
apply just measures
to healthe openwoundsof the African
people that are the resultof 1norethan 300 yearsof foreign
and colonialdomination.

13. I concludethis brief statementby categorically stating
that the Governmentand peopleof Panama,in a gestureof
brotherhood, support the 20 million victims of apartheid
and encouragethem to continue the struggle in the
certainty that victory is not far Off.
14. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Guinea.1 invite him to take a placeat the Council
tableandto makehis statement.
1.5. Mr. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpretation
fkom French):
My statement this afternoon on southern Africa will be
brief becausealmosteverything hasalready been said, and
saidrepeatedly,on this burning andtopical question.

16. This month of October, which coincides with the
anniversaryof the birth of the venerableMahatmaGandhi,
is markedalso by the accessionto the presidency of the
9. For years, the Security Council hasbeen meetingto
Security Council of the representativeof India, a friendly
find formulasthat would per1nitusto arrive at a solutionof
country which. itnmcdiately upon its admissionto memberthe South African problem.Resolutions
havebeenadopted ship in the United Nations, sawto it that the question of
which exppressenergeticcondemnationof the racistregime apartheid
was placed on the agenda of the General
and support of the victims of violence and oppression. Assctnbly.While addressing
to you, Sir, our congratulations
Those resolutionsdemandthat an end mustbe put to the
on this happy distinction, we shouldalsolike to expressour
crimesbeing committed daily againstthe native population
satisfactionat the Friendly and fraternal relations existing
both in South Africa and in the usurpedTerritory of
betweenyour greatcountry andthe Republicof Guinea.
Namibia. Those resolutionshave alsoexpressedthe most
energetic repudiation of the policy of bantustanization 17. The past year has marked a decisive stage in the
which, as is known, is no 1norethan a subterfuge,a trick, a
history of South Africa, where, sincethe Soweto massacre
vain attempt of the mastersof apartheid to emasculatethe
on 16 June, resistanceon the part of the peoplehasspread
rebellionof the African people.
throughout the country,

10. As will be seen,the Governmentof the white minority
in South Africa hasturned a deaf ear to United Nations
demands.It has not merely disregardedthe organisation’s
appealto return to commonsense,it haseven mockedthat
appeal. Instead, its tyranny has becomemore iron-willed,
more abusive and 1nore bloody. Students. newspaper
reporters. f&mers. children. men and women have been
victims of this racial madness
which criesout to be halted
by whatevermeans.
11. It has rightly often beensaidthat the South African
regimeonly exists because
of the assistance
it receivesfrom
other Powers,particularly in the economicfield. That is
why 1 venture to make a pressingappealto Governments
which maintain closerelationswith South Africa-some of
2

18. Although it is at bay and incapableof ordering its
affairs or of maintaining peace and security, the South
African rCgime has never ceasedto commit the most
barbarous acts of aggressionagainst the neighbouring
African countries while mercilessly crushing the black
populations which have been reduced to the wretched
statusof slaveswho can be exploited at will. But history
teachesus that a man who exploits another, a man who
oppresses
his fellow, can never be a free man and that the
1norethe oppressivetnachincry of the apartheid r6gimeis
strengthened,the tnore terrible the angerof the peoplewill
be. Thus, in peacefuldemonstrationafter peaceful demonstration, the fraternal peopleof South Africa hasdrawn the
attention of world opinion to the hateful crimes daily
perpetrated against it. As at Sharpevitle, the peaceful

resistance of the children of So.weto was met by Vorster’s
henchmen with indescribable violence.

26. The PRESIDENT:
1 thank the representative of
Guinea for the kind words he addressed ‘to me and my
country. It was very nice of him, indeed, to have recalled
the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, which fell on
2 October of this month.

19. In 1977, deeply concerned at the situation in southern
Africa and particularly in Azania, the Security Council met
to consider what measures should be taken to restore peace
and justice in that sorely tried region of our continent. In
March, confronted by the determination of certain of its
members, and not the least important among them, the
Council allowed itself a period for reflection of over seven
months. The proponents of apartheid have taken advantage
of this breathing space to engage in savage and increasingly
murderous practices. In view of the thousands of innocent
victims of this discredited regime, which is prepared to
listen only to the voice of violence, if the Council were to
show the slightest hesitation in shouldering its responsibility, world peace itself would be jeopardized.

27. The next speaker is the representative of Guyana. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement,
28. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, let me first of
all express the thanks and gratitude of my delegation to the
members of the Council for allowing me to participate in
this debate on the situation in South Africa. I wish also to
say how pleased my delegation is to see you, presiding over
these debates. For, among other things, it was your
country, India, which, as far back as 1946, first raised in
the United Nations the reprehensible character of the
conduct of South Africa. We are confident that in your
superintendence of the work of the Council during the
month of October, the exercise of your responsibilities will
be informed by the attributes of geniality, of wisdom, of
tact and of diplomatic skill with which you are SO
generously blessed. We are confident as well that your own
commitment to pursue what is right and what is just will
make its mark on the decisions which the Council will
adopt at the conclusion of these debates.

20. My country, the Republic of Guinea, has always
denounced the South African rCgime and my delegation has
never ceased to advocate immediate energetic action by the
Council, for Vorster is daily demonstrating that he is not
prepared to heed his Western allies, and far less the United
Nations.
71. Confroiited with this arrogance of the Pretoria GOVernmcnt, we approve the following measures: an arms
embargo, an oil embargo, the breaking off OF all forms of
co-operation with that hateful rCgime.

29. As everyone knOWs,
the United Nations has been
concerned with the phenomenon of apartheid for a
generation. During that period, the archives of the Organization have accumulated years of documents and resolutions which chronicle the activities of the apar?heid rigime
at Pretoria and which contain the conclusions and decisions
of the Organization. Those documents, those resolutions,
those decisions, reflect the abhorrence of peoples the world
over of apartheid Many have been the entreaties and
exhortations to the South African rBgime to mend its ways.
Many have been the condemnations of its actions.
Suffice
it
to say that the reaction of the racists at Pretoria has been
arrogant an? brutish. The response has always been the
ruthless repression of the voices within South Africa raised
against oppression and clamouring for freedom. and the
contumacious defiance of the Organization by the apurtheid rCgime.

12. My delegation unconditionally supports the proposals
contained in the draft resolutions submitted to the Council
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius. We
regard these measures as a minimum to be given to the
martyred populations of southern Africa, where the black
man is reduced to the status of a beast of burden in his own
country by cynical usurpers and is deprived of all rights.
23. The countries opposed to armed struggle now see that
option vindicated, for it is the only way of avenging the
victims of apartheid and restoring the black man of South
Africa Lo the freedom and dignity wrongfully confiscated
by the assassins of Pretoria.
24. Thus, while vigorously condemning the racist rCgimc
of South Africa for the massive repression and for the acts
of violence perpetrated against the African populations of
the region, my delegation reiterates its entire support for
the provisions in draft resolutions S/l 2309, S/12310,
S/ 123 11 and S/l 23 12 of 79 March 1977, which were issued
today in a revised version, My Government hopes that the
members of the Council will heed the appeal of the world
community, so that freedom, equality and juslicc may at
last triumph in South Africa and that the true sons of that
country may regain their inalienable rights.

30. Three years ago, in October 1974, the Council
conducted a thoroughgoing debate on the future relationships of South Africa with the United Nations. The Council
was unable to take a decision as three vetoes were cast: by
France, by the United Kingdom and by the United States. I
do not recall those debates now in order to reactivate the
proposal then made for the expulsion of South Africa. I
recall them really in an effort to recapture the mood
prevailing at that time and to review some positions then
heid concerning the dynamics for change in racist South
Africa. For I believe that such an analysis, enriched by a
perceptive appreciation of subsequent developments and
the interplay of forces which those developments encompass, can usefully inform the Council as to the option for
action which it can and should exercise under the provisions of the Charter.

25. The responsibility for safeguarding world peace and
security, which is the very reason for existence of the
Security Council, must be shouldered with courage and
determination. No consideration, of an economy or any
other nature, must stand in the way of the adoption and
strict implementation of measures to safeguard world
peace.

31. Speaking in the Council on 24 October 1974/1800/h
meeting], the representative of the racist minority clique,
3

now holding a so-called portfolio for foreign affairs, said
inter din: “We shall do everything in our power to move
away from discrimination
based on race or colour”.
Subsequently Vorster, the racist Icader of that clique,
pointedly emitted hints of impending changes when he
said: “If South Africa is given [a] chance, Ithe critics1 will
be surprised at where the country will stand in six to twelve
months time”.

Africa. On 24 October, lie himselfimplied that the South
African Government was respondingnot in a vacuum but
in reaction to world events, not the least of which has
been the condemnation of South Africa’s uPflrt/tc’iLl atld
Natnibian and Rhodesianpolicieswithin this iI~hmti()~~~~l
Organization.”
Later in his speech, iti arguing against exi~ulsiot~ as a
desirablemeansof securingthe compliance of the I’returia
rdgitne with United Nations resolutions. AmbassadorS~tli
said:

31. Within the Council at that titnc there were members
who viewed those effusions with sotnc degree of optimism.
The then representative of France, now Minister for
1:oreigti Affairs, said /180&h rllceting/.

“My Government believesthat this kind of all-or-tiothing
approachwould be a major strategicmistake, cspecinlly at
a time when we at-ehearing what may be new voices of
conciliation out of South Africa. Thesenew voices shc~~tkl
be tested.”

‘I . . our world is developingand the situation of Africa

is developing. It has changed since last year in the
imntediatc vicinity of southern Africa. There are new
factors appearingand those wlto are stubbornly opposed
to changemust take them into account. Perhapsthey are
doing so already, and perhapsthey tnay be led to do so
through our unanimousimpatience.”

3.5. Thus, three yearsago, expectations were harboured by
somemembers of the international community, including
somepermanent membersof the Council, that the tnjoritY
expressionof abhorrence of aprtkicl,
that the pressure of
condemnation by the United Nations, that a system of
voluntary arms embargo, and that the assertionsol‘ good
intentions by spokesmenon behalf of the Vorster regime
would induce a change in the policies of the Pretoria
rkgime.

33. AmbassadorIvor Richard of the United Kingdom also
spoke on this aspectof the question. In giving a reasonfat
his C;overttment’s stand against the expulsion of South
Africa, hesaid/ibid./:
“It would tnake it difficult, if not impossible,for the
Organiiiation to explore and exploit the recent statements
made both hereand in South Africa which hold OLI t some
hope of changein the right direction ”

36. More recently, in March of this year, the Security
Council debated the situation in South Africa. 7’110s~
debates were, it is true. inconclusive. Ycl there was a
residual mood of optimism in sortie quarters tllilt scltllc
changeswould be cvidcnt. There should not there cannot---be tnany today who stilt feel such a mood. The rcccttt
severe repressive actions of the Vorster rEgime should
shatter the confidence of even the most ardent faithful.

Later in hisstatctncnt, AmbassadorRichard had this -to say:
“In the statement we heard from the representative 01
South Africa on 24 October, we were told or progress
towards ending racial discritnina~ion. WC were give11to
expect more progress.”

37. Viewed objectively, the immediate reasons which
causeus to be here today are but a part of ;t continuum.
For, in 19h0, Sharpcvitte etched itself cntdcly in the pqges
of history as an episode of the inhumane limits of
apartheid; and Soweto, in 1976,dernonstratcd the fortitude
and determination of the young to breach and dismantle
the fortifications ofapartheid.

AtnbassadorRichard then spoke of LheGgime’sattitude to
two other questions which pedli3pS
concern us only
tangentially at this stage. Iti referring to hints given
concerningthose questions,AmbassadorRichard said:
“‘Let those promisesbe redeemed; let the hopes then
arousedbe Fulfilled: let South Africa fit its actions to its
words. The time is very late: but in our view, it is not too
late.”

3X. The recent actions of the minority rdgime at Pretoria
aimed at frustrating the forces for freedom in South Africa
therefore represent only
the latest manifestation of aportheid and the extent to which that rCgimeis prepared to go
to sustain that system. For the white tribe in South Africa.
which has ctnbraced that belief system, has equipped itself
with mechanismsdesignedto perpetuate the structure of
apnrtheid.
Whatever else apartheid
is, it is not, as its
followers proclaim, separatedevelopment. It is, itt reaiity,
the advance and development of the whites and the
suppressionof everyone else.It is a seriousattempt at the
institutionalization of white domination in South Africa.

Finally, in conveying the reluctance with wliich his Govertrtnent decided to oppose the proposal for expulsion.
AmbassadorRichardsaid:
“In so doing we are giving South Africa a further
opportunity of putting its afi‘airs in order. I hope it will
recognize the weight of international opinion that is
opposedto its policies, I hope it will heed the voices we
have all heard in this chatnber. I trust it will act
accordingly.”

39. Guyana believes that a period or three years, when
taken in conjunction with the flow of events since,is more
than sufficient time in which to test those “new voices”
which some heard in October 1974. Nor does C;uyana
believe that, although the time was very iate in Octobet
1974, it is still, in October 1977, “not too late”. Further.

34. On his part, AmbassadorScali, speakingon behalf of
the United States, observed/ibid./:
“We are heartened, indeed, by someencouragingwords
in this chamber voiced by the representative of South
4

countries, held in London in June of this year, headsof
Government recognizedthat South Africa played a central
role in perpetuating the problemsof southernAfrica. They
expressedtheir deep concernat the increasingdanger to
international peace and security which had arisen, inter
&a, from the continuing intransigence of the racist
minority rdgimein South Africa.

Guyana does not believe that, after three years, “our
unanimous inipaticnce”. of which the former representative
of France, Ambassador de tiuiringaud, spoke so eloquently,
has not flagged.
40. New voices are indeed being heard within Azania.
They are not, as my delegation sees it, however, the same
voices as those identified by Ambassador Scali in October
1974. The voices we hear today arc those of the young
black people of that unhappy land. Some, like Steve Biko,
have been silenced for ever. But there are many more in
continuous resonance passing the messages of freedom one
to the other. Linked together. those voices illuminate the
real path to freedom. In unison, those voices form the
unshakeable guarantee for the recovery of the dignity of the
oppressed masses in Azania.

Apartheid
standsuniversally condemned; no one-apart from the raciststhemselves--defends
it, The critical
question is what effective action the Security Council
should take to hastenthe dismantlementof the apparatus
of apartheid,
a result which isdesiredby the overwhelming
majority of the people of South ‘Africa and the international community. Thus, the Council is today faced with
a grave responsibility: it is to decidewhat action it can best
take at this moment that would advance the causeof
freedom in South Africa.
45.

41. As I said in the debate on Namibia in the General
Assembly a week ago:
‘I
. . racists never undergo self-induced change. History
has attested to this verity no less within societies than in
relations which extend beyond national
boundaries.
Those who practise racism have to be pressured inlo
accommodating to change.“1

46. In the final analysis,it is the people of Azania who
will wrest their freedom from the racists and who will ’
recover their dignity. The task is essentially theirs. The
membersof the internationalcommunity, individually and
collectively, mustdischargetheir obligationsto put pressure
on the Pretoria rCgimeand isolateit, and, in that regard,the
Council must act decisively.It shouldno longerdefer to the
“whitemail” of South Africa; nor indeedis a commitment
to be committed enough.

Change in South Africa will come about when, in support
of the struggle by the oppressed people of Azania.
unrelenting pressure is exerted on Pretoria in all fields:
moral, political, military and economic.

47. In a display of courageto decideand commitmentto
act, the Security Council excrciscdits authority in 1968
when it invoked the provisionsof Chapter VII of the
Charter in applying mandatory sanctionsagainstSouthern
Rhodesia-Zimbabwe. Today the Council is faced with an
even graver situation in South Africa. It should no longer
equivocate; it should no longerhesitateat the door which
leadsto decisive action. Guyana callsfor the application of
mandatory sanctionsagainstSouthAfrica.

42. Over the years, concernedcitizens, non-governmental
organisations,individual States Members of the United
Nationsand all those who form part of the pan-hfricanist
movementhave been active in this regard. Their persistent
work has contributed significantly to the unfolding of the
true dimensionsof apartheid and their dedicated efforts
haveassistedin the creation of a widespreadand appreciative public opinion fully committed to the eradication of
the evil and abhorrent system that isapartheid. Above all,
their basichumanisticconcerns,rooted in moral conviction,
havegiven suchcitizens, groupsand Statesa finely focused
perceptionof the remediesto be taken, remedieswhich are
asncccssaryasthey are appropriate.

48. Many peoples with representativesat the United
Nations are working resolutely for the early attainment of
such an objective. People all over the world desiresuch
action-not least among them are those of the black
diaspora.

43. The non-aligned movement, side by side with the
Organizationof African Unity, has beenin the forefront in
pointing the way to correct solutions to the tragedy which
the racistsin South Africa hove imposedon the oppressed
peopleof that country and to the challengewhich those
racistshave thrown down to the international community
At the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Coordinating Bureauof Non-Aligned Countries at New Delhi,
the capital of your own country, Mr. President,we reaffirmed our full support to the people of Azania and
reiterated our oft-expressed conviction that the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular. should
utilize all the meansat its disposalto bring the South
African raciststo heel.

49. The questionsof freedom and human dignity have
been part of the international agendafor a long time.
Guyana hopesthat the decisionthe Council will take on the
issueof South Africa will be informed by the example of
dedicated individuals and the actionsof mature statesmen
who chooseno other coursethan that which pursuesjustice
and that which requirescouragefoundedon conviction.
SO. When the history of this period is written, the
achievements of those people who have fought for and
stood steadfastly by principleswill be recorded no less
accurately than those who haveabandonedthoseprinciples
on the altar of short-termneeds.

44. There have been other collective expressionsof sup
port. At the Summit meeting of the Commonwealth

51. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the rcpresentative of Lesotho. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehis statement.

1 Official
Records
of’ the General Assernhly,
sion, Plenary Meetings,
36thrtlccting,para.37.

51,. Mr. MOLAPO (Lesotho): Once again this august
Council is discussingthe malignantcancer of apartheid

Thirty-second

Ses-

5

1939. Let the Council make sure that this same irrationality
does not plunge the world into another war.

South Africa, which gnaws at the basic fabric of the United
Nations; a disease which has up to now defied the remedies
of the basic principles enshrined in the Charter and the
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. It is not to0 late t0 perform radical
surgery to rid this Organization and the Todd
community
of this cancerous growth, Now is the time that the Council
should squarely
shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter and adopt measures that will ensure the death and
burial for ever of the inhuman and debased apartheid
system. It is this apartheid system which faces the
Orgdnization with a situation of racial confrontation and
bloodshed in South Africa.

58. Over 30 years ago, the attention of the United Nations
was drawn to the effects of this obnoxious ideology of
apartheid when hundreds of thousands of South Africans
were banished from colleges and universities under the
detested Bantu Education Act. The effects of that law arc
the current situation in Soweto, Mamclodi, Langa and other
places in South Africa. And a direct effect of Langa,
Soweto and Mamelodi is the influx into Lesotho of
students fleeing repressive laws. Lesotho has always welcomed the role it plays in this respect.

53. It is perhaps fate that has destined YOU, Mr. President,
a great son of India, to preside over this very important and
historic meeting. It was your great leader, Mahatma Gandhi,
who first led an organized opposition to the apartheld and
racial discrimination of South Africa. It is India, your great
country, which has been in the forefront of the fight for
respect of basic human rights in South Africa; indeed, it
was Indja which raised the question of u~artheid and racial
discrimination at the United Nations. WC should like to
extend to you oqr sincere’congratulations on seeing you
preside over the current deliberations of the Council. We
are confident that your background and your well-known
diplomatic skills will enable you to guide these deliberations to a successful and effective conclusion.

SC). During the same period, South Africa went ahead with
its primitive experiment of physically, morally and emotionally separating the peoples of South Africa into
bantustans. During this period, when practical apartheid
was forcefully applied with solemn and definite ruthlessness, South Africa has never breathed freely. Thousands
of men and women have spent their lives in the nightmarish
prisons of South Africa, fearful that like Steve Biko and
others, the strong-armed Boss would batter them to death.
WC in Lesotho, whose task and responsibility during this
entire period have been to act as wakeful witnesses to this
monstrous system, have become heirs of all that spiritual
strength, human dignity and political morality which has
been fostered by our resolve to fight against that
monstrosity.

54. We should like to thank you, Mr. President, and
through you the other members of the Council for allowing
my delegation to participate in this debate.

60. It is my Government’s view that the past 30 years of
persuasion, encouragement and even cajoling on the part of
the Organization must now be viewed in the current
perspective of the developments in South Africa. The most
basic condition for all political life in South Africa is that
the African majority must now have their fundamental and
inalienable rights of freedom of speech, religion, movement
and assembly as all free men have in their own countries.

55. The military, political and emotional cross-currents
now sweeping across South AFrica are an echo of the salient
and shrill wailing of this era’s greatest human tragedy. The
era 1 refer to is that of the United Nations. The wailing I
refer to is that of 22 million South Africans, which has
echoed inside and outside the walls of this most imposing
institution during the past 20 years. The tragedy now
glaring the Council in the eyes is that South Africa is seized
with desperate irrationality. determined as it is to cause
more misery, more bloodshed, more social and political
instability than already exists. The echo is salient and shrill
because the problems of racism and aparfheid have been
brought to the United Nations with ever-increasing urgency
and frequency for the past 30 years.

61. In the past 11 years, since Lesotho has been a Member
of the Organization, it has been Lesotho’s constant wish to
arouse and to sensitize the international community to the
dangers posed by racism and apartheid.
62. The present clamp-down on black opposition elements
in South Africa must be seen in the broader context of the
grand scheme of the South African Government to stampede the Asian and Coloured populations in that country
into the mainstream of the laager mentality of the South
African National Party. The Pretoria regime has taken those
drastic steps as a new platform on which Mr. Vorster plans
to seek the mandate of the white electorate to carry out his
design to revise the Constitution of South Africa so as to
grant token political rights to the Asian and Coloured
populations, thus undercutting their contribution to the
resistance movement.

56. The Government of Lesotho wishes to remind every
member of the Council that the United Nations was
founded and built on the ruins of a war triggered by men
subject to the same kind of illusions and irrationality as
now characterize the leadership of the racist rCgime in
South Africa. The irrationality and illusions of that
minority lie in the belief that 22 million South Africans
must be condemned to prison without trial, massacred and
murdered in cold blood, denied their basic human rights
and forcibly uprooted from their homes to live in desolate
reserves called bantustans.

63. Even under the new constitutional arrangements,
whites in South Africa will still wield the preponderant
power, white blacks are relegated to impoverished homelands which will serve as reservoirs of cheap labour. The
harsh measures taken by the South African rdgime are only
a signal for worse things to come. Mr. Vorster is now
seeking the mandate of his white electorate to challenge the

57. The actions of that frightened minority, buttressed as
they are by a twisted religious, historical and economic
ideology of sorts, are in many respects similar to those of
the irrational clique that plunged the world into a war in
6

United Nations, flout its resolutions and impose more
ruthless measures on the already oppressed black majority.

action by the international community againstSouth Africa
would not affect usany less.

64. The black people of South Africa have suffered for
years under the twin historical anachronisms of racial
superiority and minority oppression. My Government
warned the international community years ago that the
diminishing chances for a peaceful solution of the problem
of aparfheid would usher in a new era of racial confrontation and bloodshed.

69. Two myths are often advancedby the South African
Government and by apologistsfor its barbaric policiesin an
attempt either to justify thosepoliciesor to thwart punitive
action by the international community against racial
discrimination.
70. The first of these myths comes from the South
African Government itself. According to this myth, South
Africa is portrayed as the last bastion of Westerndemocracy and the “free world’s” last standagainstthe encroachment of “communism” on the continent of Africa. Under
normal circumstances,we would have simply chosen to
ignore and dismissSouth Africa’s proselytizing attempts as
the idle musingsof sick minds;but unfortunately the South
African Government doesstem to have succeeded,albeit
partialIy, in making the Westernworld bclicve that there is
a “communist” scarein that continent.

65. Recent provocative actions of South Africa--namely,
the murdering of prisoners like Biko, the imprisonment of
Qoboza and 50 other African leaders and the banning of
black organizations and black newspapers--are goading the
Security Council and the international community into
taking some punitive action against the South African
@ime. It is unfortunate that the world community has
allowed the present racist minority leadership at Pretoria in
its arrogance and intransigence to call down upon itself and
the innocent people of South Africa this painful course of
action. It is also unfortunate that, by those actions, South
Africa is technically passing on the effects of whatever
action the Council will recommend to independent African
countries in the region, countries such as my own, Lesotho.
66. It is, however, important for the Council to be
mindful of the fact that my Prime Minister, Mr. Leabua
Jonathan, as long ago as 1972, warned that, unless a
negotiated and peaceful solution of the problems of South
African apartheid and racial discrimination was pursued
with the urgency it deserved,the world would have to face
a drastic and dangeroussituation in which violence would
be resorted to. We are all witnessto the fact that it is the
South African r&me, and nut the black oppressedmasses
of South Africa, which has intensified its resort to more
concerted and brutal violence againstSouth
Africans. It is
those masseswhich are being forced to take up arms in
self-defence.Whenever a veto is cast by orle of the
permanent members of the Security Council on the
question of South Africa, the racist rbgime and its
collaboratorssingand make merry, becausea veto to them
is an approval and an endorsementof the upartheid racist
policiesof South Africa.
67. South Africa portrays itself as a beleagueredcountry
up againsta world of hostilenations all poisedto strike at it
at the first available opportunity. Recent happenings,
however, reveal that quite the contrary is the case.What we
seeis a country determined to violate every single moral
principle that guides and is held sacred by all civilized
societies. No, the world is not out Loget South Africa; it is
South Africa which is saying“to hell with the rest of the
world”.
68. The problem posedby aparfhcitl may be an academic
one to somemembersof the Council, but to us in Lesotho
it is a very real one indeed.Each time there is a massacre
in
South Africa, be it in Carletonville, Sharpevilleor Soweto,
we in Lesotho must update our statisticson widows and
orphan children: we must tlig a few more graves.Becauseof
our geographiclocation, hardly any economic or political
decision can be made in South Africa which does not
directly or indirectly affect us. Needlessto add, any joint

71. To those whose credulity South Africa has taken
advantageof we need only point out who thesesupposed
Communistsare. They include thosechildren of 8 and 9
that were so brutally gunned down in Soweto; they even
include such organizationsas The Christian Institute of
Southern Africa. Need we remind you that the South
African Government would even have us believe that
communism enjoys the support of a few United States
congressmenwho are bent on the destruction of that
country?
72. The second myth can be attributed to apartheid’s
apologistswho in one breath condemnthe system,yet in
another say corrective actionswould be counterproductive
becausethe victims of apartheid would be the hardesthit.
Nothing could be farther from the truth. The people of
South Africa live with sufferingevery day of their Iives and
would certainly withstand a little more in order to rid
themselves,once and for all, of the evil of apartheid. These
apologistshate npartheid but love the profits which accrue
to them as a result of the system.Yes, they are very much
like people who love to eat meat but cannot stomachthe
view of the slaughter.
73. It is my delegation’s hope that the Council, in
formulating its final decisionon this issue, will not allow
itself to be misguidedby thesestunts.
74. Mr, RAMPHUL [Mauritius): Before I go into the four
draft resolutions, I should like, on behalf of my African
colleagueson the Security Council,to requestformally that
the text of the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid
should be circulated asan official document of
the Council, I shall await your decision, Mr. President,
before I proceed.
75. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Mauritius has
proposedthat the text of the LagosDeclaration for Action
againstApartheid shouldbe circulatedasa document of the
Security Council. As there is no objection, we decide
accordingly(seeS/l 24261.
76. Mr. IIAMIVIUL (Mauritius): I amgrateful to members
of the Council for havingaccededto my request.

7

77. Mr. I’resident, once again I should like to postpone my
compliments to the presidency to a more appropriate
occasion when I shall no doubt be making a substantive
statement on the issue under consideration.
78. At this stage, I only wish to remind members that the
Council remains seized of the four draft resolutions which
were submitted jointly by Mauritius and my African
colleagues on the Council, namely, Benin and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, on 29 March 1977 and which are
contained in documents S/ 12309 to S/l 2312. We all know
in what circumstances those four drafts were not put to a
vote at that time, Today, some seven months later. we, the
African members of the Council, have updated the four
drafts. I shall now proceed to draw the attention of
members of the Council to the revised texts of those drafts,
which have been circulated as documents S/l2309/Rev.l
to
S/12312/Kev.l.
79. 1 shall first refer members to document S/l 23091
Rev.1. We have added some words to the third prcarnbular
paragraph. The new paragraph reads as follows:
“Gravely concenzed over reports of torture of political
prisoners and the deaths of a number of detainees,“--and
this is where we have added some words-“as
well as the
mounting wave of repression against individuals, organizations and the news media since 19 October 1977”.
Regarding operative paragraph 3, we have added a new
subparagraph (I, which reads as follows:
“Abrogate the bans on organisations
media opposed to apartheid”.

and the news

In the last operative paragraph, paragraph 6, the date has
been changed and now reads “I 7 February 1978”.
80. As regards draft resolution S/l 23 1O/Rev.l, there is a
minor updating here in operative paragraph 4, where the
new date is “17 February 1978”.
81. I now refer to document S/1731 l/Rev.l. We have
added two preambular paragraphs. ai’ter the fourth paragraph. The first new paragraph reads as follows:
“Taking note of the Lagos Declaration
against apartheid”.

manufacture and maintenanceof arms,ammunition of all
types and military equipment andvehicles”.
The other paragraphs,of course,will be renumbered. 111the
new paragraph4, the date will now read “1 April 19’7%
and, in the new paragraph5, “1 May 1978”.
82. I now refer to document S/l231 ?/Rev.l. Operative
paragraph 1 a is somewhat changed;we have added the
words “or any export and import credits”. Thus. the whole
subparagraphreadsasfollows:
“To refrain from any investmentsin, loans 10, or any
export and import credits to the South African racist
regimeor companicsregisteredin South Africa”.
There is a change of date in operative paragraph3 and it
now reads“1 April 1978”. There isalsoa changeof date in
paragraph4 which now refersto “1 May 1978”.
X3. Those are all the changesand updating WChave carried
out.
84. It is the wish of the African membersof the Council
that thesefour draft resolutionsshould be put to a vote iIS
early as possible,preferably tomorrow morning.
85. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers.I have
heard what the representativeof Mauritius has said,that his
preferenceis for a vote tomorrow morning. My preference
is otherwise becauseI do not think all .the membersof the
Council have yet had an opportunity to speak. There arc
alsosomenon-membersof the Council who have expressed
their desireto speak. As membersare aware, the Council,
us
previously agreed,will take up the question of the exercise
by the Palestinianpeople of its inalienablerights tomorrow
afternoon. So my own inclination would be not to have a
meeting tomorrow morning in order that members may
have an opportunity to engagein informal consultations on
the draft resolutions now submitted and any other proposalsthey may have.
86. If‘ this is generally acceptable we shall not meet
tomorrow morning, but we shallmeet tomorrow afternoon
at 3 p.m. as previously agreedand the next meetingof the
Council to continue considerationol‘the question of South
Africa will be un Friday at 10.30a.m.

for Action

The second new preambular paragraph immediately follows
the one I have just read. I reads:
“~LZVdJ~
cmccrned that South Africa is at the threshold of producingnuclearweapons”.

We have added a new operative paragraph2. lt reads as
follows:
“CM~ uporz all States to take measuresto revoke
contractual arrangementswith South Africa and all
existing licencesgranted to South
Africa relating to the

87. Mr. I<AMPMUL (Mauritius): Mr. President. tlrc African
membersof the Council will, I am sure,want to co-operate
with you but, since you mentionedthat somemembersof
the Council had not yet spokenand that there might be
consultations, are you in a position to inform us whether
you have received any indication whether other membersof
the Council will be speaking or whether they will bc
consulting with African members‘?
88. The PRESIDENT: My information is that there will be
some speakers on Friday morning; three have already
inscribedtheir namesand I expect more.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unitv I Nations
publications
throughout
the worltl.
Consult
Section. New York or Genevn.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PIJBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your
bookstow

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
hookstores
and distributors
write
lo: IJnited
Nations.
Sales

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Units
sent en vente
dam les librairies
d6positaires
du montlc entier. Informs-vous
auprh
de votre libraire
P : Nations
Unies. Section rles ventes. New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

IJNIES
et Ic-s agenccs
011 ;~drcss~~-~~~~

UNIDAS

pubiicnciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidns
esl;in en vrntn
en librerias
buidarns
en todas partcs de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su lihrero
o dirijase
Unidas.
SccciBn de Vcnlas.
Nuevn York o Ginebra.
Las

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

y casas distria: Narionrs

77-70001-October

1978--2,200

I
