UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YR4.R

No. 24

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 24

FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIRST MEETING

QUATRE CENT VINGT ET UNIEME
SEANCE

Htld at Lalu Success, New Yot"k,

Tt>1'I.Ue a Lake Sucuss, New-York,
le mercredi 23 mars 1949, a 15 };c1wes.

Wednllsday. 23 lMarch 1949, at 3 p.rn.

President: Mr, A

A:'VAREZ

(Cuba).

Pr/?Sm:: Tle represen~atives of the following
cmmtries: Argentina, Canada, Cb inn, Cuba,
Egypt, F,anc~, Nc,rway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, :..TniO:1 of Soviet Soc.iaJ:~t Repdo:ics,
United KiJ:gdol11, Uni:c~ Sh_les of Amf'rb.l.

1. PrQvisional agenda (5/Agenda 421)

President: M. A. ALVAliEZ (Cuba).
Preseltes: Lc!! rC!Jrc5entants d~3 pays sllivants ~
Argentine, Car.aclfi, Chine, Cllbn, Egrpte,
France, N orv;'g~, Repl1l.Jlique socialiste sovietique dUn'aine, Union des Re.publiques soc.ialistes sovietiqnes, Royaume-Uni Etats-UIlis

d'Ame.r~que,

J

1. Ordre du jour prQvieoire

(S!Agenda 421)
l. Adopt1()O of the ag,enda.

1. Adoptlon de l'orclre da ;aur.

2. The :Lndonesian question:

2. La question indonesienne:

:a) Report elated 1 MarC~l 1949 from the

:Jnited Nations Commissioll for Indouejia i.n accGrdance with the SeC:llrity

Ccunci: resoltlti::m of 28 January 1949
(Sj1270 and S/1270/Corr.1);
Cb) Lette.r dated 2 MHrcn 1949 from the re[Jn:~ent::Jtiye of the Nethe:1ands to the
President of th Security Council concerning the Couned's :'eso1ution of
28 January 1949011 the ImlU:lesian question (5jI274);

(cl Supplementary report

dated 7 March
1949 from the United Na:ioJls Commission br Indonesia submitted in accordance wi:h the CO".1I1cil's r~scl\1tion of
28 January 1949 (Sj1270jAdd.l and

S/1270/Corr.1) ;
( d) Second .>11pplcmentary report dated
10 March 1949 from the Ul1ited Nations
Commission for Indonesia submitted in
accordance with th~ Cour:dl's resolution
of 28 Janua:'Y 1949 (S/1270jAdd.2):

Ce) Third

supplementa:-y
report elated
11 March 1949 frum the United N:ltions
Commission for Indonesia submitted in

0.) Rapport, en date- du ler mars 1949, adresse au Conseil de secude, par la Commis-

siGn des Natior:s Dnies pour l'Indone;;ie,
cOl1fonnemen~ a la resolut'Oll ell COJJseil
de securite en date du 28 jar.vier 1949
(5/1270 et S/12iO/Corr.1) j
l) Lcttre, en date cl:.J Z mars 1949, adresse,~
atl Prbiu.eJI[ dt; COllslil de secnite fX"lr le
representant des Payl'-Bas, concernant la
resolution du Consfil en eate du 28 ~ar.­
vier 1949 l"e1nliv~ ?1 la q:.lestiun ir;dunesienne (5/1274) ;
c) HapPol't SUPIJlementa;re, en date dli 7 mars
1949, adresse au Conseil de securlte p..r
1<1 Commission des Nations Unles pour
l'Indonesle confom](~me:1.t a la n~s(\luticn
du Consei: de s.ecuritel:Il date du 28 janvier 1949 (Sj12iOjAid.1 et 5/1270/
Con.l) ;
cl) Deuxieme rapport stl?p:ementaire, en date
du 10 lllar!; 194Q, aclres£e an Cons.eil de
secude. par la Ccmmission ees Nations
Ul1i<::;~ 'lo:.tr l'[nrlrmesie, coniOl"mement a
la resol~ltion cl:.J Canseil de sect:irite en date
du 28 janvier 1949 (Sj1270j Add.2) ;
e) Troisieme rap?o~t supph~r:J.entaire, en date
dn 11 111ars 1949, adresse au Consei~ de
secmitc pm la. Con:m:ss:oJl des Natlljl1~

2
accordance with the Council's resolution
of 28 Januacy 1949 (S/lZ70/Add,3),

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Unies pour l'lndOnesie, conformement a
la resolution du Conseil de securite en
date du 28 janvier 1949 (S/1270/Add,3).

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adoptt.

3. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

3. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne

The PRESIDENT (translated fr01/l Spa~;ish):
Before discussing the item on the agenda, I
should like to know whether the Council has any
objection to our sending a telegram to the United
Nations Commission for Indonesia requesting :0formation on the general situation in ]ogjakarta.
As there is no objection I take it that the suggcs-tion is approved.

Le PRFSTOENT (tmdl/it de J'espagnol) :
Avant de continuer l'examen des points inscrits
a l'ord!'e du jour, je voudrais demander aux rnembres du Conseil s'ils ne voient pas cl'objection a
ce que la Commission des Nations Unies pour
l'Indonesie soit invitee par tl~lt~grc.mme a foumir
des renseiguPlnf'nts S11r la situation generale a.
Djokjakarta. CommE il n'y a pas d'objection, je
considere que ma proposition est approuvee,

On the invitation of the P.resident, Mr. Hood,
nprescnfative of Australia; Mr. VOlt Lalll]el1hwe,
".cprc.untativ'l of BrlgiU'm: [J Ra MaltI!-[], representative of Burma; Mr. Sen, representative of
India; Mr. '1:an Roijen, representative of the
Netherlands; Abdur Rahim Kllml: ,·epresenlatjue
of Pakistan; Ge1ltral RO}I~1,lo, repnsentative of
the Philip,pines; and Mr. Polar, representative of
Indonuia, took their plnus at the Securit.'Y Council
table.

Sur rinvitalion du. President, M. Hood, -representallt cle l'Australie; M. vatJ Lon[]enhove, reprasentant de la Bel,qique j U Ba Maung, representant
de la Birmaniej M. S(!n, representa1lt de l'!nde;
M. '1:an Roije11, representant des Pa.ys-Bc..r; Abdur
Rahim Khan, representant dll Pakistan; le gen6ral Romulo, representant des 'PMlippines, et
M. Palar, representant de la Rtpublique dJJndo~
nesie, prennent place d la table dl' CorJJeil.

The PRESTDENT (tratlSlated from Spanish):
As usual, the interpretation will be consecutive
for the spe,:ches of memb!::rs of the COlllJcil, and
simultaneous for the speeches of representatives
who have been invited to participate in the
meeting.

Le PRESTDENT rtraduit de l'e,~pC1,qnol).:
Comme d'habitude, I'interpretation sera conse~
cutive pour les interventions des membres du
Conseil et sinlL11tanee pour celles des representants
invit~s a participer aux clebat~.

General McNAUGHTON (Canada): l\ number
of questions have been raised at the last three
meetings of the Security Council by several tep~
resenlatives with regard to my stntement in the
Council on 11 March (417th met'titlg], and I
should like to take this opportunity to provide the
further development of that statement which is
apparently desired by members of the Council and
by the representatives of other States who are
participating in this debate.
In the first place, I wish to make it clear that
the suggestion embodied in the Canadian state~
ment of 11 March was put forward in the hope
that it might represent a practicable course of
actio:I acceptable to the Council and which would
lead to the resumption of direct negotiations
between the two parties. In advancing the suggestion for exploratory discussions, I pelt forward
an idea, not the final te.x' of a proposal, because
I fully recognize that the text of any final proposal could not appropriately be drafted until we
had had the benefit of the discussions in the
Cottncil to indicate a consensus of the members'
opinion.

Le general McNAUGHTON (Canada) (traduit
de l'anglais): Au cours des trois dernieres seances
dll Conseil de securite, plusieurs representants ont
.';(Itl[('ve un certain nombre de questions a -propos
de ma declaration du 11 mars [417eme seance]
et, pour repondre, je crois, all desir des membres
du CODseil et des represenl:aots des autres Etats
qui participent a nos debats, je vOl1drais profiter
de l'occasion qui m'est offerte pour expliquer
celtt> (leclar;uion de fat;on plus cletaillte.
Tout d'abord, je voudrais preciser que nous
avons presente la suggestion contenue dans notre
declaration du 11 mars dans I'espoir qu'elle pourrait condtlire a des mesul·es pratiquement executables que le Conseil pourrait accepter et qui
meneraielll a la reIJrise des ncgociations directes
entre les parties, En suggerant que les parties.
prcnnel1t contact all cours de conversations preliminaires, j'ai emis une idee, et non pas un texte
definitif ele proposition, car j'estime qu'it n'est
possible de n~diger comme il convient le texte
llefillitif d'une proposition que lcrsquc lHJltS avons
pu profiter des discussions au Conseil pour nous
faire une iclee de }'opinion genera1e de ses
membres.
Des debats qui se sont deroules au cours des
trois seances qui ant ell lieu depuis mOl Jecla1'2tion
il ressort que cette suggestion, telle que je l'ai
emise pour III premiere fvis le 11 mars, a obtenu
l'applli d'uIl certain nombre de dHegations j d'autres, en revanche, tout en approl1vant en principe
l'idfe de canvel'sations preliminaires sous les auspices de la Commission du Canseil, ant tenu a
faire ressor!ir que la premiere et la plus impor_

In the t!lree meetings which have been held
since I made my statement, the debate h,1S revealed that the suggestion, as it was originally
advanced on 11 March, has secured tlle support
of a number of delegations; Gn the other hand,
there are some representatives who, while expressing general support for the idea of pre1iminary
discussion~, under the auspices of our Commission, have 1lrged that the first and fOremost sub-

3

j~ct fOT consid eration at any Sltch preliminary
dls 7usslOns m~lst be the terllls and conditions on
W~11?h th,e restora ticn of ]ogjak arta to the adn1lms[ mi lO ?- of, the Governrt,ent of the Republic
of Indone sia mlght be accomplished. As I ·.lnder-

~~nte ~es questions qu'!] conviendrait cl'abonlcr nu
cta~~s elIes cc,nv~~satlons doit etre celle de savJir
e
taura: e,s D~dl~lOns pourrait s'effectuer la res.
n a JokJakarta de l'administration du
G
nement ~e .Ia Repub1iqlle d'InclDTIesie. Ces
reo~~~~
:>tal1ll these representi:J.tivcs, their position is that
s: Je COfllPlI; UUs bien, wnt d'avis
ntant~,
p
once agt"Cement has )een obtame d on this matter' que, ,une fDlS I accord obteou sur ce point on
such prelim inary discussions would then turn
c~am.lnera;t au c?urs de ces conversa:ions prenthe ~t~rthel' qL1estio n of examin ing the time and m1nalf~S 1; questIOn de savolr quand et comment
conditI ons under .which there could be acceptance po.unalt etre accept~ l'heureuse initiative qll'a
of the welcom e mitiati ve of the Governrr.ent of prlse le 00uvernement cles Pays-Bas er. propOsant
the Nether lands in proposing a conference at The qUe se benne a La Haye une conference reunisHaEi.tH·, which WOllld include representCltives of all sfn~ des .repn~:,e,ntants de to:.ites les parties nu
pa.rttc~ to the Indone sian dispute inclUding of
d ffe:end mdo:1,eslen, y compris bien cntendu des
the Gov~rn­ represe~tants qualifies du Go~vernej.]ent
la
course, qualifi ed represe ntative s
ment of the Repub lic of IndOnf'.~ift,
Repubhque d'Indonesie.

t;

;f

.1 do .not thi.nk that any real difference exists on
thlS ~omt whIch rnig-nt preYent the Council from
reacllln g a consen sus of opinion. Indeed the
princip al object of my remark s on 11 March was
to sugges t a proced ure by which Ottr Commission
in Incone sia would be able to take the ir.itiativt
in an endeav our to remove the present obstacles
which exist to the attendance of Republican repr~sellt<1tives at. the confere nce at The Hague.
Clearly , the chief obstacle to the attendance of
these repl"es entativ c5 is the questio n of the return
of the Gover nment of the Republic to Joajaka rta
and itS rc-esta blish:n ent as an effective ~dminis~
tration .
To put it briefly , our position is this. We
welcom e the Nether lands' o:l'er to seek early agreement for tIle transfe r of sovereignty over IndoM
nesia to the United States of Indonesia, ilnd the
stlgge.c;tion that a conference should be held at
The Hague to negotia te this agreement, provided
arrang ements arc made to ensure that this conference takes place with the ,agreement "-lid co·
operati on of all parties directly concerned, In
order to enable this confere nce to take place it
must be regard ed as a practical)le and acceptable
proced ure by all the parties concerned in tlle proposed negotia tions. and to this end the United
Nation s Comm ission 101" Indone sia should, in the
first instanc e, seek, withic; the powers conferred
ttpon it lJy mu resolutiuII of 28 Januar y [S/123 4],
a way of bringin g n.bout an aeceptable and voluntary agreem ent betwee n the representatives of the
Nether lands and of the Republic which woulc
enable the latter to particip ate in the conference
in T~le Hague as one of the parties to be negotiation s leading to the transfe r of sovereignty ir,

de

d,Je ne crois ilas qu'il y ait sur ce point de n~el1es
,lvergences de yues qui pourraient empecher
I acc~rd de se, falfe au sein C:U Conseil. En fait,
mOn !otervention ~u 11 mars tendait avant 1011t a
su.gg"e:-er nne prDcedure permetlant a ~lOtre ComM
ffilsSlOn en Ir.doncsLe de prendre l'ini:iative cl'un
effort tendant aecarter les obs:ac1es qui s'opposent
ac.tuellen;ent ac,e ,que le~ repre~entants de la Repubhque d Indonesle asslstent a la conference de
L:'l Haye. De totlle ~vidence, le principal (1(' rps
obst~c]es est la questIon du retour a Djokjaknna
dll Gouvernement de la RepL:blique e: de sa restallration comme administration effective,

Voici, en .l:esume, que] est notre pDin! de mc,
Nous accueLlons avec faVe.:tr 1'0ffr~ hite par
1es Bays-Bas de rechercher allssitot que possible
un accord sur la question du transfer: aux EtatsUnis d'Indonesie de la souverainete :teerlandaise
sur J'Indoncsic et 1[1 proposition de tenir a L;:t
Haye unc conference pour negocier ClOt nccord,
bant entendu que toutes dispositions seront prises
pour s'assurer que cette conference aura lieu avec
l'assentiment et la cooperation de tOlltes les parties
directement interessees. Pour que cette conference
puisse avoir lieu, il faut ql:e toutes 1es parties
interessees aux negodations qu'on se propose c:'engage~ la considerent comme un moyen possib:e et
acceptable. A cette fin, la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Il1donesie devrnit tout d'abord, dans
le cnure du nandat Cjui lai a ~te confere pal" notre
resolution du 28 janvier (S/1234], rechercher
comment on pourrait parvenir a un accord qn'accepteraient vo1ontairement les representants des
Pays-Bas et ceux de la Re?ubJique, et qui per·
M
mettrait it ces demiers de prendre pa~t a la confe
rence de La Have en tant -:tue !'une des pnrtics
Indon~sja.
aux negociations "tendant alt transfert de la souve~
rainete en Indonesie.
!--e p,rincj~:l.l obstacle a la partic:patiol1 de 1~
The princip al cbsmc1e to the participation 0: RepLlbhque 11 la conferenCe de La Haye est la
the Repnbl ic in the conference is the question oi question de :a mise en applica.tic:n du paragr~phe. 2
implem enting paragr aph 2 o~ the operative part du dispositif de notre resolution du 28 ,1~:1VI~r
of our resolu tion of 28 Januar y calling upon the qui invite le Gouver.n~ment d~s '.fays-Bas 11 faCINether lands Gove,n ment "to facilitate the imme- liter le reto:\r immedlat a DJolqakarta des foncdiate retlml of officials of the Government of the tionnaires du Gouvernemcnt de la Republique
Rev,tbl ie of Indone sia to Jogjak arta". !'-n en- d'Ir.donesie". I1 faudrait done s'efforcer, avec
deavou r should therefo re be made, With the l'aic.e de la Commission des Nations Unie~ pour
assista nce of the United Nation s Commission lor l'Indonesie et sans s'ccarter de la reso1utlOn du
Indone sia and withou t prejudi ce to the Council's 28 ~anvier - y compris le paragraphe 2 de cette
resolut ion of 28 Januar y-inclu ding paragra ph 2 resolution _ de recherche; t'l'l.ccord sur b ma·
-to seck agreem ent on the manne r in whid1 this niere dont ce retour devrait s'effectuer et egaleM
restora tion 5hould take place, and also on the rnent sur le point de savoir ql1and et dans queUes
time and condit ions for holding the proposed cor,· conditions pourrait se tenir, comme on se le
ierenee at The Hague.
propose, la conference de La Haye.

4
As onc of the mernbers of the Cottncil which
supported the l·csolutio n () f 28 January and contributed to its dra ft;ng, (;r,nada cont:nues to regard it as providing the procedmes best suited to
achieve a just and lasting settlcnH.'.:lt of this Indoncsluu dispute. \J>,f\mt we propoSE at this time
is that the Secuflty Council, acfng through its
COlllmission, should help the N ethedands Goyernment and the Government of 6e Republic to
work Dui Oln <Agreement regarding the :mplementation of those parts 0 f the reaolutior( which are
essential :0 enable fl1rther direct negotiations to
take J:llace between all parties concerned in the
Indonesian dispute, leading to a peaceful settlement whereby sovereignty may be transferred
from the Netherlands Government to the United
States of Indonesia.
V,le welcome the acceptance by the Netherlands
Gover-lUllent of our suggestion ;n the general
terms in which I pt1t it forward, and wc also
welcome the statement made by the rcpresen:ative
of the Netherlands On Wedne!'.day, 16 March
[419ih weetingJ, when, in referring to th.:- Chinese
and Canadian statements, he said: "We realize
that thl; implemelltation of their .<;ugges:lons \vill
r~qt1ire concessions from both parties".

Eta~t I'u~ des. membres du COIlSeil qui ant
~Pf.'llY~ la :esolut1on dll 28 janvier et contribue.
a sa re.dactH:>u, le Canada considere toujours que
cette resolutlOn fOlun:t le rnoyen le plus pr<iti4.ue
d'arriver un reglement juste et durable du diffe~
rend. indone.sien. Ce ~ue DOUS proposons aujOl.:rd'~t.l:I,. c·est que le C:0n,Seil, agissant }Jar !'intermedlalre de sa Comm1 sslOl1, aide le Gouyernement
des Pays~Bas et le Gouvemement de la Republique
d'lndonesie
elaborer Un <Icco;d concernant. la
mise e:l a?pllcation des parties de la resolutian
qui sor.t, esser;:ielles si l'on veut qu'il soit possible
de proceder a de nouvelles negotiations direcles
entre toutes les parties interessees au difIerend
indonesien en vile d'un reglernent pacifique grace
auquella souverainete pourrait etre transfereedu
GouveTllement des Pays-Bas allx Eta.ts.Unis
d'Indonesie.

a

a

Nous accueillor.s avec faveur l'aceeptation, par

l~ GOl.:vemement des Pays-Bas, de notre suggestion, dans les termes generaux OU je l'ui presentee,

et nOllS accueillolls egalement avec faveur la
declaration f13ite par le representant des PaysBas q:1i, le rncrcredi 16 mars l419bne sta1ICt),
faisant allusion aux declaratior.s de la Chine et
clu Can<lda, a dit: "NO:1S nous rcndcns con:pte
que la mise en ceuvre de leurs suggesliol1s cxigera cles concessions des deux parties".

On 14 March [418th 11Iectitl9j the repre:;(:nta~
!lve of the Republic of Indonesia raised some
ql1esdon~ w,th regard to the prClpo.<;al made in my
statel1.1er.t of 11 March. I hope that weat I have
said tod:ly will. serve to dispel any misconception
which might bavc: arisen at that time.

Le 14 mars [418eme seanceJ le repl"escntant
de la RepubEque d'Indones:e a souleve certa:nes
qu~stions concerr.ant la proposition eontenue cans
rna declaration du 11 mars. J'e~p,he que cc que
j'ai dit aujourd'hlli servira it dissiper taus les
mJ,lentend1.1s qui q.uraient pu se produire cl ce
moment.

In our view the pretnunary Jiscusl;ions in
Indonesia, which I and ofllers in this CO'Jnd have
suggested, are not only desira.ble but absolutely
essential. Be'fore this Council could ~anction the
presence of the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia at the conference at The Hague, we
should need. to know that our Commiss;Clr. itself
was satisfied that the proposal of the Netherlands
Goyernment had been developed into one from
which the COlllluission believed soml.' t1f<'",fu! progress towards eventual settlement would result. It
would clearly be necessary for the. Netherlands
Government and the Government of th~ Republic
of Indonesia also to be satisfied on this point, and,
in addition, they should be mutually agreed regarding the respecti,·c conditians or Htipulations
on whith they felt they would need assurance before the conference cou:d assemble.

A notre avis, les conversations prelimim..i res
cn Indonesie, que plusieun: rnctubres du Conscil
et moi-merne avons suggerees, ne sont pas seule~
ment souhaitables.: elles sont absolumen~ essentielles. Avant que le Conseil ;JUi~~e sanc.tionne;la presence, la conference de La Haye, de l.a
Commission des Nations Unies poUr l'Indonesie,
il fnut que nOllS sachions que nutre Commission
elle-melne a acquis la certitude que les Pays-Bas
ont donne it lelJr proposition nne lorr:le telle,
qU'OD puisse en attend re d'utilts progr-cs vc:s le
regle:nent final oe la question. De toute evidence,
il faudrait aussi que 1es Gouvernements des
Pays-Bas et de la Republique d'lndonesic pa.rtagent cette comiction; it faud,ait en outre, avad
que la c::mference de La Haye puisse se re..mir,
que ces Gcluvernemenls tiuie::Lt parvenu3 a un
accord concernr..nt les conditions et stipulations
dont ils estiment respectivement que l'observation
doh etre garantie.

It is clear tu the Cann.dian del~gation, and I
hope other members of the Council win agree,
tl11l.t it wculd be impracticable for the Council
itself to attempt to specify in d(!tai1 the conditions
and prvcedure which n:ig~t enable the parties to
undertake direct negotlatLons at The Hague as
proposed by the Netherlands Govemment. These
are. questions which, in our oJ:linion, shoulC: be
worked out in the preliminary discl:ssions and
with the assislance of our Commission, acting- by
virtue of the Cound's regol1..ltion of 28 January
and with the J:lowers c:m-ferre:d upon it by that
resolution. These powers include the duty of
making recommendations to the partie5, as wdl as

Il est evident, pour la delegation du Canada _
et j'espere que d'autres ml.":mbrcs du COnseil
ces vues - qu'it serait peu prasouscriront
tique qt.:.c le Conseil lui-meme essaye d'indiquer
en Mtai: les conditions et la procedure qui ?otlrraient pertllettre aux. parties cl'entreprenclre de
La Haye des negociations directes, comtne le propose le Gouvememel1t des Pays-B~~. Ce sont I:i
des questions qui,
notre a.vis, devraic:nt etre
regle.'es au coms des conversations preliminaires
avec l'aide de nolte Commission agissant en Vf'.rtu
de la resolt:tioll du COlJseil en date du 28 janvier
et clans le cadre du mandat qui lui a et:~ confere
par ladite resolution. Anx terrnes de ce mao(ht,

a

a

a

5
to the Security COl:ncil, on matters within the
competence of our Commission.

The representative of the Republic d Indonesia
raised anot~er question with regard to my statement ot 11 March when he suggested f1at the
Canadian proposal wa~ founded 011 t:1e rristaken
impressioll tlmt the aims of the Netherlands
Governement, as set forth in its proposal of
26 Febrtla:;r were identical with 'the aims
of the Security Council and of the Republic of
Indonesia. The representative of the Netr.erlands
has already replied twin' to this C]uestion regnl'ding the ultimate objective of Netherlands policy
on the transfer of sovereignty, Or. 14 March
[4J8th meeting] he declarerl: "I should now like
to state most emphatically that the trans:er,
according to the Ron'l,ille Agree1T\~nt [S/f,49,
Appendices XIII and VIII]. will be real, compl.ete a~ld unconditional," More:JYer" if there is
any difference between the Government of the
Netherlands and the Governmen: of the Repu':llic
of Indonesia regarding :hc manner in. which this
objective is to be attained, the place to clarify
the matter is in the cor.ferellce between the ~wo
parties which, itS a result of the preliminary discussions we have proposed,. we hope may take
place subsequenly at Tile Hague.

In s?eaking again today] have been prompted
by the thought that the President might feel it
appropriate that I, having taken the respoll.~;l)i1ity
of bringing before this Council a suggestion for
a prelimimry discussicn under the auspices of
the United Nations Commission for Indonesia,
should summarize my suggestiolls regarding the
t~rms in wbid: he, as President of the Security
Council, might comn1t1:1icate with Oll! Commission. I propos~ that the President, on behalf of
the Council, might communicate the following
message to the Commission:
"It is the sense of the Security Counci: tha: the
United Nations Commission for Indonesia, in
accordance w:th the Council's resolution of
28 January 1949, and without preju&cing the
rights, claims and positions of the parties, should
assist the parties in reaching agreement as to (a)
tl-:e ilr.plementation of the Council's resolution of
28 January, and in particular paragraphs 1 and 2
of the operative part thereof; and (b) the time
a'l<1 conditions for holding the proDo.~eJ conference at The Hague, to the end that the negotiations contemplated by the resolution of 28 January may be held as soon as possible. It is further
the sense of the Council that, if sl1ch an agreel1lt:llt is n:ached, the holding of such a conferenC'.e
and the participation by the United N ation~ Commission for Indonesia in acconlance With its
terms of reference, would be consistent witfr the
ptHpc,ses and objectives of the COClncil's resolufan of 28 Jallllary 1949."
I might add that, ia view of the many comments which have been made in the; Council on
m}' original statement, and .as my proposal repreSen';;; action aris:ng out of the Council's resolution of 28 January 1949, I have sought:he advice
of those members of ,he Council who supported
that resolution; and that the ~ext which I have
.proposed carries their assent.

la Commission doit, entre autres chases, Eaire des
recommandations aux parties, COIl'lme nu Consel]
de securite, en ce qui cor:cerne les questions ren~
trar:t dans la competence de la Commission.
Le rrprfsentant de la Republit.tue d·Illdonesie
a souleve nne autre question propos de ma dfc~a­
ration du 11 rears, lorsqu'il a laisse entendre
(jue la pro[)osition du Canada reposait sur l'impression erronee que les buts du Gouvernement
des Pays-Has. tels que les definit sa propositLID
en date du 26 fevrier, etaient identiques al.:x buts
poursuivis par le Conseil de secu,'ite et la Republique d'Indonesie. A deux reprises deja, le representant des Pays-Bas d rq,ondu cette quesl'objectif final de la politique des
tion relative
Pays-Bas en ce qui concerne le transfert de SCtlverainete, Le 14 mars [418eme seance] it a affirme: "Je tiens affirmer des maintenant, de la
fat;on la phlS nette, que, conforrnfment l'accord
du Rer.v-ille (5/649, anuxes XIfI ef VIII], ce
transfert de souverainete sera re~l. total et sans
cor.dition." En outre, s'i: y a quelque divergence
de vues entre le Gouvemement des Pays-Bas d
le GOl1vernetTIent de la Rer;ubliQue d'Indonesie
sur la manihe dont cet obiectif cloit etre atteint,
c'est au COllrs de la conference reunissant les
deux parties et qui, a la suite des conversations
preJiminaires Que nous pro(X)sons, pourra, nous
l'esperons, se tenir a l.a Haye, qu'il con"iendra
d'elucider ce point.

a

a

a

a

a

a

Ce qui n:';'\ ir:dte re?rendre la parole a1.1jo'.1rd'hui, c'est l'idee qtle le Presider,t pourra:t juger
ban (Jue, puisque j'ai pris l'initiative de nggerer
au Conseil l'idee de conversations pre1iminain:~
sous les auspices de la Commission des ;;rations
Unies pour l'Ir.donesie, il m'appartenait de resumer mes suggestions concernant les tennes clans
If'squels, en tant que President du Conseil de
securite, il pourrait el1Voyer a notre Corrmission
une communication. Je propose que le President,
atl nom du Conseil, fas3e ~rvenir a la Comnis.
sion le messng~ SUiV211t:
"Le Conseil de :;ecul-:tc est d'nvis que la Com~
m:ssion des Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie, con·
fcrmement la resolution adoptee par le Conse.il
le 28 j:l.llviel' 1949, et sans prejugcr les dro,its,
revendications et position~ des parties, devrnit
aider ces derni~res parveuir a. un accord concer.
nant: (1.) la mise en app~ica~on de la res?h:t.ion
du Conseil en date uu 23 Janvler et, en partlctlher,
des pal'agraphes premier et 2 de ladite resolution,
et, b) le moment DU et les conditions dans lesquelles aurait Iiett la confemice qU'Ull ;;1'. p:oPOJc
de tcnir
La I-Iaye, afin que les negoctahOns
p:'evues par la l'esolution du 28 i.anvier puisse~t
etre entreprises <.It1ssitCt qtle pOSSIble. Le CoaseLI
~stime en outre que, si l'nccord se fait sur ces
points, il serait con forme aux buts :vi.se~ pal" la
resolution du Conseil en date du: 28 fanVler 19~9
qu'une tel1e ccnferen~e ait lieu ,et que.l~ Comml~­
sion des Nations Dme; pour lIndollesle y paTtlcipe d;:ms le cadre de SOl: mandat."

a

a

a

J e pourrais aiollter q?e, eta~t .don~e les. nombreuses suggestions qUI Dnt et~, pres~ntees, atl
Conseil
propos de ma premiere ~e~lardlOn;
etant donne egalement que ma proposltl?n po.rte
sllr des mesures 11 prendre all titre de l.a resohtl<l,n
du Conseil en date dl1 28 janvier 1949, je me SUlS
inforl11e de l'opinion des membres du Conse:! qui
ont appllye cette resolution, et que le texte que
je viens de proposer a obtenu leur accord.

a

6
The PRESIDENT (tralls1c-ted from. Spaltish):
ndol"e r call t1pon th.c represcntative of the Netherlands, I sholt:d like to ask representatives wl:o
have already spoken to be as brief as possible Lf
they speak again, so as ;1ot to prolong tris debate.

Le

PURSlDENT

(tradHii

ae

l'espa.gM!):

AV:int de clonner 1;, p;lrole atl representant des
Pays-Bus, je voudrais prier les repr6sentmts qui
ont (h~ja parte (l'elre aussi brefs que po~sible au
cas ou ils interviendraient de nQLveaU, af.n de ne
pas trop prolong-er cetie discussion.

Mr. VAN ROIJEN (Netherlands): I should be
glad to conforr.l to the reql1est of the Presider.t,
and shall be as brief as possibl~.

M. VAN RorJEN (PaIS-Bas) (trarfuit de fa71~
glais): Pou:· me conformer au degir du President,
je serai aussi bref que possi1Jle.

What I have to soy here todfly does 1I0t constitute .my re~di011 to what General McNat:ghtoll
has JHst saId, and 1 s1:oulC. like to ma:,e it verv
clear th~t it is not a reply to !lis new sltggestio~
co.nc:ernmg the mess8ge whl<:h the President
mIght ;Ir1dres~ to the Uniteo Nations Commission
f 0 ~ Indonesia.

Je ne vais pas exposer aujourd'hui mon point
de vue au sujet de la dedaraf:on Gue ,'ient de faire
le 1jeueral McNaughton. Je ne CepQndl'a~ p;l"
non plus, je tiers le preciser, i la nouveJle sttggestion que le geneml v:ent de faire au sujet du
message. que le President pOl.1rra;t aclresser
la
Commission des Nations Udes ?our l'Indonesie.

The last time I spoke before the COHnd) r419th
to the
wISe and constructive :nterventiom of the represc:ntatives of Canada and China, the debate on
the Indonesian question had taken a more positive
turn. whicJ. held 0I1~ the :lopef1.11 prospect nf ;l
solutJcn. After havmg sat throt1gh htrtheT dis.
c.t1ssions in the Security Council, I m'lst ~egret­
full}' state that a. number of speakers have dOlle
their utmost to disturb lh~s atmo:;phere Lv el:Jle5s repetition of recriminations, nod by new
a.ccusations. Any impartial observer who attends
these meetings-and I am .'1ot speaking now especiallyas the representative of the Nctherlandsmust inevitably feel a question arise within him.
self: What is the purpose of these debatzs? Is
it t? ~nd a sohlt1on for a COlllplicated problem,
0:' 15 ~t to .render .the problem. still more complicated. Is It to bung the partIes together, as :he
purpcse and aim of ":he United Nations sho~lld
be, or is it to an:n.gonize the par:ies stilI mO:'e?
Is it to find objectively the trnth a::ld the solution,
or is it to find as much fault as possible with one
rarty and ab~oJv(' the other?

La derniere fois que j'ai eu l'c,ccasion de pren~
dre id la parole, [419e.me seance], j'ai dit que
le debal St:.r la qt1~.stion d'Indonesil'l avnit pris,
notamment a la sl.:te des interventions sages et
juCicieuses des represe:1tan:s du Canada et de
la Chine un earaetere plus positif qL1i permettait
d'esperer que I'on parviencrait it une su1ution.
Apres avoil' ~ssiste a de nouvelles discussions,
j'ai le :,egret de COllstater que de ncmbreux ora~
teurs se sont ,.ffmds de trottbler cet::e utmo·
sphere en reprenant sans cesse leurs ac:usations
anlerieures et en en formulant de nouvelles. Un
observateur impar(al assistant a ees seances et je ne park pas specialcmcnt en tant q\te repre~
sentant de:; Pays~Bas - doit, sans nul doute,
se poser les ql\estions suivantcs: Qud est le but
du decat? S'agit-il d'apporter t:ne solution
un
probleme complexc:, ou bien s'Clgit-il de cornpli~
quer encore ee proLleme? S'agit-il, confonnement
aux: buts de I'Organisation des Nations Unies
d'<'l1ler:er un l'appr"chemen: entre les I:urties en
enllse ou bien s'agit-il de rendre plus violent
en:or~ 1eu!" antagonisme? Vcut~on, dans un esprit
objeetif, decQuvrir la verite et unc so:ution du
prohH~me, ou 1.Jitll ve·.lt-on rejeter adant {JtH'
possible la faute sur rune des parties et absoudre
l'autre?
Voila Jcs questions que. ~e p()sent, d'une maniere
chaque jour plus pressante, non settlement roes
cornpatriotes, mais des millions de gens qui ont
foi cn l'Organisation des Nations Units et fondent
sur elle leurs espoirs. Et si - diffcrents Ol·atetW~
I'unt ohserve - le prestige du Conscil de secLlrite
decline rapidement, peut~on s'en etor.ner? rai
avprti If' ConseiL il y a Jc.ngtemps, que c'est ce
qui se produirait s'il se saisissait d'une question.
qui n'est pas de sa competence; mais cette sittlation est devetlue plus grave encore en raison de
1'<Lllitude qu'ont prise certaines deJeg.<lt;ons. Cette
tendance I"egnttable .s'est manifestee d'une fa~on
part.iellliereme:1.t ndte au eoU~s de la presente
SCSSlOn.

m~eting1 I said tr..at, ?WiEg in particular

" T~.es.e are qllestions wh'ch <l.re being asked with
mcreaslng -urgency, not only 111 my own country
but by all those mi11ions who put the:r hope and
hith in the United Nations. Is it <:.11y wonder
that, .as has ·:leen stated by several speakers, the
preshge of the Security Council ;s rapidly declining? I warned t:1e Council a long time ago
th<ll lhis would be the result of its ~aking ltp a
matter which it was ::lOt entitled to deal with, but
this result has been aggravated beyond necessity
by the attitude taken by certain celegations. The
course of events dGTmg this session hOls been
symptomatic of that regrettable trend.

Now what arc the facts?
Fuel number one: After the ac1optior: of the
Sccllrity Council's reSolution of 28 Jdnuary, the
Netr.crlands made it clear that it would carry Oltt
that resolution to tl:c uimost extent co:npatible
with its ~esponsj)ilities. On 26 Febnlary the Re·
publican leaders in Bangka were inforned that
they were free either to go abroad or to reside
:n a:J.y part of Indonesia, ,vith :he exceptio:l of
lhe still restricted aret!. of Jogjakarta. It was
3.dded that the Netherlands authorities would
grant transportRtion facilities if reql1ired. The

a

a

a

Quels sont done les {aits?
Vo:ei Un premier fait; Lorsque le ConseiL a
adoptc sa resolution d't 28 janvier, les Pays~Bas
O:1t declare sans 'ltllbigu"ite qL'ils app:ique.raient
cette resolution dans toutc la meSUl"e ou elle est
compatible avee :es l·esponsabilites (]u'ils assumellt. Le 26 fevrler, les chefs repr.:blicains a
Banka. ant ete informes qu'ils etaient libl"es de
partir P0lt! l'etranger DU hen de resider dans tlne
dgim lluelcOl1que de l'Indon~sie,
l'exception
de la zone de Djokjakarta oit des restrdions sont
encore er: viglleur. Le;; autorites neerlanc1aises se

a
