A/64/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

63

rd plenary meeting
Friday, 11 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 12
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Letter from Namibia transmitting the report of
the Kimberley Process to the General Assembly
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/134
(A/64/559)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.26)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to The Honourable Bernard Martin Esau, Deputy
Minister of Mines and Energy of Namibia, to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.26.
Mr. Esau (Namibia): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly today in my capacity as
Chair of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
for 2009 pursuant to General Assembly resolution
63/134, by which the Assembly requested the Chair of
the Kimberley Process to submit a report to its sixtyfourth session on the implementation of the Process. I
therefore have the pleasure to present the report on the
progress of the implementation of the Kimberley
Process in 2009.
Diamonds, like other natural resources, have
played a role in fuelling and/or prolonging conflicts in
various parts of the world, as the proceeds from illicit
diamond mining and trading have been used to procure
arms and ammunition. Apart from the fact that that
misuse of a country’s mineral endowment is
devastating for the very citizens who should benefit

rather than suffer from such resources, it also has an
enormous negative influence on the international
diamond trade and the economies of countries far from
the theatres of conflict.
As a consequence, the Kimberley Process was
conceived as a leading multi-stakeholder partnership
bringing together Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the diamond industry in order to
prevent conflict diamonds from entering the legal
international trade. By helping to break the link
between arms and trading in illegal diamonds, the
Kimberley Process contributes to the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
It was an honour for Namibia to lead the
Kimberley Process during 2009 in its efforts to further
the promulgation of national legislation prohibiting the
import and export of rough diamonds unless certified
as conflict-free, and the national implementation of
appropriate controls over diamond production and
trade.
Diamond mining is of great economic value for
many developing countries. It constitutes a large
percentage of the gross domestic product (GDP),
export earnings and Government revenues. In the case
of my country, Namibia, diamonds account for more
than 40 per cent of export earnings, 10 per cent of GDP
and 7 per cent of Government revenue. Last year alone,
Namibia produced diamonds worth approximately
$600 million.
Diamond mining is a catalyst for socio-economic
development, poverty alleviation and the provision of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-64442 (E)

*0964442*

A/64/PV.63

essential social services such as health care and
education. Namibia therefore attaches great importance
to the Kimberley Process. We believe that the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) not
only sets benchmarks in the regulatory process and
management of the diamond trade, but also guarantees
transparency in marketing our diamonds and provides a
valuable platform for cooperation among participants
in the Process.
Namibia has put in place a robust and
comprehensive regulatory regime in order to protect
the integrity of our diamond industry from conflict
diamonds. In addition, a number of Government
agencies, including our Diamonds Inspectorate and the
protected resources unit of the Namibian police are
specifically charged with the protection of our
diamonds from smuggling and other illicit activities.
During 2009, improvement in the security
situation in many countries has been noted, to which
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has
contributed. We have indeed made significant strides in
the implementation of the Process. A project to
establish footprints for diamonds in order to quickly
identify anomalies in trade statistics was carried out. A
new database containing rough diamond statistics was
also launched and is available on the participants-only
website. Special attention was also given to artisanal
alluvial diamond mining. A joint work plan was
designed to help improve the situation in countries
facing challenges in complying with the standards of
the Kimberley Process. Furthermore, a number of
countries undertook initiatives aimed at eliminating
illicit diamond trading.
At the end of 2008, the Kimberley Process had 49
members. I am pleased to report that there is a great
interest from a large number of countries in joining the
Process. Kenya and Swaziland have already applied,
and Egypt and Mozambique have expressed their
interest in joining. Outreach efforts were undertaken to
encourage other diamond-producing countries to join
the process.
Regular peer review visits are an important tool
to improve the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process.
During 2009, visits were paid to the diamondproducing and trading countries of the European
Union, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Turkey,
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Angola.

2

The support of the international community has
been important to the success of the Kimberley
Process. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge
with appreciation the two types of technical assistance
that have been offered by the World Bank to Kimberley
Process participants, through the Communities and
Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining network and other
World Bank projects.
The Kimberley Process has made significant
strides in the fulfilment of its mandate. However, it
still faces daunting challenges. In that regard,
continued efforts from Governments, working groups
in the industry, the World Diamond Council and civil
society are necessary to maintain and strengthen the
system.
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to all
Participants, in particular the chairs of the working
groups and committees, for the support they have
rendered to Namibia during our chairmanship of the
Process. I trust that the incoming Chair and Vice-Chair
will enjoy the same support.
It is now my distinct honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”
(A/64/L.26). The support of the United Nations has
been a key element for success, and the General
Assembly has traditionally adopted this resolution in
support of the activities of the Kimberley Process.
The draft resolution, inter alia, acknowledges the
progress made by the working groups, Participants and
observers during 2009. It also stresses that the widest
possible participation in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme is crucial for its success, and it
underscores the willingness of the Process to provide
technical assistance to those Participants in need. We
are looking forward to the support of all delegations in
the adoption of this draft resolution by consensus,
which will signify the continued importance that the
General Assembly attaches to the Kimberley Process.
At this juncture, before I conclude, I would like
to draw the Assembly’s attention to the additional
sponsors of draft resolution A/64/L.26: Angola,
Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, China, Congo, Mexico,
Singapore, Somalia and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

Ms. Mongwa (Botswana): At the outset I wish to
convey our sincere appreciation to the delegation of
Namibia for the capable manner in which they
conducted the work of the Kimberley Process during
Namibia’s tenure as the 2009 Chair of the Process. We
also commend them for the excellent report on the
activities of the Kimberley Process over the year, as
well as the successful conclusion of consultations on
draft resolution A/64/L.26, on the role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict, which my delegation has also
co-sponsored.
My delegation attaches great importance to this
agenda item, as it symbolizes the international
community’s resolve to individually and collectively
do its part to ensure that no more will precious natural
resources such as diamonds bring so much sorrow and
suffering to humankind. The annual General Assembly
deliberations on this item renew the international
community’s commitment to remain engaged in
contributing to the prevention and settlement of
conflicts by supporting all efforts aimed at stopping
illegal trade of rough diamonds from fuelling armed
conflicts. They also reaffirm the Kimberley Process as
the internationally recognized vehicle for championing
this cause and for continued regulation of diamond
trade.
Undoubtedly the United Nations system is an
important partner in this agenda. It not only validates
and underscores the important role of the Kimberley
Process but also contributes to the consolidation and
effective implementation of all principles and
objectives of the Process. In this regard, this resolution
and many other General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions are critical mandates in further
cementing this unique and mutually beneficial
relationship.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
significant work done by the Kimberley Process, a
voluntary tripartite initiative that consists of 75
countries, the diamond industry and non-governmental
organizations. The membership of the Process deserves
commendation for being the first line of defence
against the illegal diamond trade through their
compliance with Process requirements and their
oversight on rough diamond trade.
The Kimberley Process demands that its members
adhere to high standards to enable them to certify
shipments of diamonds as legitimate. Participating

09-64442

States must meet minimum requirements, which
include putting in place national legislation and
institutions and export, import and internal controls, as
well as committing to transparency and the exchange
of statistical data.
It is heartening to note from the progress report
that most Kimberley Process participants comply with
its requirements. This has resulted in, among other
things, timely submission of reports by all members
and enhanced implementation of Process requirements.
The impact of these actions has translated into a
significant reduction of markets for conflict diamonds
and the cutting off of a major source of funding for
rebel groups and militias involved in conflict.
It was not so long ago that there were a number
of such conflicts, particularly in Africa. Diamonds
fuelled civil wars, with terrible and devastating
consequences. Not only was the safety of citizens in
these affected countries put at risk, but peace, security
and the stability of their Governments were
compromised as well.
It is thanks to firm and unwavering global efforts
that today the international community has shifted its
focus to peace consolidation and reconstruction in the
former conflict-diamond countries of Sierra Leone,
Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
mention a few. We now wait anxiously for the last
conflict-diamond country to join the ranks of clean
diamond-producing countries.
Despite this notable progress, my delegation
remains concerned by reports of non-compliance with
Kimberley Process provisions by some participants and
other emerging challenges. We are pleased with the
measures that have been put in place to address them,
but we wish to emphasize that, while most of world’s
diamond production is from legitimate sources, we
cannot ignore even the smallest percentage of illicit
diamond production. Such production and its illegal
use can contribute to civil strife and instability.
It is thus imperative that the international
community continue to maintain vigilance against
illicit diamond trade and that countries continue to
exercise much greater scrutiny of their own internal
control systems, including much stronger checks on all
diamond-related activities, to ensure legal diamond
production.

3

A/64/PV.63

Clearly, the highest possible level of participation
and cooperation among Governments, civil society and
the private sector is essential to the effective
implementation and monitoring of and compliance
with the Kimberley Process. In this respect, we
commend Member States that have expressed an
interest in joining the Kimberley Process and
encourage others to consider joining the Process.
My delegation remains confident that, through
joint efforts such as this initiative, we will continue to
ensure that, more than ever before and in many more
countries, diamonds become a major source of
financing for economic development. Already, some of
us can attribute our positive socio-economic
development to diamonds. For Botswana, there is a
direct correlation between diamond revenues and safe
drinking water, better living conditions and better
health care, including free anti-retroviral drugs for all
the people of Botswana who need them, the sum total
of which is a better quality of life for everyone in
Botswana, now and in the future.
In conclusion, conflict diamonds should remain a
matter of serious concern to the international
community. For this reason, we should all remain
engaged in global efforts to eliminate conflict and the
illicit diamond trade.
Finally, allow me to also take this opportunity to
welcome Israel as the Chair of the Kimberley Process
for 2010 and the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
the Vice-Chair. I wish to assure them both of my
delegation’s continued cooperation, support and
goodwill.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): It is my honour to
address the General Assembly today on behalf of
Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Allow me to begin by thanking Namibia for its
tenure as Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2009. The
theme selected by Namibia, “Diamonds for
development”, served as a timely reminder of the
critical contribution the diamond industry can make to
many economies, especially in the developing world.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
Israel as the incoming Kimberley Process Chair. We
look forward to working with Israel to enhance the
effectiveness and implementation of the Kimberley
Process in the year ahead. I would also like to

4

congratulate the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
its Vice-Chairmanship for 2010.
The year 2009 was a very difficult year for the
Kimberley Process. Much credibility has been lost in
the public eye, and calls for reform of the Certification
Scheme — by civil society, industry and participants
themselves — have steadily grown.
We are concerned over the situation in
Zimbabwe, which was found to be non-compliant with
the minimum standards of the Kimberley Process by a
review mission that visited the country in June and
July. There are credible reports that elements within the
Government of Zimbabwe are trying to work around
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. We urge
Zimbabwe to fully implement the workplan
immediately and in good faith, and call on all
Kimberley Process participants to implement
monitoring measures to contain the illicit trade in
Marange diamonds.
We are also troubled that civil society observers
monitoring the implementation of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme continue to face
harassment in many countries. We would like to
reiterate that the Kimberley Process draws its strength
from its multi-stakeholder nature. All parties must be
allowed to participate freely in Kimberley Processrelated activities.
There were some notable successes this year as
well. In particular, we welcome Liberia’s offer to host
a meeting to foster regional cooperation in areas such
as
information-sharing,
illicit
networks
and
improvement of internal controls. We are also
encouraged by the mandate given to the Kimberley
Process by the United Nations Group of Experts on
Côte d’Ivoire to undertake improvements to the
diamond footprint of that country.
The ongoing development of Kimberley Process
rules and procedures will assist in enhancing the
effectiveness of the Scheme. We are pleased with the
progress made regarding the adoption of important
Kimberley Process administrative decisions this year,
including on cooperation in implementation and
enforcement and on information-sharing with the
United Nations. The latter will help the Security
Council improve the effective monitoring of its
resolutions, which is a welcome development.

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

(spoke in French)
On 11 and 12 May 2000, the first Forum on
Conflict Diamonds was held in Kimberley, South
Africa. As we approach the tenth anniversary of that
historic meeting, the Kimberley Process finds itself at a
crossroads. While it has contributed to stemming the
trade in conflict diamonds, now more than ever
participants must demonstrate the necessary political
will to apply the rules if the Kimberley Process is to be
effective.
Here, let me be clear. Canada, Australia and New
Zealand remain fully supportive of the Kimberley
Process. It enhances the accountability, transparency
and effective governance of the trade in rough
diamonds. However, the Kimberley Process must be
able to adapt to new challenges if it is to remain a
relevant instrument in combating the trade of conflict
and illicit diamonds. Consumers do not distinguish
between conflict diamonds from areas controlled by
rebel groups and those from regions controlled by
Governments with blood on their hands. It is
imperative that the international community be vigilant
in monitoring for any human rights abuses committed
in the production and trade of diamonds. It must also
work better together to end these practices. Ultimately,
we must not let diamonds linked to human rights
abuses enter the international diamond market and
place at risk an industry that is of great importance to
many of our economies.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
express Israel’s firm support for the Kimberley
Process. In a world where natural resources can fuel
war, violence and civil strife, it is imperative that the
international community act in a concerted manner to
stem the tide of blood diamonds. Since 2000, the
efforts of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
(KPCS) have minimized the presence of blood
diamonds in the world market while marginalizing
those who engage in the commerce of conflict
diamonds.
As Israel prepares to assume the chairmanship of
the Kimberley Process, we recognize the progress that
continues to be made. Israel welcomes the
communiqué of the Kimberley Process from Namibia
of 5 November 2009. We were pleased to see the
expansion of the Working Group on Monitoring, as
well as the position adopted by the plenary regarding

09-64442

particular indications of non-compliance with the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
Despite those and other measures of progress,
challenges remain. Israel is concerned by the state of
the minimum requirements of the KPCS in Zimbabwe,
especially given the review mission’s findings of
“credible indications of significant non-compliance
with the minimum requirements of the KPCS” by
Zimbabwe (A/64/559, attachment I, para. 13). Israel
took note of Zimbabwe’s commitment to urgently start
implementation of the joint workplan and we hope that
Zimbabwe will address in a substantive manner the
aforementioned issues of compliance.
Israel is also concerned by the situation of
Venezuela’s implementation of the minimum standards
of the Certification Scheme. However, we hope that,
after having voluntarily separated from the KPCS for a
period of two years, Venezuela will implement the
minimum standards of the Certification Scheme and
eventually fully reintegrate into the KPCS.
Israel is prepared to assume greater responsibility
as the incoming Chair of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme so that we can continue to
contribute in a positive manner towards a more
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
Kimberley Process. Israel, as one of the largest trading
centres of diamonds, attaches great importance to the
Kimberley Process and has in place a strict system to
ensure compliance. As noted by Mr. Christian Berger,
the head of the KPCS delegation that visited Israel in
2008, Israel’s system of spot checks and overall
organization was “worthy of emulation in other
Kimberley Process countries”.
As we move forward, Israel reiterates its
commitment to the KCPS, as well as to United Nations
sanctions pertaining to conflict diamonds. Our
collective action on this important matter can ensure
that more and more diamonds are appreciated for their
beauty and not for their role in conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX) of
11 October 1974, I now call on the observer of the
European Community.
Mr. Schwaiger (European Community): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
regarding agenda item 12, entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”. The European Union,

5

A/64/PV.63

which participates as a single member in the Kimberley
Process, would like in the first place to welcome the
results of the Swakopmund plenary session in so far as
they illustrate the Kimberley Process capacity to
further adapt as an innovative instrument to prevent
diamonds from fuelling conflicts.
The European Union notes with satisfaction that
the tools that make the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme (KPCS) so unique have been further
strengthened during this past year. The peer review
system has ensured continued monitoring of the
Scheme’s implementation. Review visits to important
trading and producing countries have been organized in
2009, including review visits to countries that have
been affected by the scourge of conflict diamonds, such
as Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sierra Leone and Liberia.
I am also pleased to say that the European Union,
as the world’s main trading centre, received a review
visit in February 2009 as a vivid illustration of its
commitment to the KPCS. The European Union, as
Chair of the Working Group on Monitoring,
encourages the continued commitment of participants
to scrutiny through Process review visits.
The European Union actively supports the efforts
of the Kimberley Process to continue to adapt to a
changing environment and notes with satisfaction the
introduction of new types of Process measures, such as
international vigilance measures making use of the
footprints of certain diamonds. The European Union
firmly believes that the consistent use of such tools
will strengthen the Process’s ability to tackle the illicit
trade in conflict diamonds. The European Union also
welcomes in this respect the plenary decision to set up
an team of technical experts to address the challenges
posed by cross-border Internet trading.
The most vivid illustration of the capacity of the
Kimberley Process to develop innovative solutions to
address complex crises is provided by the plenary
decision and workplan to address Zimbabwe’s noncompliance in the Marange mining area. The European
Union looks forward to implementation of Zimbabwe’s
commitment to undertake a series of ambitious actions
to bring diamond mining in Marange into compliance
with the minimum requirements of the Process and to
subject exports of Marange diamonds to independent
Process verification pending full compliance. The
European Union stands ready to contribute to the

6

action plan as a key element to protect the integrity of
the Kimberley process and ensure that Marange
diamonds contribute to Zimbabwe’s economic
development and do not fuel further violence and
human rights violations. The European Union further
calls on Kimberley Process participants to improve
regional cooperation and implement international
vigilance measures in order to contain the flow of
illicit diamonds from Marange.
The continuing Kimberley Process engagement
and monitoring of diamond production in Côte
d’Ivoire, in the light of Security Council resolution
1893 (2009), further illustrate the positive role that the
Kimberley Process can play in concrete crises where
production and trade of diamonds might affect peace
and security.
The Kimberley Process decision to increase
oversight of Guinea’s diamond production and trade,
and continued engagement with Ghana and Liberia in
particular, underline the efforts of the Kimberley
Process to support regional cooperation in this respect.
At the end of the day, however, the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme’s credibility as an
international
process
depends
on
effective
implementation by its participants. In this respect, the
European Union also welcomes the adoption of a
decision
regarding
cooperation
on
Process
implementation and enforcement that represents a
significant step forward, as it will foster greater
cooperation between national agencies involved in the
fight against infringements to Kimberley Process rules
and can indeed make a difference on the ground.
In 2009, the international community has
demonstrated its determination to act collectively and
constructively in response to challenges to the
Kimberley Process, and the European Union would like
to express its gratitude to Namibia for its stewardship
of the Process in 2009. We now warmly welcome Israel
as the upcoming Kimberley Process Chair and look
forward to working together to implement the
decisions reached in Swakopmund, Namibia. We would
also like to congratulate the Democratic Republic of
the Congo upon its selection as 2011 Kimberley
Process Chair.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

(spoke in English)
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.26, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
Thailand has asked to join the list of sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested on the
following words in paragraph 23 of draft resolution
A/64/L.26:
“and takes note that the Process has selected
Israel as Chair and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as Vice-Chair of the Process for 2010”.
I call on the representative of Sweden on a point
of order.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): It is very unclear to us
exactly what we are voting on at this point. Could you
repeat, Mr. President, exactly what the vote is about
and what a vote in favour would indicate and a vote
against would mean?
The President: A recorded vote has been
requested for a part of the paragraph, so I will repeat it.
The Assembly is now voting on the following words in
paragraph 23:
“and takes note that the Process has selected
Israel as Chair and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as Vice-Chair of the Process for 2010”.
I call on the representative of Israel on a point of
order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): Mr. President, could you
please clarify what happens with those words in
paragraph 23? It is not clear to us. What are we voting
on?
The President: A recorded vote has been
requested by one delegation on that part of paragraph
23 of draft resolution A/64/L.26. A delegation has
requested a recorded vote on part of that paragraph. I
will repeat it again. It is the part of that paragraph
starting from:
“and takes note that the Process has selected
Israel as Chair and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as Vice-Chair of the Process for 2010”.
I call on the representative of Jamaica on a point
of order.

09-64442

Mr. Williams (Jamaica): My delegation would
like to know whether we are being asked to keep that
section of the paragraph or to delete that section of the
paragraph.
The President: Those voting in favour are voting
to keep the paragraph intact; those voting against are
voting to take that part of the paragraph out.
I call on the representative of the United States of
America on a point of order.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Mr. President, that was our question as well. I would
like to ask you to repeat for the Hall one more time
what a “yes” vote signifies and what a “no” vote
signifies on this vote that has been called.
The President: I request the representative of the
Secretariat to clarify.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): A recorded vote has
been requested on the following words of paragraph 23
of draft resolution A/64/L.26:
“and takes note that the Process has selected
Israel as Chair and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as Vice-Chair of the Process for 2010”.
Those who vote “yes” are in favour of keeping the
paragraph as it is; those who vote “no” mean for those
words to be deleted from paragraph 23 of draft
resolution A/64/L.26.
The President: I call on the representative of
Israel on a point of order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): Frankly, we very much
appreciate the fact that it has been reiterated again and
again in this Hall that we have been selected as Chair
of the Kimberley Process, and we are very grateful for
that, but we should like to ask why, procedurally, we
should vote on something that is already in the draft
resolution. Why should this be voted on? Maybe,
through you, Sir, we could ask the initiators of this
vote what the reasoning is behind it.
The President: Will the representative of the
Secretariat please answer that?
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I can say that the draft
resolution is still a draft resolution that can be orally
revised, modified or amended before the General
Assembly takes action on it. This is in accordance with

7

A/64/PV.63

rule 89 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, which says, “A representative may move
that parts of a proposal or of an amendment should be
voted on separately”.
The President: I call on the representative of
Peru on a point of order.
Mr. Pérez (Peru): My question was about under
which rule this was being put to vote, and the
representative of the Secretariat has just explained that.
So, should I understand that this is a proposal to delete
the paragraph, or is it an amendment of the paragraph?
The President: I think we have clarified that.
Some delegations have asked for a recorded vote on
part of paragraph 23. I think we should go ahead and
try to vote.
I call on the representative of Israel on a point of
order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): I must insist on the
procedural question. The representative of the
Secretariat quoted from rule 89. If we understand it
well, a text that is already in the draft resolution can be
voted on if there is a change, but again I must ask why
there should be a vote on something that is already in
the draft resolution.
The President: Again, I will
representative of the Secretariat to reply.

ask

the

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I cannot understand the
question. Could you repeat it, please?
Mr. Carmon (Israel): Of course. We have before
us a draft resolution which says exactly what has been
proposed for deletion. There is a request from a certain
delegation to vote on something that is already in the
draft resolution. The representative of the Secretariat
quoted from rule 89, saying that there is a possibility to
do so. But we understand that this possibility exists if
there is a change, not if there is a reiteration of
something that is exactly, word by word, in the draft
resolution. The question, if I may ask, is why we
should vote on something that is already in the draft
resolution in a process that we understand would
welcome consensus. Why should there be a vote and
reiteration of something without changing the text in
the draft resolution?
The President: I call on the representative of the
Secretariat.

8

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): There is a request from
a Member State for a recorded vote on a part of a
paragraph of a draft resolution before the General
Assembly. There being such a request, it is my
understanding that there is no consensus on that
paragraph of the draft resolution. There is a request
from a Member State for a vote that apparently will,
should it be successful, modify paragraph 23 of this
draft resolution. I cannot comment on the substance of
the words that the Member State has requested to be
put to the vote. As a result of the vote, the paragraph
may be changed or not. Should the vote result in the
paragraph being changed, then the paragraph will have
a different text from what is currently in paragraph 23
of draft resolution A/64/L.26.
The President: I call on the representative of
Canada on a point of order.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): I am still seeking a
clarification under the point of order. If a delegation
does not agree with a proposed paragraph, should it not
be proposing an amendment, such that then we would
be voting on the clear amendment? Is that not the
normal procedure?
The President: I will ask one of the
representatives who asked for the recorded vote. I
would ask the representative of Syria whether he meant
that he would like to propose an amendment or just to
put these words to a separate vote? Can he explain that
to us?
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has asked for a recorded vote
on one part of paragraph 23 of draft resolution
A/64/L.26 owing to its opposition to the wording of
that paragraph, in particular regarding the selection of
Israel as Chair of the Process. That is why we have
asked for a recorded vote.
The President: I call on the representative of
Namibia on a point of order.
Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): We, too, are trying to
understand the proceedings here. I am not going to
comment on the text because it reflects the historical
fact that a meeting took place which selected Israel and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as Chair and
Vice-Chair, respectively. That is what is reflected in the
draft resolution. We are reflecting a record. We are not
legislating anything. We are only saying that that is

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

what happened. We and 49 other countries were party
to that decision, and that is the decision that is
reflected here.

The President: I once again give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat to explain. Perhaps he
can convince representatives.

Be that as it may, we will return to that discussion
later. The issue is that there is an objection to a
historical fact. That being so, what is the alternative to
that historical fact? Is there any proposal being put
forward on which we are being asked to vote? One
votes for a text to be deleted or retained, but we are not
even sure whether we are being asked to vote to keep
or to delete the text or for an alternative text.

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and
Conference
Management):
Thank
you,
Mr. President Rule 89 of the rules of procedure was
mentioned. Let me read out rule 89:

For what purpose is the text being put to vote? Is
it for a deletion? What are the alternatives? What are
we waiting for? When a text is put to the vote,
normally we vote for either one or other text. But, here,
we have the historical fact reflected and we have not
been given anything else to vote for.
We request your help, Mr. President, so that we
can make our decision in terms of what we are voting
for. Later on, on behalf of Namibia in its capacity as
Chair and also as a country that depends largely on
diamonds, I will make a statement with regard to the
various extraneous issues that are being introduced, but
before we come to that, maybe we need a clarification
at this stage.
The President: I think the matter is clear. We are
asked to vote. If the majority votes in favour of the
wording of the paragraph in question staying as it is,
the paragraph will stay as is. If the majority is against,
or would like us to remove those words, then, later, we
can see what can be done. So let us vote now, first, and
then we can decide later.
I call on the representative of Israel on a point of
order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): I thank the current Chair of
the Kimberley Process, the representative of Namibia,
for what he said. That is exactly what we feel also. If
there is a vote, the vote should be on something that is
different from draft resolution A/64/L.26. If the
representative of the country that wants to bring
something to a vote would like a vote, it should be on
something that is either deleted or changed, but not on
the draft resolution.
We would definitely ask for a clarification or
maybe some legal advice on this matter. We feel very
uneasy having to vote on something that is in the draft
resolution.

09-64442

“A representative may move that parts of a
proposal or of an amendment should be voted on
separately. If objection is made to the request for
division” — which may be the case today — “the
motion for division shall be voted upon.
Permission to speak on the motion for division
shall be given only to two speakers in favour and
two speakers against. If the motion for division is
carried,” — here there is a proposal to delete
some words from the paragraph — “those parts of
the proposal or of the amendment which are
approved shall then be put to the vote as a whole.
If all operative parts of the proposal or of the
amendment have been rejected, the proposal or
the amendment shall be considered to have been
rejected as a whole.”
That means that if those words from paragraph 23
of draft resolution A/64/L.26 are adopted, paragraph 23
stays as it is and the General Assembly can proceed to
adopt draft resolution A/64/L.26 as a whole without a
vote.
I hope that that clarifies the matter.
The President: I think that that is clear. Let us
proceed.
I call on the representative of the United States of
America on a point of order.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Once again, we are a little confused as to what the
procedures are. We believe that the questions posed by
the representatives of Canada, Namibia, Israel and
others with respect to the procedure that is under way
are very appropriate. We still have not heard what the
amendment is that we are voting on, and we would
respectfully request a legal opinion on this matter.
The President: We will now suspend the meeting
for 15 minutes to seek the advice of the Legal Adviser.
The meeting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and
resumed at 12.10 p.m.

9

A/64/PV.63

The President: After consultation with the legal
adviser, we would like to offer a clarification. The
Syrian Arab Republic has requested a separate vote on
part of operative paragraph 23 of draft resolution
A/64/L.26, in accordance with rule 89 of the
Assembly’s rules of procedure, as is the right of any
Member State.

is a friendly State that we greatly esteem. We ask that
there be no misunderstanding of what we ask and
desire to achieve. What we really want is that no
mention be made of Israel for reasons that are no secret
to anyone and that are primarily concerned with
Israel’s malignant role in the world diamond trade in
general, and in Africa in particular.

Pursuant to that request, we will now proceed to
the separate vote on the words in question in operative
paragraph 23. Under the separate vote, a vote in favour
means that the words in question will remain in the
draft resolution; a vote against means that the words in
question will be deleted. After that, the General
Assembly will take action on the draft resolution as a
whole.

As you know, Mr. President, and as the Legal
Adviser has stated, the rules of procedure allow for a
vote on any phrase or word in any draft resolution.

The General Assembly will now therefore take a
decision on the wording of operative paragraph 23 of
the draft resolution: “and takes note that the Process
has selected Israel as Chair and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as Vice-Chair of the Process for
2010”. A recorded vote has been requested.
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on a point of order.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have asked to speak on a point of order, in
accordance with the rules of procedure, in order to
clarify the matter on which we are expected to vote.
We noticed that there was some misunderstanding
among some of our colleagues. Our request pertains
only to the request to vote on the deletion of a minor
part of paragraph 23, not an entire sentence. What we
requested, specifically, was the deletion of the
following words from paragraph 23: “Israel as Chair
and”. The amended sentence would read as follows:
“Acknowledges with great appreciation the
important contribution that Namibia, as Chair of
the Kimberley Process in 2009, has made to the
efforts to curb the trade in conflict diamonds, and
takes note that the Process has selected the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as Vice-Chair
of the Process for 2010”.
This was what we requested, not that the entire
sentence be deleted.
The reason for this, as everyone knows, is that
my country’s delegation highly appreciates Namibia’s
Kimberley Process chairmanship for this year. Namibia

10

The President: I call on the representative of
Egypt on a point of order.
Mr. Attiya (Egypt): I wish to clarify something,
because I think that what was read out earlier as the
amendment proposed by Syria was different from what
was explained just now by the Syrian representative.
We have to be clear beforehand on what has been
decided and what we are voting on. To my delegation,
this is a clear amendment.
The President: I call on the representative of
Israel on a point of order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): I would like to associate
my delegation with what the representative of Egypt
said. Until the meeting was suspended, the vote was on
one thing: an affirmative reiteration of what is written
in the draft resolution. What we just heard a few
moments ago from one particular representative was
something else: the request of that representative to
delete something. I think we deserve to know what we
are voting on.
The President: The representative of Israel is
impatient and should have waited. The vote will be on
what was decided before the suspension.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mexico,

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain,
Sri
Lanka,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Chile, Comoros, Egypt, Indonesia, Kuwait,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Nigeria, Sudan,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
The original wording of operative paragraph 23
of draft resolution A/64/L.26 was retained by 90
votes to 6, with 18 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/64/L.26, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”. May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.26?
Draft resolution A/64/L.26
(resolution 64/109).

was

adopted

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union.
As the representative of the European Union
delegation stated earlier during the debate, the
European Union attaches great importance to the

09-64442

Kimberley Process. This initiative allows the
international community to act in a transparent and
coordinated manner to eradicate the trade in conflict
diamonds. It is imperative that the Kimberley Process
remain independent and consensual.
The European Union values the support that the
United Nations can lend to the Kimberley Process.
Unfortunately, there seems to be a trend to politicize
this issue when it is addressed by the General
Assembly. This might undermine the work to ensure
that diamonds fund peace and development rather than
conflict.
Resolution 64/109 adopted today does not
provide for the kind of support that the Kimberley
Process needs from the General Assembly. The text
does not accurately reflect the discussions that took
place during the Kimberley Process plenary session of
2 to 5 November in Swakopmund, Namibia. In
particular, we regret the fact that no reference is made
to the continuing challenges faced by Zimbabwe in
implementing the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme. The plenary adopted an administrative
decision and an workplan to address the outcome of the
review mission to Zimbabwe, which had found credible
indications of significant non-compliance with the
minimum requirements of the Certification Scheme.
Mr. Hackett (Barbados), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The European Union also wishes to underline its
regret that the election of the new Chair and Vice-Chair
of the Kimberley Process was not welcomed in
accordance with customary practice. The European
Union warmly welcomes Israel as the upcoming Chair
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2010.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): The purpose of
United Nations resolutions on the role of diamonds in
fuelling conflicts has been to provide a comprehensive
review and update of the main items of discussion and
decisions adopted at the Kimberley Process sessions in
a given year. Canada has joined consensus in order to
support the Kimberley Process, but is disappointed that
this year’s resolution 64/109 does not accurately reflect
the work of the Kimberley Process in 2009. Canada
takes issue with two points.
First, the main item on the Kimberley Process
agenda this year was Zimbabwe. A review mission, led

11

A/64/PV.63

by Liberia, took place in June and July and found
“credible indications of significant non-compliance”
(A/64/559, attachment I, para. 13) with the minimum
requirements of the Certification Scheme. This
language is taken from the communiqué agreed to by
Zimbabwe in Namibia. The review team also
confirmed consistent reports of human rights abuses
related to diamond production at Marange. The
Kimberley Process adopted a workplan for immediate
and urgent implementation by Zimbabwe. Regrettably,
the resolution ignores this key development.
Secondly, Canada does not support the
resolution’s wording on the current and upcoming
chairmanships. Israel was a consensus choice for
Vice-Chair and then Chair of the Kimberley Process,
and resolutions have traditionally welcomed the
incoming Chair. This resolution should have done this.
For these reasons, Canada was not able to co-sponsor
this resolution.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): Japan strongly supports the
Kimberley Process. We appreciate the role of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in helping to
ensure the effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1459 (2003) to combat trafficking
in conflict diamonds and establish a mechanism for the
prevention of future conflicts. Japan recognizes the
high importance of the Kimberley Process for the
settlement of conflicts and the advancement of peace
and security in the world. We also support the
Kimberley Process offers of assistance to help those
participants experiencing temporary difficulties in
complying with the requirements of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme to overcome their
challenges. Japan continues to encourage those
countries to engage in the Process.
Japan thanks all of those who participated in the
active discussions to formulate the resolution this year
under the Chair of the Kimberley Process. We regret
only that we could not complete our discussions and
reach consensus. It is Japan’s hope to continue to play
an active role in support of the Kimberley Process.
We take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Namibia, the outgoing Chair, and to
welcome Israel as Chair and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as Vice-Chair. We look forward to
cooperating with them and other members of the
Kimberley Process to further improve the Process.

12

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Namibia for its valuable work as
Chair of the Kimberley Process over the past year.
Switzerland is deeply committed to the process, which
has a positive impact in reducing the role of conflict
diamonds in fuelling armed conflict and in helping to
protect legitimate trade.
With regard to resolution 64/109, Switzerland is
disappointed with its content. We are convinced that a
better outcome for all parties could have been reached,
and fear that, with the omission of references to
Zimbabwe, the image of the Kimberley Process will be
damaged and work on future such resolutions will
become even more difficult. This was a squandered
opportunity to address some of the major challenges
facing the Kimberley Process.
Furthermore, we feel that the role of the private
sector and civil society has not been adequately
reflected. In that context, although we joined
consensus, we did so with a sense that the international
community had not entirely fulfilled its duty.
Allow me to reiterate Switzerland’s appreciation
for the valuable accomplishments of the Namibian
Chair. We welcome and congratulate Israel as the
incoming Chair and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as the Vice-Chair, and wish them a challenging
and successful year that we hope will take the
Kimberley Process one step forward.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand takes
this opportunity to explain its position on resolution
64/109 on the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
New Zealand joined consensus on the resolution
because we strongly support the Kimberley Process.
We are disappointed, however, that language on
Zimbabwe, in particular, was removed from the
resolution, and it was for this reason that we did not
co-sponsor. We are concerned at the situation in
Zimbabwe, which was found to be non-compliant with
the minimum standards of the Kimberley Process.
We welcome Israel as the incoming Chair of the
Kimberley Process and look forward to working with
them. We also look forward to constructive and
consensus-based negotiations on this resolution next
year.
Finally, New Zealand expresses concern at the
procedural confusion — I could use stronger

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

language — that preceded the adoption of this
resolution.
Mr. Rose (Australia): Australia, as a strong
supporter of the Kimberley Process, traditionally
co-sponsors the resolution thereon. We consider it
important that the General Assembly be appraised of
the work of the Kimberley Process in its efforts to curb
the trade in conflict diamonds.
Unfortunately, this year’s resolution 64/109 falls
short in two respects and does not accurately reflect
proceedings within the Kimberley Process. For that
reason, we have been unable to co-sponsor the
resolution.
First, we regret that we were not able to agree a
consensus reference to the situation in Zimbabwe. At
its session last month, the Kimberley Process plenary
adopted an administrative decision on the state of
compliance with the minimum requirements of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme by Zimbabwe.
The plenary adopted a joint workplan for implementing
the recommendations of the July review mission to
Zimbabwe and welcomed Zimbabwe’s commitment to
urgently starting implementation of the joint workplan,
while calling upon participants to support the plan.
Regrettably, the resolution ignores that reality.
Secondly, we regret that the resolution was not
able to welcome the selection of Israel as Chair and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as Vice-Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2010. As mentioned by Canada,
on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand in our
debate on this item earlier this morning, we would like
to welcome Israel as the incoming Kimberley Process
Chair and we look forward to working with them to
enhance the effectiveness and implementation of the
Kimberley Process in the year ahead.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our view that it was unfortunate that a
delegation that had participated actively and
constructively in the informal consultations on this
Process waited until the day of action to voice its
opposition to a paragraph of what we understood to
otherwise be a consensus resolution. That opposition
has nothing to do with the role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict, but was designed solely to bring extraneous
issues unnecessarily into our consideration of this
agenda item.

Ms. Ross (United States of America): The United
States strongly supports the Kimberley Process, and we
warmly welcome and look forward to working closely
with Israel as it assumes the chairmanship and with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as it assumes the
vice-chairmanship of the Kimberley Process in 2010.
The Governments, industry and civil society
organizations engaged in the Kimberley Process
deserve recognition for six years of collective efforts in
preventing diamonds from being used to fund conflict.
The Kimberley Process monitored over $39 billion in
the rough diamond trade in 2008, enabling the
international community to work together to help
ensure stability in diamond-producing countries and
head off potential future conflicts.
The unique multi-stakeholder approach, in which
Governments, the diamond industry, and civil society
have worked together in the Kimberley Process to
monitor and control the rough diamond trade, is now a
model for other efforts to combat resource-based
conflict. The Kimberley Process demonstrates that
when Governments work together with the private
sector and civil society organizations, we can ensure
that the legitimate trade in diamonds helps countries
reduce poverty, promote transparency and economic
development, combat smuggling and moneylaundering, and meet Millennium Development Goals.
We note a number of achievements by the
Kimberley
Process
in
2009,
including
the
establishment of measures for enhanced cooperation on
law enforcement and for the sharing of critical
Kimberley Process data with the United Nations. We
note that the Kimberley Process continued efforts this
year to control illicit diamond flows from Côte
d’Ivoire, and we welcome efforts by Liberia to
facilitate regional cooperation to address those illicit
flows.
We also welcome progress made regarding
increased oversight of exports from Guinea. The
actions related to Guinea underscore the importance of
the different bodies of the Kimberley Process working
together to address critical issues. In the Guinea
example, three working groups collaborated for many
months to analyse trade statistics and other data to
reach what we hope are credible conclusions and
identify specific mechanisms to remedy the problems.
However,
notwithstanding
those
positive
developments, the United States has serious concerns

09-64442

13

A/64/PV.63

about Zimbabwe’s non-compliance with the minimum
requirements of the Kimberley Process, particularly in
relation to smuggling and grave violence in and around
the Marange diamond fields. As noted by the report of
the review mission that travelled to Zimbabwe in late
June 2009,
“When a participant fails to fulfil the obligations
it that has committed itself to and satisfactorily
adhere to the minimum requirements for
compliance, the objectives of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme are undermined.”
The United States remains strongly committed to
the goals and the work of the Kimberley Process. As a
result, we continue to expect full and expeditious
implementation of the stringent controls that were
agreed to by Zimbabwe during the recent plenary. That
implementation is needed to address serious noncompliance in Zimbabwe and to help restore the
credibility of the Kimberley Process, which we
acknowledge has been damaged during 2009.
We thus note our serious concerns that Zimbabwe
was not willing to reiterate its commitment to its own
agreements and the integrity of the Kimberley Process
through resolution 64/109. We regret that language
reflecting that concern has not been included in the text
of the resolution. Nevertheless, the United States
joined consensus on the resolution in view of the
importance that we attach to the Kimberley Process.
Further, we look to Zimbabwe’s neighbours,
international trading centres and the diamond industry
to redouble their efforts against illicit diamonds from
the Marange region in order to give the decision agreed
to by Zimbabwe and the rest of the Kimberley Process
a chance to succeed, and to bring the smuggling,
violence and human rights violations there to an end.
In that light, we welcome the positive efforts of
civil society organizations within the Kimberley
Process to make more formal the need for the respect
for human rights in the administration of participants’
diamond mining sectors, given that the Kimberley
Process itself was created to mitigate such abuses in
nations facing conflict or internal strife.
The United States supports donor efforts to
provide technical and development assistance to help
Kimberley Process participants and candidate countries
to strengthen their internal controls. One of the best
ways to promote stability in diamond-producing

14

countries is to foster Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme controls at the same time as we support
development opportunities for mining communities.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): As the current Vice-Chair
and the incoming Chair of the Kimberley Process, let
me start by thanking all those delegations that have
genuinely and warmly welcomed Israel’s initiation,
starting in January, as Chair.
This morning, that
was heard again and again in this Hall through the
various deliberations that we have participated in, and I
think that no further elaboration on that theatre need to
be made at this stage.
Resolution 64/109, which the Assembly has
adopted today, contains certain deficiencies and
omissions that remain a serious cause for concern.
First, the credible evidence on non-compliance with
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme by
Zimbabwe, as noted in the Swakopmund communiqué
of 5 November 2009, is of deep concern. The ongoing
problems related to the Marange diamond fields, in
particular, merit attention. However, the omission of
any reference in the resolution to Zimbabwe is
professionally troubling.
Secondly, Israel regrets the efforts of some States
to use this important professional issue to promote a
politicized agenda. What we have seen here today,
unfortunately, is a gap between two worlds — the real
world and a politicized General Assembly that
overlooks historical facts, as the current Chair of the
Kimberley Process, the representative of Namibia, has
indicated. That was done, as we all witnessed, only for
politicized reasons, and not because of any real worries
about black diamonds, which is the issue at stake. In
order to make the resolution relevant, its drafters
would have done better to reflect the real-world
Kimberley Process communiqué of November 2009
instead of succumbing to politicization.
For the aforementioned reasons, Israel did not cosponsor the resolution as drafted, although we did join
consensus.
One more comment from the real-world
Kimberley Process is that the world is very lucky to
have a real Kimberley Process in which real concerns
are met. Israel, as the incoming Chair of the Process, is
prepared to assume, as I have mentioned, greater
responsibility so that we can continue to contribute in a
positive manner towards a more comprehensive and
effective implementation of the Kimberley Process.

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has just adopted by recorded vote
resolution 64/109, entitled, “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts.”
The title of the resolution indicates the great
importance of this issue for our peoples, countries and
Member States because it is very closely linked, on the
one hand, to the illicit and dangerous trade in rough
diamonds and, on the other, to attempts to fuel conflict
in Africa. Therefore, I believe we need to understand
the position of Syria and other countries that have just
expressed their opinion in full transparency.
We regret that the General Assembly was not able
to adopt Syria’s proposal, which would have enabled
us to reach true consensus on the resolution. The main
goal of the resolution, as we understand it, is to prevent
the illicit trade in rough diamonds that contributes to
the exacerbation of conflict in diamond-producing
countries, an aim which is at the heart of the Kimberley
Process. Another goal is to prevent the illicit
exploitation of the natural wealth of peoples through
transnational activity that, inter alia, deprives those
countries of their wealth.
In that respect, my country has echoed the esteem
unanimously expressed for this year’s Chair of the
Kimberley Process, Namibia, and its predominant role
in implementing the goals the Kimberley Process. In so
doing, we also express our support for the efforts of
that brotherly African nation in fighting the illicit trade
in diamonds.
However, my delegation voted against including
a reference to Israel in paragraph 23 of the text because
we believe that the choice of Israel to chair the
Kimberley Process reflects a misreading of the noble
objective outlined in the very title of the resolution. No
one can ignore the fact that Israeli diamond merchants,
most of whom are reserve officers in the Israeli army,
exploit the diamond trade in Africa and elsewhere in
order to fund subversive arms deals and promote
internal strife in certain countries, including the
financing and use of children in armed conflict. All of
these factors fuel conflict and negatively affect peace
and security in Africa.
That is what the title of the resolution warns us
against. The final report of the Group of Experts on
Côte d’Ivoire (see S/2009/521) underscores very

09-64442

clearly the involvement of Israel in the illicit export of
rough diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire. Paragraph 253 of
that report, in fact, highlights the fact that the Group of
Experts is firmly convinced that the Israeli authorities
are able to provide “vital information relevant to the
Group’s investigations into the trade of Ivorian rough
diamonds”. The Group of Experts has asked, among
other things, that Israel carry out a full investigation of
the possible involvement of some of its citizens and
their partners in the illicit trade of Ivorian diamonds.
In paragraph 327 of the report, the Group
expresses its belief that
“it is also worth noting that Mr. Freund’s family,
notably his father, Shimon Freund, also operates
a rough diamond business based in Ramat Gan,
Israel. Company X of Youri Freund (the son)
regularly exports diamonds from Liberia to
Mr. Shimon Freund (the father)”.
We are surprised that the General Assembly would
adopt a resolution that contradicts the report of another
important body of the United Nations — the Group of
Experts on Côte d’Ivoire — that deals with the illicit
trade in rough diamonds there.
As all members know, the title of the resolution
refers to breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict. This
is exactly what most neutral observers know about the
world diamond trade. It was also made very clear to the
international community in the film Blood Diamond,
an objective portrayal that illustrates the accuracy of
our position, which is shared by a great number of
countries. The internationally confirmed involvement
of Israel in the illicit trade in diamonds and arms
promotes international terrorism and protects drug
gangs and separatist movements in Africa.
The Acting
President:
I
remind
the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic that he
exceeded the 10-minute limit on explanations of
position.
Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the
delegation of Venezuela wishes to congratulate and
thank Namibia for its direction of the Kimberley
Process during its chairmanship. We would also like to
congratulate the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
having been elected Vice-Chair of that mechanism.

15

A/64/PV.63

My delegation has taken the floor although we
had not planned to speak in explanation of position,
because, as a co-sponsor of resolution 64/109, we are
truly alarmed at the politicization of this mechanism,
which is supposed to be a voluntary mechanism of
cooperation among a group of countries, including my
own, to serve the cause of mitigating any factors that
contributes to conflict in Africa. This morning,
however, we have seen certain delegations — not all
but some — take the floor claiming to be the
guarantors of the mechanism by pointing their fingers
at other countries. We believe that this is totally
unacceptable. That is why we abstained in the voting
on paragraph 23.
Another factor that compelled us to change our
position is precisely that pointed out earlier by the
representative of Syria, which we feel to be of the
utmost importance. Clearly, the mechanism will have
to meet to determine whether there is a conflict of
interest between the chairmanship being exercised by
the country that is being questioned and the legitimate
objectives of the mechanism. I shall transmit this
information immediately to my Government.
We know that the major producers of diamonds,
which control the largest transnational diamond
operations, also have serious responsibilities in this
matter. Unfortunately, we fear that the Kimberley
Process, if it is not revised, is going to lose its teeth
and its legitimacy, which is founded on the
endorsement of those responsible countries that make
up the great majority of its participants.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe, who has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): We are very
pleased that we have been able to adopt resolution
64/109 by consensus, and we are very grateful to the
chairmanship of Namibia. They have done a splendid
job in getting the resolution adopted.
This morning we have witnessed a charade
committed by a number of countries that think they are
the guarantors of the Kimberley Process, making
reference to Zimbabwe in terms of non-compliance.
We are of the view that, if we are talking of
non-compliance, we should look at it from a global
perspective. Zimbabwe is very much a victim. Our
diamonds are being smuggled, fraudulently certified
and finding markets in Israel, Canada, Antwerp, the

16

United States and elsewhere. So if we are talking about
compliance, let it be global. Do not point the finger
just at Zimbabwe. We are victims.
We are committed to the Kimberley Process, and
we know that we can safeguard our resources if we
comply with the Process. We were in Swakopmund. We
agreed to a plan within the Kimberley Process. The
countries that are trying to bring the issue of Zimbabwe
into the General Assembly are trying to incorporate
technical issues into a resolution of the General
Assembly. The communiqué that we agreed to in
Swakopmund is on record, and there is no reason why
people would want to repeat in the resolution what is
already in the communiqué. There is no added value to
that.
So I want to remind those that have been pointing
fingers at Zimbabwe that if there were no buyers of
illicit diamonds in the world — in the United States, in
Canada, in Israel — there would be no trade for those
diamonds. If it is a question of compliance, let us look
at compliance from a holistic point of view, rather than
seek a scapegoat for political reasons.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In view of the lateness of
the hour, the Assembly will consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 70, “Assistance to the Palestinian people”
and agenda item 115, “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy”, originally scheduled for
today’s meeting, on Wednesday 16 December in the
morning.
The President in the Chair.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
draw members’ attention to two matters. The first has
to do with extending the work of the Fifth Committee.
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on
18 September 2009, the General Assembly approved
the recommendation of the General Committee that the
Fifth Committee would complete its work by Friday,
11 December 2009. However, I have been informed by
the Chairman of the Fifth Committee that the
Committee will not be able to finish its work by today,
Friday, 11 December.

09-64442

A/64/PV.63

May I therefore take it that the Assembly agrees
to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until Friday,
18 December?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The second
matter concerns the date of the recess of the current
session of the General Assembly. Members will recall
that at its 2nd plenary meeting, the Assembly decided
that the sixty-fourth session would recess on Tuesday,

09-64442

15 December 2009. However, in view of the work that
remains to be done for this part of the session, I would
like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone the
date of recess of the current session to Tuesday,
22 December.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17
