United Nations

S/PV.6227

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6227th meeting
Monday, 30 November 2009, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ebner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2009/592)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-62291 (E)

*0962291*

S/PV.6227

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2009/592)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Djibril Bassolé, Joint African
Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.
I invite Mr. Bassolé to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2009/592, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

2

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Edmond Mulet and Mr. Djibril
Bassolé. I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the security situation in Darfur
as well as on the national political and electoral
environment, following the issuance of SecretaryGeneral’s report of 16 November (S/2009/592). My
briefing will also provide an overview of the actions
that are required to implement the objectives of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Afterwards, the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassolé, will provide a complete
update on the political process and the efforts of the
Mediation to facilitate a political solution in Darfur.
The security situation in Darfur remains unstable.
Carjackings and attacks against humanitarian workers
have not stopped, and we remain extremely concerned
by the fate of two UNAMID employees who were
kidnapped in Zalingue 94 days ago. Furthermore, the
beginning of a new round of peace talks in Doha on
17 November coincided with an increase in fighting on
the ground. That same day, 17 November, in Southern
Darfur, combatants affiliated with the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)/Minni Minawi faction attacked two
villages close to Neghea, killing 11 people. On
19 November, the Sudanese Armed Forces reported the
deaths of 29 soldiers in an ambush in Sindy, in
Northern Darfur, allegedly orchestrated by the rebels
belonging to the SLA/Abdul Shafi faction, but for
which responsibility was also claimed by the
SLA/Abdul Wahid faction. In the same period,
UNAMID also reported clashes between SLA/Abdul
Shafi and SLA/Abdul Wahid in the Jebel Marra in
Western Darfur. These attacks are unacceptable and
clearly show — if proof were needed — that the
fragmentation of Darfurian rebel movements remains a
reality, with obvious consequences for the Mediation
and the peace process.
Lastly, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report, over the past three months, UNAMID has had
to face significant obstacles to its freedom of
movement. Given the extent of the problem, these were
brought to the attention of senior Sudanese officials
during discussions in New York on 28 September. The
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, then sent a detailed list of incidents
to the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United

09-62291

S/PV.6227

Nations on 14 October. We are determined to resolve
this problem in cooperation with the Sudanese
authorities, and we will continue to raise this matter
with them in an open and transparent fashion.
It goes without saying that the rebel movements
must be held to the same obligations. In
mid-November, SLA/Abdul Wahid repeatedly denied
UNAMID access to the zones under its control in
Northern Darfur and the Jebel Marra area, notably in
Sortony and Deribat. That is why the armed
movements must be asked to make similar
commitments to ensure freedom of movement for
UNAMID in the zones under their control if we want
the Mission to succeed in its effort to help the parties
restore full peace and stability. UNAMID will continue
to work with the Government as well as with the
movements in pursuing this objective, but it is clear
that we will need the support of Security Council
members in this undertaking.
(spoke in English)
In the national political context, the Government
of the Sudan is carrying out registration for the
national elections, scheduled to take place in April
2010. As foreseen in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), national elections can play a
significant role in building national unity and
democratization in the Sudan. To date, significant
challenges remain with regard to preparations,
including agreement on the census results, clarification
of constituency delimitation and completion of the
registration process. A transparent and meaningful
debate must also take place with regard to what is
required to hold inclusive elections in Darfur. To date,
a number of Darfur groups, including internally
displaced persons and the movements — the Justice
and Equality Movement and the SLA/Abdul Wahid —
continue to express concerns about the holding of
elections before the conclusion of a peace agreement.
In this connection, the start of elections
registration on 1 November led to heightened tensions
in some areas of Darfur. On 9 November, SLA faction
leaders threatened to attack election registration
officials who attempted to enter territory they control.
On 18 November, assailants attempted to force their
way into a voter registration team accommodation near
Mornei in Western Darfur. We are investigating these
reports, which describe an unacceptable threat to the
electoral process in the Sudan. UNAMID is also

09-62291

working to disseminate a strong message that no group
has a right to use violence to disrupt preparations for
the elections. We must demand more both of partners
in the Government of National Unity and of the Darfur
movements in addressing outstanding political and
technical issues associated with the elections, with a
view to ensuring that they meet the objectives set down
in the CPA.
The release of the report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur chaired by President
Mbeki represents another major political development
for the Sudan. As the Council is aware, the
recommendations of the report were endorsed in a
29 October communiqué issued by a summit-level
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council. In the meantime, we are preparing for
forthcoming discussions with the African Union on the
next steps.
With regard to the peace process, Joint Chief
Mediator Bassolé will provide you with a detailed
update on the positions of the parties and his mediation
efforts. From our perspective, with the pressure and
urgency of the electoral time frame in mind,
Mr. Bassolé has been working for over a year to
facilitate the resumption of direct talks between the
Government and the armed movements, with civil
society consultations alongside those talks. In the
meantime, the Government and the movements must
demonstrate a readiness to give up completely the
military option.
In our view, the Sudanese know what they have
to do, and the report of President Mbeki’s panel
highlights the issues that need to be addressed: powersharing, wealth-sharing, security and compensation.
Considerable progress needs to be made on those
issues in the coming months in order for the elections
to be meaningful in Darfur. If progress is not made, the
holding of elections could have significant implications
for peace. The challenge for this Council, for the
United Nations and for the African Union, is therefore
how best to assist the parties in achieving a political
solution that addresses these issues.
The report before the Council describes a set of
concrete benchmarks and indicators for measuring
progress towards the achievement of UNAMID’s
mandate. Progress in all four areas is long overdue for
the people of Darfur: the achievement of a
comprehensive political solution; the establishment of

3

S/PV.6227

a secure and stable environment; enhancement of the
rule of law and a stabilized humanitarian situation.
Among the Mission’s mandated activities and the
efforts of the United Nations in Darfur, none are as
important as those aimed at achieving a comprehensive
political solution to end Darfur’s marginalization and
to enable its rightful representation in the national
political process.
The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bassolé.
Mr. Bassolé: I would like to thank the Council
for the constant support that it has have given to the
Darfur peace process. Thank you also for this
opportunity given to me, as the Joint African Union
Chief Mediator, to update the Council on the current
state of the process, whose objectives are the
establishment of a comprehensive political peace
agreement and a popular consensus of opinion to
support it.
I would like to start by praising the large majority
of Sudanese actors for their engagement in the process
of dialogue to find an end to this crisis. Unfortunately,
the belligerents’ current lack of confidence in each
other makes for slow progress in the peace talks and in
achieving an end to military hostilities.
On 18 November 2009 in Doha, the Mediation, in
partnership with the State of Qatar, launched the Darfur
peace talks in the presence of the representatives of all
of the different communities living in Darfur, as well
as of women’s groups, the youth and internally
displaced
persons.
Representatives
from
the
Government of National Unity and the armed
movements also attended.
Allow me to thank His Highness the Amir of
Qatar and his Government for all the efforts that they
have made, diplomatically and organizationally, to
make the peace process successful. I would also like to
thank Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States, for his unfailing support.
Together, the League of Arab States and the African
Union have sponsored the initiative, spearheaded by
Qatar, which is supporting the Mediation.
The inclusive peace talks that we have just
commenced will include both a dialogue between the
different parts of Darfurian society and direct
negotiations between the belligerent parties. The aims

4

are to find a comprehensive resolution of the
underlying
causes
of
crisis,
to
overcome
inter-communal hatreds caused by war and to
accelerate socio-economic development. Civil society,
as well as the principal belligerents, must address the
central issues, which include: the socio-economic
reintegration of displaced persons and refugees; the
promotion of human rights and human security; the
fight against poverty and marginalization; the end of
military hostilities and political and security
arrangements; the 2010 elections and democratic good
governance; the resolution of land disputes; and
compensation, reconciliation and justice, including an
end to criminal impunity.
Civil society has a clear and important role to
play in the peace process. Its involvement will be
crucial for the promotion of social and inter-communal
reconciliation, in order to rid Darfurian society of the
germs of chronic conflict that risk prolonging the crisis
and affecting the entire subregion. Ending the crisis
across Darfur requires addressing varied and complex
issues: the pastoral and agrarian use and management
of land; environmental degradation and the precarious
livelihoods and living conditions of nomads; the new
social and political realities of the camps of internally
displaced people, et cetera. Civil society must be
involved in the search for solutions in order for there to
be widespread, sustainable peace.
The process of negotiations between the armed
movements and the Government of National Unity has
slowed since the signing of the 17 February 2009 Doha
Goodwill Agreement. This is due to a crisis of
confidence between the principal belligerents, as well
as various differences that undermine the cohesion of
the movements.
The Mediation has intensified its efforts with the
Justice and Equality Movement of Khalil Ibrahim, as
well as with the Sudan Liberation Movement of Abdul
Wahid al-Nur. Our aim is for these two founding
movements of Darfur’s rebellion to unite their
positions and those of all of the other movements of
Darfur. I would like to praise the reunification efforts
undertaken by the armed movements and supported by
Libya and the United States.
To encourage them in this direction, the
Government of National Unity should do its utmost to
strengthen the credibility of the peace process. In

09-62291

S/PV.6227

particular, it should reduce tensions in Darfur, improve
security and advance socio-economic development.
I call upon all of the belligerent parties to agree a
cessation of hostilities and to commit themselves to
improve significantly the security situation in Darfur.
There needs to be an end to hostage-takings, clashes
between belligerents, the marauding of armed militias,
the recruitment of fighters, the anarchic circulation of
arms and above all, impunity.
During the course of the peace talks, the
Mediation will encourage the parties to agree and
establish a coordination body with the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) that will facilitate the free and safe passage
of people and goods across Darfur.
It is also crucial that the Sudan improve its
relations with Chad. That is a necessary, although not
sufficient, condition for peace in Darfur. The
re-establishment of confidence between the two will
help to reduce tensions considerably. We should praise
the recent initiative taken by Chad and the Sudan to
improve their relations. I also ask the Council to
continue to encourage the supportive diplomatic efforts
of Libya, the Dakar Contact Group, Qatar and the
wider international community.
The Darfur peace talks are taking place today in
the uncertain and tense environment of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The good conduct of the 2010 general
elections across the whole of the Sudan, including
Darfur, is a key factor for peace. The Mediation
therefore strongly urges the parties to the Darfur crisis
to reach the political understanding necessary to allow
for the holding of elections — elections that will
reinforce democracy, peace and stability in Darfur and
the whole of the Sudan.
To that end, I would like to commend the
excellent work done by the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, in coordination with the
Department of Political Affairs and the African Union
Commission, to develop an integrated overall approach
to peace in the Sudan. It will help the Mediation to take
into account the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
calendar. It also supports the efforts of the Government
of National Unity, the key actor in both the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur
processes, to promote peace across the country.

09-62291

I would also like to highlight the analysis of the
causes of conflict outlined in the report of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur. It explains how the
conflicts in the East, South and West of the country are
related to national political and economic powersharing arrangements. That is why it is urgent that we
come to a political arrangement in Darfur ahead of the
electoral deadlines. Those elections should not threaten
peace and stability in the Sudan. Rather, they should be
an opportunity for the promotion of democracy, good
governance and stability in the country.
Arriving at a political accord is essential to
ensuring that the electoral process is neither boycotted
nor taken hostage. To achieve that, I will invite the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan, including
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, to work with
the parties to the Darfur conflict during the peace talks
in Doha. I hope that, together, they can agree the
necessary political arrangements to allow the entire
population of Darfur to take part in the elections. That
will also offer them the opportunity to resolve, through
dialogue, the questions of political representation and
democratic good governance. Voting by the whole of
Darfur’s population in calm, free and fair elections
constitutes the legitimate and acceptable means for the
selection of its local and national political leaders.
The approach of the joint African Union-United
Nations Mediation and of our partner, Minister
Al-Mahmoud of Qatar, is adapted to the realities of
African countries facing crises. It is also inspired by
the values and traditional approach to conflict
resolution in Africa, which are based upon the mutual
confidence and respect of the parties. A participative
and inclusive approach is the best way to establish
lasting peace in Darfur. The Mediation is therefore
involving representatives of all communities and
women’s groups, young people and internally displaced
persons alongside the belligerents.
The first civil society forum, held in Doha, was
an important success. I must thank the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan, as well as local
administrative authorities in Darfur, for their
facilitation of the forum, in collaboration with
UNAMID. The popular representatives of Darfur were
able to assemble and freely discuss solutions to the
crisis.
In the coming days, alongside negotiations
between the belligerents, the Mediation will organize a

5

S/PV.6227

workshop with representatives of civil society and
armed movements. The aim will be to reinforce the
internal cohesion essential to the process. The
exclusion or marginalization of one of the actors by the
Mediation would otherwise certainly entail fratricidal
clashes inside Darfur. Such fighting would increase
insecurity and decrease stability across the whole
subregion. The process of building peace must not
exacerbate rivalries between the parties. Rather, it
should unite them and help seal social reconciliation.
The Council’s support for inclusive peace talks
will play a decisive role in encouraging all the parties
to join to process in Doha. The Sudanese State and its
Administration are the lynchpin for the construction of
peace. The international community should support
them in the promotion of peace and democratic good
governance, as well as socio-economic development in
Darfur.
Among the challenges to the process are mistrust
arising from the trauma of war and growing political
rivalries, which are accentuated by the coming
elections. Despites those challenges, however, we have
hope that the principal actors in the crisis will come to
the negotiation table to agree the modalities for ending
the conflict. They need to agree the terms for peace,
justice, national reconciliation, human security and
economic and social progress in Darfur.
The refusal of some armed movements to take
part in political dialogue and the persistent divisions
between others should not be allowed to block the
establishment of peace in Darfur. That is why the
Mediation will, in the near future, submit to the
belligerent parties for approval the solutions emerging
through consensus from all of Darfur’s communities.
With the genuine popular support of the inhabitants of
Darfur and the assistance of the international
community, it will be possible to make significant
progress towards durable social peace.
The Mediation recognizes the varying states of
readiness of the parties and will not sacrifice the
credibility or sustainability of the process. The
Mediation will make progress with those who are
ready, allowing time for those who are not. It will also
simultaneously pursue three tracks: building consensus
of opinion among civil society, organizing negotiations
between the movements and the Government, and
improving Chad-Sudan relations. It will advance as

6

quickly as possible along each track, which will
facilitate progress along the others.
I would like to finish by reiterating my
commitment and my determination to fulfil, to the best
of my ability, the mission that has been entrusted to
me. I will continue to work, with integrity and
impartiality, to improve the situation of the population
of Darfur and the whole of Sudan. The Mediation will
continue to advance, despite the complexity of the
crisis and all of the various obstacles in our path.
To succeed in this mission to bring peace, we
need now more than ever this Council’s support to
reinforce the authority and credibility of the Mediation.
With the undivided backing of the Security Council
and the international community at large, and with the
engagement of the parties to the conflict, the
population of Darfur will hopefully soon be able to
find peace, reconciliation and socio-economic
progress.
The President: I thank Mr. Bassolé for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, allow me once again to congratulate you, on
this last day of your presidency of the Security Council
for this month. It has been a very fruitful month in
terms of the activities and varied initiatives
undertaken. I would also like to thank Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his presentation at the beginning of this
meeting of the Secretary-General’s periodic report
(S/2009/592) on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also
like to thank Mr. Djibril Bassolé, Joint African UnionUnited Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, for his
briefing on the peace process.
In earlier statements, we have said that the peace
process remains the only way of ensuring security,
stability and lasting peace, particularly since we have
now turned the page on military confrontation and
there is no longer war in Darfur. Indeed, the desire for
peace has won out as the unanimous choice of all of
the citizens of Darfur. Only one link in the chain is still
missing: the Security Council must breathe new life
into the political process by undertaking immediate and
decisive action to encourage those who are refusing or

09-62291

S/PV.6227

hesitating to participate seriously in the negotiations
that are planned.
The Government of Sudan firmly believes that it
must focus its efforts on the political process as the top
priority. But we are also not neglecting the need to
meet the requirements of all the other tracks,
particularly the maintenance of peace. Indeed, the
report before the Council takes note of the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan, the initiatives it has
undertaken and its close coordination with the African
Union and the United Nations in the context of the
Tripartite Mechanism, which was established to speed
up deployment and to resolve all of the problems that
still face us. The Tripartite Mechanism holds regular
meetings, whose results confirm that the Government
of the Sudan is cooperating fully and is positively
addressing all the concerns expressed. The most recent
such meeting, the seventh, was held in Khartoum on
16 November.
Moreover, three days ago the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union organized an important
visit to Darfur, during which its delegation affirmed
that the situation in Darfur had clearly improved and
that the Government of the Sudan was cooperating
fully with UNAMID.
With regard to UNAMID contingents already
deployed, the report confirms that the Mission is now
fully operational and all that remain to be resolved are
a few support issues. Deployed military contingents
now number 14,638 personnel, the police component
4,449 personnel, and the civilian component 3,921. The
report states clearly in paragraph 43 that — while the
mission is now fully operational and has been for over
a year — it still lacks military support, for example
helicopters and transport units. This does not fall
within the purview of either the Sudan or the Tripartite
Mechanism.
Meanwhile, registration for the upcoming
elections in April is proceeding smoothly in all
provinces of the Sudan, including in Darfur, and
abroad.
Sudan has also undertaken an initiative with
regard to the brotherly country of Chad through the
important visit by presidential adviser Ghazi
Salaheddine to N’Djamena with a view to normalizing
relations between our two countries and brotherly
peoples.

All of the personnel on the ground in Darfur have
been deployed thanks to the unstinting cooperation of
the Government of the Sudan, the host country of the
Mission. So we were justifiably surprised that the
report, in some of its paragraphs, overlooks this reality
and gives the impression that there are still certain
obstacles facing UNAMID. Reference was made to a
few isolated incidents, which are the sort of thing that
could happen anywhere in the world, not to mention in
an area such as Darfur, where there has been an armed
rebellion. For example, if a UNAMID patrol was
somewhat delayed, the report indicates, in paragraph
66 for example, that Government officials — in the
plural — prevented access to UNAMID patrols.
What is more, a number of paragraphs in the
report describing the security situation do not faithfully
reflect what is actually happening. There has been an
end to fighting and an improvement in the security
situation in Darfur, and yet the report highlights a
number of isolated incidents, which the Government of
the Sudan has already strongly condemned. The
Government is seeking to prevent any recurrence of
incidents such as the kidnapping of two UNAMID staff
members or the killing of an individual by unknown
attackers.
The report makes reference to serious
developments in the security sphere. This is rather
startling to us. We do not want any guest of ours, or
any member of the Mission to be harmed, let alone
kidnapped or killed, and we condemn such acts. These
isolated incidents must not be exaggerated. We must
put them into their proper context as the exception, not
the rule. We note that the security situation in Darfur is
somewhat stable and continues to improve.
During your presidency of the Council, Sir, you
have undertaken a number of initiatives, for example
on the protection of civilians. But what is missing is
that we and the United Nations must be protected
against such non-factual reports, drafted by
international officials not in the interest of peace in
Darfur but to serve particular interests. The reports of
the United Nations should be objective and positive,
and they should serve the cause of peace, not run
counter it.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

09-62291

7
