A/77/415

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 77

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of
its seventy-third session
Report of the Sixth Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Sarah Zahirah Ruhama (Malaysia)

I. Introduction
1.
The item entitled “Report of the International Law Commission on the work of
its seventy-third session” was included in the provisional agenda of the seventy seventh session of the General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolution
76/111 of 9 December 2021.
2.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee.
3.
The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 21st to 31st meetings, and at its
36th meeting, from 25 to 28 October, on 1 to 2 November and on 18 November 2022.
The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee’s consideration of
the item are reflected in the relevant summary records. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-third session (A/77/10).
5.
The Chair of the International Law Commission at its seventy-third session
introduced the report of the Commission on the work of that session at the 21st
meeting, on 25 October, and the Committee considered the report in three clusters,
namely: cluster I (chapters I to V and X) at its 21st to 25th meetings, from 25 to
27 October, cluster II (chapters VI and IX) at its 26th to 29th meetings, on 28 October
and on 1 November, and cluster III (chapters VII and VIII) at its 30th to 31st and 36th
meetings, on 2 and 18 November.

__________________
1

22-26238 (E)

A/C.6/77/SR.21, A/C.6/77/SR.22, A/C.6/77/SR.23, A/C.6/77/SR.24, A/C.6/77/SR.25,
A/C.6/77/SR.26, A/C.6/77/SR.27, A/C.6/77/SR.28, A/C.6/77/SR.29, A/C.6/77/SR.30,
A/C.6/77/SR.31 and A/C.6/77/SR.36.

251122

*2226238*

A/77/415

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.16
6.
At the 36th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Colombia, on behalf
of the Bureau, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its seventy-third session” (A/C.6/77/L.16) and orally
revised it as follows:
(a) A new operative paragraph 3 was inserted as follows, and the subsequent
paragraphs were renumbered accordingly:
Decides that the consideration of chapter IV of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-third session, dealing
with the topic “Peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens)”,
shall be continued at the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, during
the consideration of the report of the Commission on the work of its seventy fourth session;
(b) The renumbered operative paragraph 5 (former operative paragraph 4) was
revised to read:
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects of
the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the specific
issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

General principles of law;

(b)

Sea-level rise in relation to international law;

(c)

Subsidiary means for the determination of rules of international law;

(d)

Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea;

(e) Settlement of
organizations are parties;

international

disputes

to

which

international

7.
At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee made a statement
regarding the financial implications of the draft resolution.
8.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.16,
as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 12, draft resolution I).
9.
The representative of South Africa (on behalf of Colombia, El Salvador, Italy,
Mexico, Portugal, Sierra Leone, South Africa and Uganda) spoke in explanation of
position after the adoption of the draft resolution.

B.

Draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.22
10. At the 36th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Mexico, on behalf
of the Bureau, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Protect ion of the environment
in relation to armed conflicts” (A/C.6/77/L.22).
11. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.22
without a vote (see para. 12, draft resolution II).

2/16

22-26238

A/77/415

III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee
12. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-third session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and
codification of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth
Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development and
codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which,
given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable for
the progressive development and codification of international law and therefore may be
included in the future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new topics
for the consideration of the International Law Commission, and noting in this regard
the recommendation of the Commission that such proposals be accompanied by a
statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law
Commission of the information provided by Member States concerning their views
and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the
International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and the voluntary
contributions made to the United Nations trust fund for the International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
__________________
1
2

22-26238

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/77/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
3/16

A/77/415

Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commis sion as a body
of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two
bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question
time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in General Assembly reso lution 58/316 of
1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-third session; 3
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
work accomplished at its seventy-third session, and notes in particular:
(a) The completion of the second reading of the draft conclusions on
identification and legal consequences of peremptory norms of general international
law (jus cogens) and the commentaries thereto; 4
(b) The completion of the second reading of the draft principles on protection
of the environment in relation to armed conflicts and the commentaries there to; 5
(c) The completion of the first reading of the draft articles on immunity of
State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction and the commentaries thereto; 6
3.
Decides that the consideration of chapter IV of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its seventy-third session, dealing with the topic
“Peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens)”, shall be continued at the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, during the consideration of the report
of the Commission on the work of its seventy-fourth session;
4.
Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work on
the topics in its current programme of work, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the Sixth Committee;
5.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects of the
topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the specific issues
identified in chapter III of its report, 7 regarding:
(a)

General principles of law;

(b)

Sea-level rise in relation to international law;

(c)

Subsidiary means for the determination of rules of international law;

(d)

Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea;

(e) Settlement of international disputes to which international organizations
are parties;
6.
Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their comments and observations by

__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/77/10).
Ibid, chap. IV, sect. E.
5
Ibid, chap. V, sect. E.
6
Ibid, chap. VI, sect. C.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/77/10).
3
4

4/16

22-26238

A/77/415

1 December 2023 on the draft articles on immunity of State officials from foreign
criminal jurisdiction; 8
7.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include
the topics “Settlement of international disputes to which international organizations
are parties”, “Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea” and
“Subsidiary means for the determination of rules of international law” in its
programme of work, 9 and encourages the Commission to continue the examination of
the topics that are in its long-term programme of work; 10
8.
Encourages the International Law Commission to take particular account
of the capacity and views of Member States, as well as of the workload of the
Commission, when including topics in its current programme of work;
9.
Takes note of paragraphs 249 to 253 of the report of the International Law
Commission, 11 and notes, in particular, the inclusion of the topic “Non-legally
binding international agreements” in the long-term programme of work of the
Commission, 12 and in this regard calls upon the Commission to take into
consideration the comments, concerns and observations expressed by Governments
during the debate in the Sixth Committee;
10. Also takes note of paragraph 270 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify
concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs, additional to those
provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
11. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its
methods of work, and encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
12. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity and to consider making proposals to Member
States to that end;
13. Recalls the importance of an in-depth analysis of State practice and the
consideration of the diversity of legal systems of Member States to the work of the
International Law Commission;
14. Takes note of paragraph 274 of the report of the International Law
Commission, recalls the paramount importance of multilingualism as set forth in
General Assembly resolutions 69/324 of 11 September 2015 and 73/346 of
16 September 2019 on multilingualism, underlines the importance of having the
documents of the Commission published in due time in the six official languages of
the United Nations while ensuring their accuracy in all official languages, and to this
end requests special rapporteurs to submit their reports within the time limits specified
by the Secretariat, and the Secretariat to give due consideration to the quality of th e
translation of the documents of the Commission in the six official languages;
__________________

Ibid., para. 66.
Ibid., paras. 238–240.
10
The following topics are currently in the long-term programme of work of the International Law
Commission: “Ownership and protection of wrecks beyond the limits of national maritime
jurisdiction”, “Jurisdictional immunity of international organizations”, “Protection of personal
data in transborder flow of information”, “Extraterritorial jurisdiction”, “The fair and equitable
treatment standard in international investment law”, “Eviden ce before international courts and
tribunals”, “Universal criminal jurisdiction”, “Reparation to individuals for gross violations of
international human rights law and serious violations of international humanitarian law” and
“Non-legally binding international agreements”.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/77/10).
12
Ibid., para. 251.
8
9

22-26238

5/16

A/77/415

15. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take costsaving measures at its future sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and
effectiveness of its work;
16. Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the United
Nations Office at Geneva;
17. Takes note of paragraph 284 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at the
United Nations Office at Geneva from 24 April to 2 June and from 3 July to 4 August
2023;
18. Also takes note of paragraph 281 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretariat to proceed with the necessary
administrative and organizational arrangements to facilitate the holding of the first
part of a session of the Commission in New York during the next quinquennium;
19. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission, in particular the special rapporteurs, and the Sixth
Committee, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of
informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission throughout the year;
20. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission, to continue to adhere as far as possible to the
structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider
presenting concise and focused statements;
21. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to enable
high-level discussions on issues of international law;
22. Underlines in this regard the necessity to allow sufficient time for the
consideration of the report of the International Law Commission in the Sixth
Committee;
23. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which
expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written
form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
24. Takes note of paragraphs 286 to 288 of the report of the International Law
Commission with regard to cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and
encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of articles 16 (e), 25 and
26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission
and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of
such cooperation;
25. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
26. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission, including in the preparation of
memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Comm ission, and takes note
of the request of the Commission to the Secretariat contained in paragraphs 241 to
6/16

22-26238

A/77/415

246 of the report of the Commission to prepare memorandums that would be
particularly relevant for its future work on the topics “Settlement of intern ational
disputes to which international organizations are parties”, “Prevention and repression
of piracy and armed robbery at sea”, “Subsidiary means for the determination of rules
of international law” and “Sea-level rise in relation to international law”;
27. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and
summary records of the International Law Commission; 13
28. Takes note of paragraph 272 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of
the International Law Commission, welcomes the continuation of the measures taken
to streamline the processing of summary records during the sixty -fifth session of the
Commission, 14 which have led to a more rational use of resources, and expresses its
satisfaction that the summary records of the Commission, constituting travaux
préparatoires in the progressive development and codification of international law,
will not be subject to arbitrary length restrictions;
29. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to
include on the website of the International Law Commission the provisional summary
records in English and French relating to the work of the Commission;
30. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat in seeking to ensure the timely
and efficient processing of the documents of the International Law Commission and
the institutionalization of the experimental measures taken during the sixty -eighth
session of the Commission to streamline the editing of those documents;
31. Takes note of paragraph 271 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and underlines the importance of the publications of the Codification
Division to the work of the Commission, welcomes in particular the issuance of the
ninth edition of The Work of the International Law Commission also in Chinese,
French, Russian and Spanish, and reiterates its request that the Secretary -General
continue to publish The Work of the International Law Commission in all six official
languages at the beginning of each quinquennium, the Reports of International
Arbitral Awards in English or French and the Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory
Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice in all six official languages
every five years;
32. Also takes note of paragraph 275 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Library at Geneva for
the dedicated assistance accorded to the Commission, and notes the Commission’s
emphasis on the need for adequate funding to ensure the continuation of the Library’s
ability to function as a research library to assist the Commission in the performance
of its mandate in the codification and progressive development of international law;
33. Further takes note of paragraph 276 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the unique value of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely publication in
all official languages;
34. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary
contributions to the trust fund on the backlog relating to the Yearbook of the
__________________

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the
annual reports of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly; see also Yearbook
of the International Law Commission 1982, vol. II (Part Two), paras. 267–269 and 271, as well
as all subsequent annual reports of the International Law Commission.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10),
para. 183.
13

22-26238

7/16

A/77/415

International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the trust
fund;
35. Takes note of paragraph 277 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the
past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission in all six languages, welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its
Editing Section, in effectively implementing relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog, enc ourages that Division to
provide continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on progress
made in this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
36. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain
and improve the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
37. Takes note of paragraph 285 of the report of the International Law
Commission, together with annex II and the appendix to the report, and, without
prejudice to the importance of ensuring necessary allocations for the Commission and
its secretariat in the regular budget, requests the Secretary-General to establish a trust
fund for assistance to Special Rapporteurs of the International Law Commission and
matters ancillary thereto, taking into account the terms of reference proposed in the
appendix to the report, including the need for the financial contributions not to be
earmarked for any specific activity of the International Law Commission, its Special
Rapporteurs or Chairs of its Study Groups;
38. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be
held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and that
an increasing number of participants representing the principal legal systems of the
world and from different countries in the various regions, including in particular those
from developing countries, will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, as
well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and appeals to States to continue to make
urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund for the
International Law Seminar;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the International
Law Seminar with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and
encourages him to continue to consider ways to improve the structure and c ontent of
the Seminar;
40. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the
debate in the Sixth Committee for the deliberations of the International Law
Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in
conjunction with their oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical
summary of the debate, following established practice;
41. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the
conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its report
containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the specific
issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the
Commission and any draft provisions adopted on either first or second reading by the
Commission;
42. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the
International Law Commission available as soon as possible after the conclusion of
the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States with due
8/16

22-26238

A/77/415

anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for repor ts in the General
Assembly;
43. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider
ways in which specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of
particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help Governments to
have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
44. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly commence on
23 October 2023.

22-26238

9/16

A/77/415

Draft resolution II
Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its seventy-third session, 1 which contains the draft principles on
protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts,
Taking note of the recommendation of the International Law Commission
contained in paragraph 55 of its report,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the recommendation of the United Nations Environment Programme
that the International Law Commission examine the existing international law for
protecting the environment during armed conflict and recommend how it can be
clarified, codified and expanded, 2
Noting that the subject of protection of the environment in relation to armed
conflicts is of major importance in international relations,
Recalling that, to the extent that they do not reflect customary or treaty -based
obligations of States, as applicable, the draft principles provide recommendations for
the progressive development of international law, inter alia, through examples of
effective voluntary measures to enhance the protection of the environment in relation
to armed conflicts,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law Commission
on protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts and its adoption of the
draft principles on protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts and
commentaries thereto; 3
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;
3.
Takes note of all the views and comments expressed in the debates of the
Sixth Committee on the subject, including those made at the seventy -seventh session
of the General Assembly, 4 as well as the comments and observations submitted in
writing by Governments on the draft principles on protection of the environment in
relation to armed conflicts;
4.
Also takes note of the principles on protection of the environment in
relation to armed conflicts, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, with
the commentaries thereto, brings them to the attention of States, i nternational
organizations and all who may be called upon to deal with the subject, and encourages
their widest possible dissemination.
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/77/10).
United Nations Environment Programme, Protecting the Environment During Armed Conflict: An
Inventory and Analysis of International Law (Nairobi, 2009), recommendation 3.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/77/10), paras. 58–59.
4
See A/C.6/77/SR.21, A/C.6/77/SR.22, A/C.6/77/SR.23, A/C.6/77/SR.24, A/C.6/77/SR.25 and
A/C.6/77/SR.31. The statements made in the Sixth Committee are available in full (in the
original languages) on the website of the Sixth Committee, at www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/.
1
2

10/16

22-26238

A/77/415

Annex
Principles on protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts
Preamble
Recalling the urgent need and common objectives to reinforce and advance
the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of the environment for present
and future generations,
Recalling also that principle 24 of the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development provides, inter alia, that States shall respect international law
providing protection for the environment in times of armed conflict and
cooperate in its further development,
Recognizing that environmental consequences of armed conflicts may be
severe and have the potential to exacerbate global environmental challenges,
such as climate change and biodiversity loss,
Aware of the importance of the environment for livelihoods, food and
water security, maintenance of traditions and cultures, and the enjo yment of
human rights,
Emphasizing that environmental factors are to be taken into account in the
context of the implementation of the principles and rules of the law applicable
in armed conflict,
Conscious of the need to enhance the protection of the environment in
relation to both international and non-international armed conflicts, including
in situations of occupation,
Considering that effective protection of the environment in relation to
armed conflicts requires that measures are taken by States, international
organizations and other relevant actors to prevent, mitigate and remediate harm
to the environment before, during and after an armed conflict,
Part one
Introduction
Principle 1
Scope
The present principles apply to the protection of the environment before,
during or after an armed conflict, including in situations of occupation.
Principle 2
Purpose
The present principles are aimed at enhancing the protection of the
environment in relation to armed conflicts, including through measures to
prevent, mitigate and remediate harm to the environment.
Part two
Principles of general application
Principle 3
Measures to enhance the protection of the environment
1.
States shall, pursuant to their obligations under international law, take
effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures to enhance the
protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts.

22-26238

11/16

A/77/415

2.
In addition, States should take further measures, as appropriate, to enhance
the protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts.
Principle 4
Designation of protected zones
States should designate, by agreement or otherwise, areas of environmental
importance as protected zones in the event of an armed conflict, including where
those areas are of cultural importance.
Principle 5
Protection of the environment of Indigenous Peoples
1.
States, international organizations and other relevant actors shall take
appropriate measures, in the event of an armed conflict, to protect the
environment of the lands and territories that Indigenous Peoples inhabit or
traditionally use.
2.
When an armed conflict has adversely affected the environment of the
lands and territories that Indigenous Peoples inhabit or traditionally use, States
shall undertake appropriate and effective consultations and cooperation with the
Indigenous Peoples concerned, through appropriate procedures and in particular
through their own representative institutions, for the purpose of taking remedial
measures.
Principle 6
Agreements concerning the presence of military forces
States and international organizations should, as appropriate, include
provisions on environmental protection in relation to armed conflict in
agreements concerning the presence of military forces. Such provisions should
address measures to prevent, mitigate and remediate harm to the environment.
Principle 7
Peace operations
States and international organizations involved in peace operations
established in relation to armed conflicts shall consider the impact of such
operations on the environment and take, as appropriate, measures to prevent,
mitigate and remediate the harm to the environment resulting from those
operations.
Principle 8
Human displacement
States, international organizations and other relevant actors should take
appropriate measures to prevent, mitigate and remediate harm to the
environment in areas where persons displaced by armed conflict are located, or
through which they transit, while providing relief and assistance for such
persons and local communities.
Principle 9
State responsibility
1.
An internationally wrongful act of a State, in relation to an armed conflict,
that causes damage to the environment entails the international respons ibility of
that State, which is under an obligation to make full reparation for such damage,
including damage to the environment in and of itself.

12/16

22-26238

A/77/415

2.
The present principles are without prejudice to the rules on the
responsibility of States or of international organizations for internationally
wrongful acts.
3.

The present principles are also without prejudice to:
(a)

The rules on the responsibility of non-State armed groups;

(b)

The rules on individual criminal responsibility.

Principle 10
Due diligence by business enterprises
States should take appropriate measures aimed at ensuring that business
enterprises operating in or from their territories, or territories under their
jurisdiction, exercise due diligence with respect to the protect ion of the
environment, including in relation to human health, when acting in an area
affected by an armed conflict. Such measures include those aimed at ensuring
that natural resources are purchased or otherwise obtained in an environmentally
sustainable manner.
Principle 11
Liability of business enterprises
States should take appropriate measures aimed at ensuring that business
enterprises operating in or from their territories, or territories under their
jurisdiction, can be held liable for harm caused by them to the environment,
including in relation to human health, in an area affected by an armed conflict.
Such measures should, as appropriate, include those aimed at ensuring that a
business enterprise can be held liable to the extent that suc h harm is caused by
its subsidiary acting under its de facto control. To this end, as appropriate, States
should provide adequate and effective procedures and remedies, in particular
for the victims of such harm.
Part three
Principles applicable during armed conflict
Principle 12
Martens Clause with respect to the protection of the environment in
relation to armed conflicts
In cases not covered by international agreements, the environment remains
under the protection and authority of the principles of international law derived
from established custom, from the principles of humanity and from the dictates
of public conscience.
Principle 13
General protection of the environment during armed conflict
1.
The environment shall be respected and protected in accordance with
applicable international law and, in particular, the law of armed conflict.
2.

Subject to applicable international law:

(a) Care shall be taken to protect the environment against widespread,
long-term and severe damage;
(b) The use of methods and means of warfare that are intended, or may
be expected, to cause widespread, long-term and severe damage to the
environment is prohibited.

22-26238

13/16

A/77/415

3.
No part of the environment may be attacked, unless it has become a
military objective.
Principle 14
Application of the law of armed conflict to the environment
The law of armed conflict, including the principles and rules on
distinction, proportionality and precautions, shall be applied to the environment,
with a view to its protection.
Principle 15
Prohibition of reprisals
Attacks against the environment by way of reprisals are prohibited.
Principle 16
Prohibition of pillage
Pillage of natural resources is prohibited.
Principle 17
Environmental modification techniques
In accordance with their international obligations, States shall not engage
in military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques
having widespread, long-lasting or severe effects as the means of destruction,
damage or injury to any other State.
Principle 18
Protected zones
An area of environmental importance, including where that area is of
cultural importance, designated by agreement as a protected zone shall be
protected against any attack, except insofar as it contains a military objective.
Such protected zone shall benefit from any additional agreed protections.
Part four
Principles applicable in situations of occupation
Principle 19
General environmental obligations of an occupying Power
1.
An occupying Power shall respect and protect the environment of the
occupied territory in accordance with applicable international law and take
environmental considerations into account in the administration of such
territory.
2.
An occupying Power shall take appropriate measures to prevent significant
harm to the environment of the occupied territory, including harm that is likely
to prejudice the health and well-being of protected persons of the occupied
territory or otherwise violate their rights.
3.
An occupying Power shall respect the law and institutions of the occupied
territory concerning the protection of the environment and may only introduce
changes within the limits provided by the law of armed conflict.

14/16

22-26238

A/77/415

Principle 20
Sustainable use of natural resources
To the extent that an occupying Power is permitted to administer and use
the natural resources in an occupied territory, for the benefit of the protected
population of the occupied territory and for other lawful purposes under the law
of armed conflict, it shall do so in a way that ensures their sustainable use and
minimizes harm to the environment.
Principle 21
Prevention of transboundary harm
An occupying Power shall take appropriate measures to ensure that
activities in the occupied territory do not cause significant harm to the
environment of other States or areas beyond national jurisdiction, or any area of
the occupied State beyond the occupied territory.
Part five
Principles applicable after armed conflict
Principle 22
Peace processes
1.
Parties to an armed conflict should, as part of the peace process, including
where appropriate in peace agreements, address matters relating to the
restoration and protection of the environment damaged as a result of the conflict.
2.
Relevant international organizations should, where appropriate, play a
facilitating role in this regard.
Principle 23
Sharing and granting access to information
1.
To facilitate measures to remediate harm to the environment resulting from
an armed conflict, States and relevant international organizations shall share and
grant access to relevant information in accordance with their obligations under
applicable international law.
2.
Nothing in paragraph 1 affects the right to invoke the grounds for refusal
to share or grant access to information provided for in applicable international
law. Nevertheless, States and international organizations shall cooperate in good
faith with a view to providing as much information as possible under the
circumstances.
Principle 24
Post-armed conflict environmental assessments and remedial measures
Relevant actors, including States and international organizations, should
cooperate with respect to post-armed conflict environmental assessments and
remedial measures.
Principle 25
Relief and assistance
When, in relation to an armed conflict, the source of environmental
damage is unidentified, or reparation is unavailable, States and relevant
international organizations should take appropriate measures so that the damage
does not remain unrepaired or uncompensated, and may consider establishing
special compensation funds or providing other forms of relief or assistance.

22-26238

15/16

A/77/415

Principle 26
Remnants of war
1.
Parties to an armed conflict shall seek, as soon as possible, to remove or
render harmless toxic or other hazardous remnants of war under their
jurisdiction or control that are causing or risk causin g damage to the
environment. Such measures shall be taken subject to the applicable rules of
international law.
2.
The parties shall also endeavour to reach agreement, among themselves
and, where appropriate, with other States and with international organ izations,
on technical and material assistance, including, in appropriate circumstances,
the undertaking of joint operations to remove or render harmless such toxic or
other hazardous remnants of war.
3.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 are without prejudice to any rights or obligations under
international law to clear, remove, destroy or maintain minefields, mined areas,
mines, booby-traps, explosive ordnance and other devices.
Principle 27
Remnants of war at sea
States and relevant international organizations should cooperate to ensure
that remnants of war at sea do not constitute a danger to the environment.

16/16

22-26238
