United Nations

S/PV.6472

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6472nd meeting
Friday, 21 January 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Institution-building
Letter dated 10 January 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/16)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21268 (E)

*1121268*

S/PV.6472

I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The Secretary-General: Mr. President, thank
you for initiating today’s special debate. Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s own transition is considerable. Your
country has rapidly moved from recipient of
international assistance in a conflict and post-conflict
environment to contributor to international peace and
security as a member of the Security Council. I
applaud your readiness to create a platform to share
experiences in institution-building and to strengthen
our common efforts.

The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Institution-building
Letter dated 10 January 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2011/16)
The President: I would like to welcome the
presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedures, I would like to invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Japan, Mexico, Morocco,
Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Serbia, Slovenia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and the United Republic of Tanzania to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: Under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Germany.
Also under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Peter Schwaiger,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, and Mrs. Alice Mungwa, Chargé
d’affaires of the Office of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/16, transmitting the concept paper on
the item under consideration.

2

His

Building effective and legitimate institutions is a
difficult task, even under the most favourable
conditions. It presents even greater challenges in postconflict situations. Unfortunately, the track record of
international support to institution-building is mixed.
We can do better.
Institutions can be critical in sustaining peace and
reducing the risk of relapse into violence. Building
legitimate and effective institutions that respect and
promote human rights therefore must be a central
element of the overall peacebuilding effort.
This open debate offers an important opportunity
to review the Council’s own role in this area and the
lessons we have learned. Experience suggests that there
are three major lessons we need to apply to our
collective efforts.
First, we need to reinforce national ownership
and leadership and build on existing institutions. I
speak not only of national Governments or core State
institutions, but also of local governments, affiliated
bodies, communities, the private sector, women’s
groups and other civil society actors.
Responsive and inclusive institutions can be built
only by national actors, using their knowledge of the
context, the institutions that do exist and the root
causes of conflicts. International assistance has to build
on what is already there and can help by identifying,
protecting and nurturing latent national capacities. The
ongoing review of international civilian capacity is
guided by this principle. International capacity
assistance should mentor national capacities, never
substitute for them.
More nimble and agile systems are also required,
including stronger partnerships that can provide the
most appropriate civilian capacity, particularly from

11-21268

S/PV.6472

developing countries and among women. Access to
reliable, early and flexible funding will also advance
this goal.
Secondly, we must avoid one-size-fits-all
solutions. Attempts to impose an outside model on a
post-conflict country can do more harm than good.
Each country’s institutions develop on their own
trajectory and at their own pace. They should be
allowed to develop incrementally and with a certain
level of experimentation to learn and change. Similarly,
institutional change should not be approached as a
technical exercise. Rather, it should be viewed and
pursued within the broader context of a country’s
political processes, development and social change.
In Guinea-Bissau, we have found that weak
institutions at multiple levels remain one of the main
causes of political instability and the lack of
socio-economic development.
Institutions are not just bricks and mortar. They
are also about informal norms and values, trust and
social cohesion. Public confidence in the police, for
example, is required for reformed police forces to be
effective and to regain authority. Shared norms are
necessary to enable legal systems to apply the law
equally to all, including different ethnic groups,
minorities and women. Respect for international
standards, including human rights law, will support
public trust in institutions.
Building these intangible qualities and capacities
and addressing public perceptions are particularly
important in post-conflict societies. International
assistance can sometimes facilitate such change, but
only if it is highly sensitive to political and social
dynamics and how they evolve over time.
Thirdly, institution-building should start early and
be sustained not only for years, but decades. In the
short term, early and tangible progress needs to be
made in a few priority areas to restore confidence and
increase the legitimacy of national institutions. Such
gains could include providing security in key areas of
the country, increasing access to justice systems or
expanding health and education services. Quick and
focused capacity development can enable key
institutions to begin functioning again. Peacekeepers,
development and humanitarian actors can play an
important role in this regard.

11-21268

At the same time, premature reform efforts can be
risky, particularly if they are taking place under a shortterm transitional Government and before a first postconflict electoral process. Striking the right balance
between short- and long-term efforts is critical — and
so, too, is the linkage between the two. International
efforts have often failed to recognize that building
effective institutions is a long-term effort, even in
relatively stable conditions. Some progress can be made
in three to five years, but expectations need to be
realistic. This, of course, has implications for the
Council and the missions it mandates.
In recent years, we have seen a marked increased
in institution-building mandates from the Council for
peacekeeping operations and political missions. Where
missions are mandated to support institution-building,
including rule of law and security institutions, we must
do more to ensure, right from the start, a strong
engagement with other international actors. This
requires stronger partnerships and coordination among
the Council, the Secretariat, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, international financial
institutions, regional organizations and others.
As the Council reviews its mandates and plans for
transitions, it could engage these partners more
frequently and directly so as to ensure a smooth
transition to other actors when our missions leave. In
this regard, the Peacebuilding Commission provides an
important political platform for countries on its agenda,
which can help to focus attention on long-term
institution-building priorities and mobilize resources
for them, share lessons learned and sustain engagement
by the international community.
There is much that we can do to improve our
efforts, reduce fragmentation and promote a coherent
approach. We can better reflect institution-building in
assessments, identify what existing institutions are
present and can be developed, and ensure better
predictability and accountability for delivery by the
United Nations system.
Many of the steps we are taking as part of our
peacebuilding
and
integration
agendas
are
strengthening coherence within the United Nations
system, including integrated strategic frameworks that
now bring together the missions and United Nations
country teams around shared strategic objectives. But
we can achieve greater coherence only with the active
support of Member States. For example, we need

3

S/PV.6472

greater consistency across mandating authorities to
facilitate more effective cooperation and smooth
transitions. Greater coherence and coordination among
donors are equally important, and need to start from
the earliest stages.
The Council, for its part, should provide clear and
achievable mandates and carefully consider the role of
a range of actors within and beyond the United Nations
system. The Council and the missions it mandates play
a crucial role in building some of the most important
institutions in post-conflict countries.
Our success will depend on whether we can
deploy the right expertise and resources at the right
time, how well we work with our national and
international partners, and whether we actually apply
the lessons we have learned. Once again, I thank you,
Sir, for your commitment to and focus on this vital
issue, for your initiative and for sharing your country’s
example.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. José
Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): I thank the
Secretary-General for his very informative briefing.
May I, on behalf of Timor-Leste, thank you, Sir,
and your country for holding this important thematic
debate and for your kind invitation to us to join the
Council on this very important occasion. My colleague,
Minister of Finance Emilia Pires, Chair of the Group of
Seven Plus (g7+), could not be with us as she is with
the Prime Minister at our nation’s Parliament,
discussing the 2011 budget.
This year’s budget is focused on developing our
country’s infrastructure and human capital. The budget
process is a key enabling tool in support of our
Nation’s State-building agenda. Such is the level of
public interest in this process that it is broadcast live
on television and radio networks for 13 days to the
entire country.
Today, the situation in East Timor speaks for
itself. We all went through the global financial crisis,
yet for three years running Timor-Leste has
experienced an average of double-digit economic
growth. This places us among the ranks of the top 10
fastest-growing economies in the world. Such growth

4

has seen a 9 per cent decrease in poverty, reversing
rising poverty levels that peaked at 50 per cent during
the crisis. This decrease saw some 96,000 people lifted
out of extreme poverty. The 2010 United Nations
Human Development Index recently recorded a rise in
rank of 14 places for Timor-Leste.
Unemployment has plummeted, with 96 per cent
of men aged between 30 and 49 years currently
employed and two in five women now working yearround. In 2007, 85 per cent of all Timorese were
employed in the agriculture sector; today, that figure
stands at 67 per cent of men and 61 per cent of women.
Much of this achievement has been underpinned by the
strengthening of institutions.
From the professionalization of the public service
to reform of the security sector and the nation’s taxation
system; and from promoting transparency through the
establishment of civil service and anti-corruption
commissions
to
reforming
public
financial
management, institutions have all helped in sustaining
peace through the better delivery of public services.
Very soon, data on Government expenditure will
be available in real time to the people via an on-line
portal, thus ensuring greater transparency and making
public spending more efficient. Timor-Leste’s national
priorities process embodies this national home-grown
strategic response to the challenges of post-conflict
State-building. The identification of specific national
priorities in a sequenced manner has allowed us to
identify and then resolve specific issues. From
establishing stability to ensuring food security, these
issues have required immediate, coordinated and
strategic solutions while not distracting us from the
larger task of reform.
Emerging from crisis in 2006, our immediate
challenge was to establish security and stability so that
out people could begin to rebuild. At that crucial
moment, Timor-Leste was faced with a defining
decision. To whose voice, amidst the offers of
international support, should we listen for direction? At
this time, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Security Council for responding to our request
for assistance in a timely manner.
The crisis of 2006 profoundly affected East
Timor. During his visit to Timor-Leste, the SecretaryGeneral visited tent camps in Dili, our capital. Around
150,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) lived in
tents in East Timor at that time. This is a problem that,

11-21268

S/PV.6472

in many places, takes decades to solve. In East Timor,
we did our best, with the help of the international
community and the representatives of the IDPs
themselves, and by discussing ways to find solutions
we were able to solve the problem in two years. We
therefore thank the Secretary-General and all the
countries and experts that helped us in that process.
At the time of the crisis, we enjoyed the support
of many countries, 36 of which contributed to the
United Nations police mission, reflecting a wide
variety of policies and philosophies. Also at that time,
we faced the daunting task of establishing public trust
in our defence and security forces, as well as trust in
our institutions in general. We therefore had to take
ownership of the process. With the help of the United
Nations, we began security sector reform. Existing
divisions in the defence and security forces slowly
began to be eliminated through professionalization and
better oversight and management. There were also
improvements in the security infrastructure and salaries
and reforms to the promotions regime, ensuring that
merit and ability were restored as key criteria for
career advancement. Those reforms also helped to
secure peace and stability and to ensure that the nation
would not have another crisis.
A second key social programme that has served to
support stability involves recognizing our veterans
through the provision of pensions. We have allocated
$58 million in this year’s budget for that purpose. All
of us who have experience in conflict situations know
how important it is to tackle veterans’ issues. Those
pensions formed part of a wider integrated social
welfare package that now includes the elderly and
female-headed households.
Those reforms heralded the beginning of a new
compact between citizens and the State. Those
successes now allow us to say goodbye to conflict with
hope and determination, and welcome to development.
That is our nation’s motto today.
We find ourselves in a unique position. Having
reflected upon our past failures and successes, we feel
that we are better placed to communicate the lessons
learned and to draw attention to what we consider to
have been ineffective when it comes to how aid has
been used to support institution-building in postconflict States.
For Timor-Leste, the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, which we co-chair

11-21268

with the United Kingdom, is a very important channel
that we use to engage in open and frank exchanges
with fellow member States, as well as with regions and
our development partners. At the Dialogue’s first
meeting, which was hosted by Timor-Leste in April
2010, members indicated that they could not hear their
voices echoed within the vast body of work dedicated
to addressing conflict in our countries. We could not
see ourselves in the road maps, strategies and policy
notes put forward.
In response, members agreed to convene four
working groups dedicated to combining the breadth of
experience
that
conflict-affected
States
and
international partners had to offer, in order to present a
credible and legitimate plan of action for the
international community to refer to. The working
groups focus on capacity development, under the
co-chairmanship of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Japan; aid instruments, under the
co-chairmanship of Afghanistan and Sweden; planning
processes, under the co-chairmanship of Sierra Leone
and the United Kingdom; and political dialogue, under
the co-chairmanship of Liberia and the United Nations.
Over time, a bond has been established between
countries with direct experience of conflict. In fact,
that shared experience provides the bridge necessary to
identify and connect with a diverse range of countries,
all of which are united in the search for peace. A forum
of post-conflict affected countries was thus built, with
a foundation grounded in the same basic human
challenges we all face and spanning a diversity of
cultures, histories and languages. The forum, known as
the Group of Seven Plus (g7+), is a new and
independent forum of conflict-affected countries and
regions that have come together to form a single
collective voice to present to the international
community.
At the forum’s inaugural meeting, held in Dili
last year, 13 countries and regions came together to
recognize the strong spirit of solidarity between our
countries and regions, reflecting a strong desire to
work together in the g7+ to share experiences,
challenges, failures and successes in order to make a
rapid transition to sustainable peace and development.
My colleague the Minister of Finance was honoured to
have been nominated as Chair.
The g7+ now accounts for almost 350 million
people. It is the intention of the Group to own our

5

S/PV.6472

nation-building agendas, drawing upon the combined
wisdom of those 350 million people to provide the
international community with the tools necessary to
bring about real change.
Given the experiences of Timor-Leste, and
considering the experiences that our fellow States have
expressed to us, it is clear that institutions play a
critical role in sustaining the shift away from conflict
towards the building of more stable, responsive and
accountable State. We are therefore concerned when
we repeatedly hear of situations where the actions of
the international community in that regard fall short of
its promises.
As we said at the Millennium Development Goals
summit last year, aid delivery and programmes
supported by international actors are often
inapplicable, unsuitable and incompatible with our
agendas and priorities, including with regard to
institution-building. On that same occasion, the g7+
challenged the global community to commit to a new
paradigm of international engagement in conflictaffected countries and regions.
Other friends tell us of delays in the setting up of
trust funds that are not delivering rapidly and flexibly,
and thus causing disruptions in aid flows that then
impact negatively upon the abilities of emerging
institutions to deliver visible results to people.
In my country as well as in other countries, the
responsibility for coordinating our development
partners’ various conflicting policies and practices
gives an additional responsibility to our institutions. In
order to ensure that we can rely on our partners, we
feel that urgent reform and support must be directed
towards at least four key areas.
First, international partners must help us build
our institutions by working within them. That includes
a complete review of the way technical assistance is
provided to our countries. This is critical if we seek to
strengthen State legitimacy and to build people’s trust
in emerging institutions, particularly during delicate
transitions.
Secondly, one cannot build a nation upon the
principles of another. There is no overarching model
that can be applied to solve the unique challenges
facing our nations. International actors must appreciate
the importance of historical context, culture, regional
diversity, linguistic complexities, social differences,

6

ongoing political dissonance and the national
mentality. All of those are crucial elements in Statebuilding in post-conflict nations.
Thirdly, we must be absolutely clear as to the
purpose that institutions are intended to serve, and then
be relentless in that pursuit. Function over form must
take priority. It is only when the tangible benefits of
institutions are seen and felt that citizens’ confidence,
trust and engagement with State institutions will
emerge.
Fourthly, sustained political dialogue within
States — between the men and women who make up
our communities and Government — is crucial to
strengthening democracy and encouraging buy-in,
thereby turning State-building into a nation-wide
endeavour involving all peoples. In that regard, on
behalf of the g7+, I would like to that advantage of the
timely opportunity afforded by this debate to suggest
the idea of a report of the Secretary-General devoted to
the topic of institution-building in conflict-affected
States.
In conclusion, all that we seek to achieve is
difficult and requires time. However, what the g7+ has
prioritized, and what I have presented to the Council
today, are specific and, more important, actionable
reforms to which the international community must
now commit. We will work with our development
partners through the International Dialogue to
elaborate concrete actions that can improve
international engagement in conflict-affected States.
An action plan will be ready by the end of the year, and
we would be happy to share the results.
As member States made clear in the g7+
statement, our countries understand that urgent action
with international partnerships is critical at this time.
As Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão recently said, this
is not the time to be pessimistic — this is the time for
hope and change. It is my sincere hope that the
international community and members of the Security
Council will take this message and work with us to
ensure that our States and nations are also able to make
a smooth transition towards peace and stability.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig: I would like at the outset to thank the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina for convening

11-21268

S/PV.6472

this important debate
presidential statement.

and

preparing

the

draft

I particularly welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General and also thank the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Guterres, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Allow me to make the following remarks in my
capacity as the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I have just five more days as PBC
Chair, but I will relish them.
The question of national capacity development in
the context of post-conflict peacebuilding has been
particularly addressed as a main theme in the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304).
Today’s debate will allow us to delve deeper into the
critical aspect of institution-building in complex postconflict settings. To this end, I wish to highlight three
overarching points from which we can possibly
approach institution-building from a peacebuilding
perspective.
First, the principle of national ownership, as the
Secretary-General has made very clear, should stand at
the beginning of any effort to build or rebuild
institutions in countries emerging from conflict. Every
post-conflict situation is unique, there is no one size
that fits all and, thus, approaches to institution-building
might vary considerably.
In many cases, most notably such as in postconflict Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should not
assume that the institutions and capacities needed to
transform and rebuild the State and society are
completely absent. We should encourage ongoing
mapping of existing national institutions and capacities
in critical peacebuilding areas — such as in the
security and justice sectors, basic services and
economic revitalization — and build on these existing
national capacities. At the same time, a thorough
analysis and dialogue with national stakeholders are
crucial to prioritization within a broader national
peacebuilding vision.
Secondly, there is an important need to develop a
common institutional understanding within conflicttorn societies. Institution-building goes beyond
establishing and nurturing organizational structures.
From power-sharing and rotation, and the active
participation of women in decision-making processes,

11-21268

to the fair distribution of wealth and economic
opportunities, societies emerging from conflict struggle
to rebuild themselves on the basis of new rules of the
game.
Thirdly, it is important to keep in mind that
entities such as the community, community-based
organizations, the private sector and civil society also
represent forms of institutions and are essential to
advancing national reconciliation, restoring trust,
rebuilding the social fabric and generating economic
opportunities in conflict-affected societies.
Peacebuilding is certainly a major challenge for
the whole United Nations system, but how can the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture contribute to
institution-building in post-conflict environments? The
General Assembly and the Security Council tasked the
PBC to focus on, inter alia, institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from conflict.
I wish to offer a few ideas on how the
Peacebuilding Commission’s role could further evolve
in this respect. The Commission’s engagement offers a
political forum necessary to facilitate among national
stakeholders the development of their own
prioritization for peacebuilding. The Commission can
encourage the identification of the crucial institutions
and mechanisms needed to make post-conflict societies
more resilient and capable of addressing tensions and
challenges through non-violent means.
The Commission’s engagement also provides a
framework for the development of partnerships and
mutual commitments between national Governments
and their international partners in support of national
peacebuilding priorities. The development and
monitoring of its instruments of engagement allows the
Commission to sustain focus on institution-building, to
promote integration and coherence of efforts among
United Nations and non-United Nations actors, and to
help address funding gaps where they exist. As an
advisory body to the Security Council, the Commission
can keep the Council informed of evolving
opportunities for and challenges facing peacebuilding
in countries on the agenda.
Supporting national capacity development for
building,
transforming
and
managing
viable
institutions at the earliest stage should remain at the
heart of our collective efforts. In taking forward
relevant
recommendations
from
the
2010
peacebuilding review, the Commission has undertaken

7

S/PV.6472

to focus its instruments of engagement on practical
approaches to national capacity development around
critical peacebuilding priorities.
To conclude, I would like to welcome the joint
statement to be delivered by the Chairs of the five
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission later on in this debate. I think that such a
joint statement is a first for this body and testifies to
the efforts to develop synergies among the five country
configurations.
Allow me to add a few brief points in my national
capacity.
First, international support to national institutionbuilding should be designed in such a way as to
support national ownership, rather than supplant it.
One positive example of this is the phased-out
involvement of international judges and prosecutors in
the Bosnian State Court, which could serve as an
important model in this regard.
In Timor-Leste, we have seen that, while the
development of national capacities went very well, the
early withdrawal of international judges, prosecutors
and investigators was, with hindsight, perhaps
premature. This can teach us some valuable lessons for
the future on how to better sustain the ability of national
actors to continue to fight against serious crimes.
Secondly, we need to understand the term
“institution-building” in a very broad sense. This is the
approach Germany adopts in its bilateral development
assistance. Institution-building, or rather Statebuilding, is not only about constructing Government
institutions and State capacity; it is about the whole
social fabric of a society and how the State interacts
with its society. Thus, guaranteeing active participation
of women, supporting the establishment of vibrant
social organizations and integrating former childsoldiers, for example, into their local communities can
all be part of institution-building.
In addition, we must think in medium- and longterm perspectives. For too long, the international
community has based its approaches on too narrow and
short-term perspectives. Let us face the fact that
building States from scratch takes decades, not years.
One good example of a nationally owned and broad,
long-term institution-building approach is the
institution-building plan of Palestinian Prime Minister
Fayyad — the Fayyad Plan — launched in 2010. It

8

aims at creating sustainable foundations for a viable
democratic Palestinian State and focuses on areas such
as good governance, social issues, infrastructure and
economic revitalization.
Thirdly, post-conflict institution-building efforts
should be combined with efforts to build national
capacities in fighting impunity and in vetting human
rights violation perpetrators, especially in the areas of
judicial reform and police and corrections capacities, to
rebuild victims’ and public trust in State institutions.
To cite a positive example, Germany funds the
International Legal Foundation’s expert day-to-day
mentoring of local lawyers in Afghanistan and the West
Bank, which has led to major changes in the practice of
lawyers, shifts in lawyers’ assumptions about their role
in the justice system, shifts in the authorities’ views of
the importance of counsel, and the establishment of a
true culture of defence where none previously existed.
Without the involvement of organizations with the
necessary local expertise to build national capacity,
rule-of-law projects fail to develop adequately the
capacities of national justice institutions to strengthen
the rule of law and protect the rights of their citizens.
Lastly, the Security Council should address the
issue of institution-building as early as possible,
especially when mandating, extending or downsizing
existing peacekeeping operations. Germany hopes that,
especially during this phase, the relationship between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission will become closer and more organic.
Germany welcomes the most recent initiatives of the
Council, such as the informal exchange of views
between the Council and the Chairperson of the PBC
country-specific configuration on Liberia, and would
like to encourage more interaction of this nature in the
future. We believe that in this way a more coherent,
comprehensive, effective and timely approach to
institution-building in particular, and post-conflict
situations in general, can be achieved.
In conclusion, we very much look forward to the
soon to be released Senior Advisory Group’s review of
civilian capacities and its recommendations regarding a
more effective and comprehensive approach to postconflict institution-building. We are confident that the
review will give us valuable guidance on many aspects
that are being touched upon during today’s debate.
The President: I thank Mr. Wittig for his briefing
and his statement.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General, Deputy Prime Minister Guterres
and Ambassador Wittig for their thoughtful briefings
today.
The only way to truly end a war is to successfully
build a peace. Old embers left to smolder can ignite
into new flames. Old weaknesses left to languish can
summon new risks. So we face an important challenge
here today — to sharpen all the tools at our disposal in
order to do an essential job better. We meet today at the
initiative of our colleague from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who has rightly drawn the Council’s
attention to our topic today. This is fitting. Countries
that have themselves endured and overcome the horrors
of war are particularly suited to providing leadership —
leadership that rests on hard-won wisdom.
In 1995, the Dayton Peace Accords ended a
shattering conflict that claimed more than 100,000
lives and drove more than 2 million people from their
homes. Through more than 15 years of dedicated
effort, Bosnia and Herzegovina has built up national
governmental institutions one by one and made them
stronger and more effective — from the Ministry of
Defence to the customs service, the tax agency and the
central bank.
The United Nations, together with a wide range
of other actors, has been involved in helping postconflict countries grapple with their most pressing
needs now for more than 20 years, and virtually every
conflict-wracked country currently on the agenda of
the Council — from Haiti, to Liberia to the Sudan to
Afghanistan — seeks effective international assistance
to rebuild its institutions.
We have learned important lessons over the past
two decades in this field, but we also have work to do
in putting them into practice. We all agree that national
ownership of the processes of rebuilding and renewal
is indispensable, but we still struggle to assist fragile
post-conflict Governments so they can set and
implement their own priorities. We recognize that
women need to play a more active role in
peacebuilding, but we still lag in ensuring that women

11-21268

have an equitable stake in making post-conflict
decisions and a full voice in running key institutions.
We know that the sustainability of a peace process
often hinges on strengthening key national institutions,
but we still grapple with how best to mobilize effective
and timely international assistance in such vital areas
as the rule of law and security sectors.
Fortunately, we have collectively acknowledged
the challenges and resolved to make headway on them
in the year ahead. For example, we have turned to the
Peacebuilding Commission to help the democratically
elected Government of Liberia to extend State
authority beyond Monrovia by establishing regional
hubs that will help deliver fair and timely justice in
rural communities and make trained police and
magistrates more accessible to the population as a
whole. We have established new mechanisms and
pledged considerable financial assistance to help Haiti
consolidated the impressive progress it has made since
the terrible earthquake struck a little more than a year
ago.
But as many of us said in the Council yesterday,
Haiti will continue to face steep challenges unless the
international commitment to recovery remains strong
and sustained and unless all parties redouble their
efforts to strengthen Haiti’s critical governing
institutions. The country’s recovery depends on its
ability to find a way to move ahead, even amid
complex challenges, including the continuing turmoil
surrounding the November 2010 election.
The effectiveness of international assistance to
institution-building in Liberia, Haiti and other
countries emerging from conflict depends on the
United Nations and other multilateral and bilateral
actors being able to quickly identify and deploy
qualified civilian expertise. We therefore look forward
in the coming weeks to the findings of the international
review of civilian capacity. We appreciate the briefings
to the membership by the Senior Advisory Group, and
we hope that the review will emphasize the question of
core national capacities in post-conflict States.
We look forward to reviewing specific proposals
to make the United Nations own civilian capacities
more timely, relevant and flexible and more open to
deeper partnerships. Our approach to this review will
be guided by our own recent national efforts, as laid
out in my Government’s first quadrennial diplomacy
and development review.

9

S/PV.6472

We continue to value the Secretary-General’s
ongoing efforts to make United Nations field missions
more effective, particularly his work to ensure that the
top leaders of missions are selected carefully and held
accountable.
This meeting is a timely reminder of how
essential the work of peacebuilding and institutionbuilding is. There are no easy solutions for societies
recovering from conflict, but we must persist in
working together to try to craft and implement the
specific solutions that each post-conflict society needs.
Nothing less than international peace and security hang
in the balance.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate on the complex issue
of institution-building. There can be no lasting
emergence from conflict without reconstruction and
national institution-building; when they are lacking,
conditions conducive to violence can quickly re-emerge.
As previous speakers have said, and as
subsequent ones will as well, there is broad consensus
in the Council on the subject of our debate today,
namely, on the need to address as soon as possible the
process of institution-building in the aftermath of
crisis. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are two sides of
the same coin. They must be planned in a forwardlooking and integrated manner. There are three ideas
that I would like to develop here: the need for national
ownership of the process, as my German colleague has
already mentioned; the need to define priorities as
early as possible; and the importance of long-term
funding for these new institutions.
First of all, with regard to national ownership of
the process, the building of national institutions, the
establishment of the rule of law and the development of
practices of democratic governance are essential
elements of any stable and peaceful political life. These
things cannot be improvised. While it is possible to
temporarily set up institutions in the aftermath of war —
as we saw in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with the International Committee for Support of the
Transition — lasting national institutions can only gain
full legitimacy where there is national political will,
validated by the people through a referendum or
democratic elections. Such national ownership also
makes it possible to ensure that the intellectual and
human resources of a country are used appropriately and
that newly created institutions are adapted to the

10

national context and make it possible for development
to occur. Should it gain independence following the
referendum that has just been completed, what takes
place in Southern Sudan will of course be an
exceptional process that the Council will have to
monitor very carefully.
Priorities will also have to be defined better. We
have to take into account the stakes involved in
governance. Corruption is a threat to the stability and
security of societies, as it undermines institutions,
democratic and moral values and justice. It also
compromises lasting development and the rule of law.
It is therefore important to define strategies and
oversight mechanisms that can enable new institutions
to defend themselves against this scourge, in
conjunction with the whole host of international
partners.
In order to avoid a resumption of conflict,
attention must also be paid to the development of
institutions in the immediate post-crisis context:
democratic and representative bodies, public services
that address primary needs and security institutions
that ensure the stability of the State while guaranteeing
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Guinea, where everything has to be rebuilt even if
it is not emerging from civil war, is a good example of
this. President Alpha Condé has indicated that he wants
to make security-sector reform one of the areas for
immediate attention, along with setting up basic
services and encouraging inter-communal dialogue. His
project of having military engineering corps participate
in public works is also an interesting way of cleaning
up a military institution while placing it at the service
of the development of the country.
There is no single way of rebuilding institutions.
All partners involved must therefore support a strategy
that is fully endorsed by the legitimate authorities of
the host country.
My third and last point relates to the need for
long-term funding. We must address the issue of
sustainable funding for newly created or consolidated
institutions from the very outset. As a State emerging
from crisis rarely has the necessary resources to do so,
the international community has to lend support. Let
me cite the example of the press, which can be an
important pillar for peacebuilding and the promotion of
human rights. In that regard, the role played by United
Nations Radio in the Great Lakes region must be

11-21268

S/PV.6472

acknowledged. The issue of funding radio services
following the departure of United Nations missions has
to be considered.
The Peacebuilding Commission must also play its
role fully in building institutions. It can do so if it
adheres to the three requirements that I have just
mentioned, namely, national ownership, good
governance and financial commitment. We trust that
the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding Commission will
make it possible for it to better focus its action and
bolster its contribution to institution-building in the
post-crisis stages.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
important debate. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing to the Council. We also wish
to thank Mr. Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, for sharing his country’s experiences on
institution-building. We also pay tribute to our
colleague Peter Wittig for his outstanding leadership as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission in the past
year, as well as thank him for his statement today.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
It is certainly true that conflict frustrates not only
the emotional and physical aspects of people’s lives,
but also the economic and social infrastructure of
countries, which is the subject of today’s debate. By
way of further underscoring and addressing the
challenges before us, my delegation will focus on four
broad issues.
The first issue is the importance of national
ownership and local capacities. As has already been
mentioned by those who spoke before me today,
national ownership of peacebuilding efforts is at the
core of creating sustainable institutions in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Although people in
post-conflict situations may not be able to articulate
their short-, medium- and even long-term priorities, we
believe that they can and should be given the
opportunity to at least identify them. The international
community has the obligation to build upon and advise
countries based on priorities that they themselves have
identified. Careful identification of those priorities is in
most cases a critical determinant for the success or
failure of peacebuilding efforts. National actors can be

11-21268

very accurate in identifying the root causes of the
conflict.
National capacities at the human and institutional
level are important in sustaining peacebuilding efforts.
Consequently, the timing of developing these
capacities becomes critical in the medium to long term
when the attention of the international community on a
particular country has waned. In particular, capacityand institution-building are a foundation for efforts to
avert dependency and achieve sustainable peace.
South Africa emphasizes the importance of
building local capacities and the provision of training,
especially targeting women, in order to enhance
existing capacities at the national level, as they are
usually willing to participate in the rebuilding of their
homes, communities and countries. In this context,
South Africa has played a significant part in postconflict capacity- and institution-building in Africa
through
multilateral,
bilateral
and
trilateral
mechanisms, in such countries as Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone,
among others. On behalf of the African Union (AU),
South Africa continues to lead the committee on postconflict reconstruction and development in the Sudan,
whose role is expected to become even more critical in
the post-referendum phase, especially in Southern
Sudan.
Secondly, with regard to the question of
coherence, coordination and partnership, South Africa
strongly supports the call for greater coherence,
coordination and interaction among various United
Nations organs and agencies. The United Nations must
deliver as one. Other actors, such as the international
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations and donors, also need to work in a
coherent and coordinated manner in support of national
authorities to address national institution- and
capacity-building priorities in post-conflict countries.
These priorities include the creation and revival of
institutions for the reform of the security sector,
strengthening the rule of law, ensuring demobilization,
demilitarization and reintegration, and economic
recovery.
South Africa is encouraged by the progress made
by the Peacebuilding Commission in strengthening its
partnerships with regional organizations, in particular
the efforts to institutionalize its relationship with the
African Union. One of the principles underpinning the

11

S/PV.6472

AU’s post-conflict reconstruction and development
programme is capacity-building for sustainability.
Since regional and subregional organizations are in
close proximity to post-conflict situations, it seems
natural and logical to us that the United Nations should
work in partnership with these organizations if it is to
maximize the impact of its peacebuilding interventions.
While acknowledging the improvement in the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, we believe that more has
to be done. Perhaps we could consider flexibility in our
working methods, in order to allow the Commission to
effectively play its role in advising the Council on
institution-building in post-conflict situations. The
growing number of peacekeeping operations,
integrated peacebuilding and special political missions
with considerable peacebuilding tasks provides an
opportunity for the Security Council to make optimal
use of the Commission’s advice. Specifically, in
consultation with the Commission, we encourage the
Council to incorporate peacebuilding tasks related to
institution-building into all of its peacekeeping
mandates. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be
mutually reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace for
countries in conflict.
Concerning the question of mobilizing resources,
as our French colleague has already mentioned,
institution- and capacity-building in post-conflict
countries require a substantial injection of resources. In
this regard, we believe that timely, sustainable and
predictable financing remains a crucial ingredient in
realizing peacebuilding objectives. We therefore
emphasize the need for the United Nations to consider
utilizing sustainable mechanisms, including assessed
contributions, as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding
activities in countries emerging from conflict,
especially for early institution-building efforts.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
adoption of the draft presidential statement before us
on post-conflict peace- and institution-building. South
Africa appreciates United Nations efforts, through its
multifarious organs and agencies, towards making the
world a better place to live. We also look forward to
the report on the review of international civilian
capacities early this year.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, as well as

12

to the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their contributions to today’s discussion.
In its meetings the Security Council regularly
considers issues of post-conflict peacebuilding, both
within the framework of a generalized review and in
the context of individual countries. The peacebuilding
activities of the Organization have taken on a global
scale and demand our careful attention. It is symbolic
that the initiator of today’s discussion is a Council
member with first-hand experience of crisis, having
gone through a brutal armed conflict and being a
recipient of peacebuilding assistance. In our view, such
an insider perspective will help further optimize United
Nations mechanisms and increase our common
understanding of existing problems.
We believe there is a need to highlight a number
of specific principles. First, and most important, is that
the logic of any peacebuilding operation is a function
of the principle of national responsibility for defining
its priorities and the approaches to their
implementation. Only national leaders can ensure
sustainable peaceful development. Mentorship and
templates must be avoided.
Secondly, the key component in successful
post-conflict peacebuilding is the creation and
strengthening of national institutional capacities. This
should become — in facts, not just words — the
system-wide priority for the entire Organization.
Achieving lasting peace and stability is only possible
when every aspect of responsibility and ownership lies
with national players.
Thirdly, any assistance from the international
community should be provided with the consent of
national Governments and with respect for the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
success of peacebuilding efforts in Africa, the Balkans,
Timor-Leste, Afghanistan, the Middle East and other
regions is rooted in the ability to take into account the
interests and priorities of host States. Assistance from
the international community should not be imposed
from outside. There can be no predetermined recipes
for assistance. The specifics of every State and the
nature of every conflict must be taken into account. In
some cases, robust international patronage is essential
in order to help form viable State institutions capable
of effectively resolving the people’s most pressing
problems: establishing security and stability,
stimulating the economy and rebuilding social

11-21268

S/PV.6472

infrastructure. Such international trusteeship does not
cancel out the principle of providing for the gradual
transfer of responsibility for a country’s situation to its
national authorities and for an early definition and
formation of a clear exit strategy. Artificially
maintaining such patronage can squander its purpose
and become counterproductive. It should not become a
brake on the path to strengthening national Statehood.
The United Nations unquestionably plays a
special role in coordinating international post-conflict
and socio-economic reconstruction efforts. The
Organization possesses unique legitimacy and has
accumulated invaluable experience. Even today,
however, this role presents many complexities and
demands the coordinated efforts of the Secretariat, the
Organization’s programmes and funds, Member States,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions. In this regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s drive towards increasing the effectiveness of
United Nations efforts in the area of post-conflict
response, strengthening the Secretariat’s organizational
toolbox and ensuring the cohesiveness of its work. In
the peacebuilding field, the United Nations and its
missions rarely operate in isolation. Other international
presences are often working alongside them, as in, for
example, Afghanistan and Iraq. Relationships in such
cases should be defined in strict compliance with
Security Council decisions.
Many of the initial tasks of peacebuilding — such
as in the area of security-sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration — now
fall to United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
accomplishing its chief task, namely, enabling the
peace process to move forward, United Nations
peacekeepers play a critically important role in
creating the conditions conducive to peacebuilding
assistance on a larger scale. Considering the growing
complexity and multifaceted nature of peacebuilding
mandates, it would be rational to entrust peacekeepers
only with the initial reconstruction tasks. It is
imperative that we exploit the potential of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
of
regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
donors in subsequent stages of post-conflict
peacebuilding.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina for preparing
the draft presidential statement on the topic of today’s
meeting, which we are ready to support.

11-21268

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on a very relevant issue in terms
of the functioning of States and their co-existence in
the aftermath of conflict. Focusing the discussion on
institution-building demonstrates its value for
generating conditions that can ensure sustainable
peace. The statements by the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste and Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
reflect the progress that has been achieved and the
tasks that remain before us on this issue.
Peacebuilding
is
primarily
a
national
responsibility, and I believe we all agree on that.
Countries recovering from the effects of conflict
require tools to ensure good governance, strengthen the
rule of law and channel economic and social
development. In this regard, the international
community is responsible for providing support for
national agendas and priorities aimed at creating,
restoring or reforming institutions in order to achieve
effective administration and national capacity-building.
The actions of the international community, including
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
international financial institutions, should be aimed at
supporting programmes that encourage a country’s
stability and viability. That is why the leadership of the
State in question is paramount at every stage of the
process.
Rebuilding the institutional structure that sustains
a State affects every area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. This viewpoint must be present from
the earliest stages of the planning and executing of
peacekeeping operations. Strategies aimed at
establishing stable and lasting peace must be adapted
to the specificities of each individual case. This
understanding must guide the Council’s discussion and
decisions in order to ensure that the measures adopted
respond to the political, economic and cultural
characteristics of each situation.
The preparation and implementation of
institution-building require from the outset the
participation of the State and the use of existing
national capacities to ensure the transition towards
stability and long-term development and to help
progressively to reduce dependence on the
international community.

13

S/PV.6472

Conflicts weaken or lead to the dissolution of
important civil society structures. There are many
examples. Therefore, it is essential to generate
sustainable economic activities that guarantee a steady
income, a decent standard of living and the
reconstruction of the social fabric. That will help to
prevent the re-emergence of the conditions at the root
of the conflict. Likewise, we must ensure that all actors
involved in the peacebuilding process work in a
coordinated and consistent way in order to avoid the
duplication of efforts and to ensure the efficient use of
available resources.
Colombia believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission is destined to play a central role in
meeting the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict. It should promote recovery, reintegration and
reconstruction and help to lay the foundations of
sustainable development. Accordingly, it should
promote institution-building and the regular use of its
advisory role to the Security Council. Moreover, if the
United Nations is to be more effective throughout the
conflict cycle, the Security Council must make use of
the conflict prevention tools at its disposal to develop
actions to prevent the emergence and recurrence of
situations that threaten or undermine peace. The
experiences and lessons of all countries in that regard
should serve to foster solid institution-building that
ensures the transition to lasting peace.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate. I also take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for an
excellent presentation. I welcome Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste Mr. José Luís Guterres, and
congratulate him on the important strides that his
country has made in recent years. We very much
appreciate his thoughtful comments on State-building,
based on Timor-Leste’s own very successful
experience. I also thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for
his important remarks on peacebuilding.
Brazil aligns itself with the statement to be made
by Ambassador Jan Grauls on behalf of the five Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configurations. I will now make brief remarks in my
national capacity.
The strengthening of Government institutions is
key to achieving sustainable peace in post-conflict
countries. In several parts of the world, the fragility or
the lack of institutions makes it difficult to solve or

14

mitigate serious political, social or economic problems,
thus increasing the risk of relapse into conflict. We are
encouraged to note that a consensus has evolved on the
need for a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
and institution-building.
The efforts of the international community should
be focused not only on supporting institutions in the
field of justice and security, as it is also important to
enhance the capacity of the institutions in charge of
economic revitalization, public administration and the
provision of basic services. Those institutions are
indispensable to promoting poverty reduction, which is
a powerful tool for addressing some of the root causes
of social strife and building long-lasting peace.
Likewise, social policies have a positive impact on the
political process, since they empower groups that were
once excluded from making decisions to do so at both
the local and the national levels. The contribution of
women must be continuously emphasized, taking into
account two dimensions: on the one hand, their
presence in Government institutions and, on the other,
the existence of institutions and governmental bodies
capable of ensuring their fundamental rights and needs.
That is one reason why institution-building must
start at the earliest stage of the post-conflict period.
There are a number of ways in which the United
Nations system can and does assist societies emerging
from conflict in that regard. The development arm of
the Organization, the centrepiece of which is the
United Nations Development Programme, is indeed
expected to have assistance in institution-building as
one of its main tasks.
Nevertheless, that endeavour is to be undertaken
by all parts of the United Nations system, according to
their respective responsibilities. In that regard, it is
encouraging to see the growing recognition of the need
to resort to peacekeepers as early peacebuilders. We
seem to be finally discarding the traditional approach,
by which peacekeeping and peacebuilding were
sequential and unrelated stages in the path towards
peace.
Assistance in institution-building is also a task to
be undertaken in coordination with international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, whose valuable experience and expertise
can provide assistance tailored to the specific needs of
post-conflict countries.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

As has been stressed by previous speakers,
national ownership is vital to peacebuilding processes.
International support to building and strengthening
institutions must be fully aligned with the interests of
the countries concerned. That is particularly relevant to
the United Nations in those places where United
Nations missions are deployed.

value system that would promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes over the long term. The early
engagement of civil society is also important, as it can
help to promote a culture of greater transparency,
accountability and the active participation of the
population in defining its actual needs.

That is why one guiding principle for proper
assistance with regard to civilian capacities should be
to tap into and help build national capacities, thus
avoiding the damaging consequences of brain drain and
dependency on foreign expertise. Partnerships with
Member States, in particular South-South cooperation,
are particularly important to achieving that goal. We
are confident that the current review of international
civilian
capacities
will
submit
concrete
recommendations to ensure that that principle is
translated into practical arrangements.

Institution-building is both a goal and a means to
an end in complex peacebuilding processes. It should
be integrated, along with other peacebuilding goals,
into a national peacebuilding strategy serving as a
framework that brings together peace, security and
development. A successful peacebuilding strategy must
strike a delicate balance between the need to quickly
produce an impact and dividends on the ground, on the
one hand, and to support long-term capacity-building,
on the other, with the overarching goals of
transforming the causes of the conflict and laying the
foundations for justice and durable peace.

Finally, as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil
is committed to promoting national ownership,
nurturing national capacities, and assisting in the
consolidation of national institutions as we move
forward in helping Guinea-Bissau to consolidate peace
and promote its development.

As others have already stressed, the greatest
lesson to be learned from previous efforts at building
institutions in conflict-ridden States is undoubtedly that
there is no one-size-fits-all approach. Building
functional institutions requires tailored approaches
based on thorough analysis of the root causes and
drivers of the conflict.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important and
timely debate. Allow me also to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Peter Wittig and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José
Luís Guterres, for their briefings and presentations.

Institution-building should be nationally owned
from the outset and involve leveraging existing
capacities. Therefore, the United Nations and donors
should seek out local initiatives, however nascent, and
encourage them to grow. In addition to national
ownership, equally important is the availability of
sustained attention and financial resources for longterm tasks. There is often a gap between peacebuilding
aims and the resources required in the long run, as
funding tends to diminish precisely at the point when it
is most needed. In this area, the Peacebuilding
Commission could play a critical role in mobilizing
additional resources to continue over a sustained period
of time.

It is well known that conflict weakens institutions
and affects State capabilities. In the post-conflict
phase, the scale of required institution-building varies
from one country to another. It depends largely on the
degree of institutionalization existing prior to the
eruption of conflict, as it is easier to resuscitate
institutional memory than to establish it from scratch.
However, peacebuilding is not only about rebuilding
what existed before the outbreak of violence. Actually,
it may be the case that existing structures are part of
the root causes of the conflict. Therefore, the goal of
any peacebuilding operation must be to establish stable
and accountable institutions that are able to provide
good governance.
In that context, institution-building should be
understood and pursued in its wider sense, not only to
encompass organizational reforms, but also to instill a

11-21268

Post-conflict institution-building undoubtedly
determines the shape and direction peace and stability
will take. It is thus our responsibility to provide the
necessary means for such an undertaking to succeed.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to commend your
delegation, Mr. President, for bringing the focus of our
peacebuilding discussion on institution-building for the
first time. I extend our thanks to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing, and we especially wish to

15

S/PV.6472

welcome Deputy Prime Minister José Luís Guterres for
sharing the experience of his country with us in this
debate.
We owe a great debt to Peter Wittig speaking in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). We believe that his dual role is a valid sign of
the Security Council’s deepening relationship with the
PBC, from which we can only benefit.
Institution-building,
an
integral
part
of
peacebuilding, encompasses more than establishing
and nourishing organizational structures. It includes the
value systems that underpin such organizations.
Indeed, many civil conflicts erupt or recur not because
of a lack of organizational structures such as courts,
police and other security services, but because of deep
disagreements over the sharing of political power and
economic resources among different groups. The task
of post-conflict institution-building revolves as much
around rehabilitating organizational structures as it
does around restoring the norms and values that guide
the effective functioning of the economy, society and
politics.
Although the work of the various actors in the
United Nations system is to be commended, the
restoration of core institutions cannot be outsourced,
and accordingly it is imperative that, from the
inception of each peacebuilding exercise, the United
Nations be mindful of its role as a facilitator. National
actors should always take the lead in articulating the
needs of their countries, with the United Nations
providing necessary assistance in addressing those
needs.
As speakers before me have already stated, the
fundamental need for people to own their own peace
cannot be ignored. Every post-conflict society must be
the author of its destiny. Any peacebuilding project that
is not rooted in local knowledge, local expertise, local
engagement and local will is doomed to fail right after
the departure of the Blue Helmets. It is equally true
that building a sustainable peace is the primary
responsibility of the nation State. The Government and
people of each country must assume the task of longterm institution-building.
We are gratified that the early findings of the
civilian capacity review of the Peacebuilding Support
Office point to the need to assess local needs and
existing local capacities, including the capacity to
absorb assistance, before we set about deploying

16

international capacities. It is encouraging to note that
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are reviewing
both
their
needs
and
capacity
assessment
methodologies to better calibrate their work on the
ground.
Despite a degree of progress, more predictable
long-term financing for institution-building must
remain high on our agenda. As Nigeria has previously
stated, the lack of pre-mandate funding can slow
progress in implementing important transitional
mandates, and we therefore call for further
consideration of how the Organization might resolve
this very important issue. The two new funding
facilities and the revised funding ceiling for urgent
peacebuilding support from the Peacebuilding Fund are
very welcome innovations. We encourage donors to
participate in this and other multilateral funds that
support institution-building and post-conflict recovery
activities.
Regional actors also have an important role to
play in this context, and we note in particular the
African Union’s Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Policy Framework. For its own part,
Nigeria provides support for regional and international
peacebuilding efforts. Across Africa, particularly West
Africa, we support activities such as security sector
reform. In addition, since 2004 all three arms of
Nigeria’s armed forces have been working assiduously
with civil society to mainstream peacebuilding into
international peacekeeping operations. The integration
of peacebuilding into the training curriculums of a
number of Nigeria’s military institutions is aimed at
equipping the armed forces with skills that will allow
intervention supportive of a more lasting peace within
communities following the cessation of hostilities.
If properly managed, with a clear division of
labour, predictable funding and an exit strategy, the
expertise of the international community can be
invaluable in rebuilding institutions, particularly in the
security and rule of law sectors. We eagerly anticipate
the completion of the civilian capacity review so that
the United Nations can draw from it lessons on better
coordination, better cohesion and more effective
partnerships with national, subregional and regional
actors. In this way we can help post-conflict countries
restore security, accountability and legitimacy, all of
which lie at the very core of responsible statehood.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

Every nation aspires to stand on its own two feet.
Let us use every means at our disposal to make that
aspiration a realizable one. I want to reiterate Nigeria’s
commitment to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As an
active and responsible member of the PBC, we will
continue to lend our support to the efforts of the United
Nations in assisting post-conflict societies.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The sustained
attention of the Council to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is indicative of the fact that it recognizes
that the success or failure of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will determine the continuing relevance
of the United Nations and of this Council to many
troubled parts of the world. My delegation would
therefore like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate to focus on what is probably the
most critical component of the peacebuilding agenda.
We would also like to thank you for the concept paper
(S/2011/16, annex), which we found extremely useful.
I thank the Secretary-General for his remarks,
and I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste for his presence
here and for his presentation on the remarkable strides
that his country has made. I also thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Wittig of
Germany.
Out of respect for the President’s injunction to
confine our remarks to four minutes, I will present only
a summary of what I have to say. A more detailed paper
has been circulated.
Peace cannot be restored to post-conflict societies
and their citizens cannot be freed from fear and want
unless national authorities are able to govern
effectively. The capacity for effective governance, in
turn, depends on the existence of institutions that
enable these authorities to respond effectively to the
aspirations of people.
Over the past two decades, this Council made
huge investments in terms of manpower and resources
in
designing
and
running
multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. These have shown, at best,
mixed results. A handful has delivered outcomes that
may be termed satisfactory. Many have meandered as
they attempted over a decade or more to be equal to the
task of implementing their complex and ambitious
mandates.

11-21268

Unfortunately, conflicts persist, and we are now
in the midst of another paradigm shift. One dimension
of this shift — the attempt to define the scope of
peacebuilding — is becoming ever clearer as fragile
States define areas in which the international
community can and is willing to support their nationbuilding activities. A second dimension — the relation
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding — is also
being clarified. However, a third dimension — the
organizational context of peacebuilding — continues to
lack uniformity. Some peacebuilding efforts are being
managed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, others by the Department of Political
Affairs and yet others by the United Nations resident
coordinator system. At another level, the Peacebuilding
Commission is working to expand its effectiveness.
Peacebuilding, therefore, is very much a work in
progress.
India brings to the table almost 60 years of
experience in peacekeeping. We have contributed more
peacekeepers to more peacekeeping operations than
any other nation. We have also participated in every
type of peacekeeping operation from truce supervision
to the current generation of complex peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeepers are early peacebuilders, and
Indian peacekeepers have been among the earliest
United Nations peacebuilders.
Our experience in transforming a colonial legacy
into a modern, dynamic nation that enjoys both
democracy and a rapidly growing economy has made
Indian peacekeepers instinctively understand that no
peace can be effective unless it is accompanied by the
growth of local institutions. Indian peacekeepers in the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia,
the United Nations Operation in Somalia II, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti and elsewhere have made conscious efforts to
assist local authorities in restoring national structures
that had collapsed during conflict. Our peacekeepers
have donned peacebuilding hats and attempted to
restore administrative processes, strengthened local
policing and activated judicial mechanisms in the areas
they have served. They have attempted to work through
indigenous mechanisms for conflict resolution and
mediation in order to strengthen these local institutions
so that they become viable political institutions. They

17

S/PV.6472

have tried to get educational institutions to function
and provided services, such as livestock clinics, to help
local economies get going.
Political and administrative institutions that
decentralize governance are, in our experience, the key
to nation-building. Institutions must be locally relevant
and include all stakeholders, particularly the weak and
underprivileged.
India launched the largest-ever exercise in
democratic decentralization about two decades ago.
Administrative and legislative powers were transferred
to village- and district-level bodies, and considerable
thought and effort were devoted to making these
institutions locally relevant. The key to the success of
these institutions, we have found, lies in what we call
inclusiveness.
Our
process
of
democratic
decentralization has ensured the election of about
1 million women to representative offices at all levels.
Empowering those who have traditionally been at the
margins of society has strengthened and transformed
both democracy and governance in our country.
Inclusiveness works in interesting ways. The
decision of the Government of India to aggressively
recruit women police personnel allowed us to field a
female formed police unit — the first such formation
composed entirely of women — in UNMIL. We
understand that the presence of these Indian women
police personnel has not only assisted in restoring faith
in the local law enforcement system, but has served as
an example to Liberian women.
No amount of international will can replace
national
will
and
commitment.
Moreover,
peacebuilding cannot be undertaken in a hurry. Our
role as peacebuilders has to be to assist, through longterm and patient involvement, the creation of an
environment in which this local will is allowed to
express itself. It is also to provide the resources and the
expertise that are often lacking in societies struggling
to re-engineer themselves. All of this calls for the
international community to make available a
predictable and appropriate level of resources over
extended periods.
It is hard to avoid the feeling that the United
Nations presence on the ground is a ponderous
bureaucracy rather than a lean institution that is quick
to adapt and respond. Symptomatic of this malaise is
the fact that the Secretariat takes up to 200 days to fill
positions in the field, leading to worrying vacancy

18

levels. The sourcing of these capacities must be driven
by the needs of national authorities and not by
priorities of the donors. It also stands to reason that
these capacities need to be sourced from the
Governments of nations that have experience of
relevance to these national authorities.
Serious consideration must also be given to the
idea of expanding the secondment of staff to the United
Nations. This would allow the United Nations to
rapidly access necessary capabilities, deploy them
swiftly and allow rapid scaling up and down. It is also
likely to be more economical.
In concluding, I would like to stress that, as a
responsible global citizen, India will not be found
lacking in responding to the challenge of maintaining
international peace and security through the
peacebuilding process. Through the Indian Technical
and Economic Cooperation programme, we give
training to some 5,000 foreign students and experts
from 158 countries around the globe in approximately
220 courses. Similarly, through lines of credit, SouthSouth cooperation and the India Development
Initiative, we have contributed to nation-building
activities in various countries. India has also
contributed to peacebuilding through innovate
multilateral mechanisms, such as the India-BrazilSouth Africa initiatives in Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
other nations.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): at the outset, my delegation commends the
initiative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to organize this
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, and more
specifically on the reconstruction of institutional
architecture in countries emerging form conflict. I
would also like to express our gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Mr. José Luís Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, for their
valuable contributions to the present debate. Allow me
finally to thank Ambassador Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany and Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his enlightened
leadership in that role.
Peacebuilding is one of the most difficult and
complex tasks of the United Nations. Over the years, it
has also become one of the most important, insofar as
it prevents countries emerging from devastating
conflicts from sinking back into violence.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

Rebuilding institutional architecture is an
extremely critical issue and calls for particular
attention, as reflected in today’s debate. My delegation
would therefore like to focus on three issues we deem
to be important: the assistance that the United Nations
and the international community as a whole can
provide to these countries; the question of national
ownership; and aspects relating to partnerships.
Institution-building in post-crisis countries is an
important pillar of peacebuilding. This is an issue that
must be taken into account as soon as hostilities cease
in order to establish viable and lasting peace. Indeed, a
number of post-conflict countries lack effective
institutions capable of preserving a painfully won
peace. In other cases, the pre-existing institutions
themselves are the cause of conflict.
The United Nations and the international
community must ensure that peace so achieved is
preserved. This approach allows for peacebuilding, to
prevent any resurgence of conflict, and is fully
consistent with my country’s conception of conflict
prevention.
International assistance, however, should not
obscure the responsibility of the authorities and other
national actors or their participation in the process
aimed at rebuilding the institutions of their country.
Assuming that responsibility would lead them to
greater ownership of the institution-building process
and the strengthening of national capacities.
With regard to issues related to the partnership
among the various players in the reconstruction or
strengthening
of
institutions,
coherence
and
coordination among them is necessary to avoid
overlapping tasks. In Sierra Leone, for example, the
establishment of a single programme for change,
bringing together the areas of security, development
and policy, has considerably streamlined the work of
the administration and has at the same time
strengthened the coherence of its actions and the
country’s taking charge of the peace process.
Coherence must begin at the level of the United
Nations, through the clear definition and distribution of
tasks among the various bodies involved in efforts to
rebuild institutions in post-conflict countries. We
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding
Commission in that regard. Next, coherence must
extend to partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. They are sometimes better placed to

11-21268

resolve some issues and to consider, with the host
country, the question of institution-building.
We also welcome the initiatives undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Commission to strengthen relations
between the United Nations and the World Bank, which
have enabled the Bank to take better account of the
priority needs of countries such as the Central African
Republic during 2010. We encourage the Commission,
in its coordinating role, to develop partnerships with all
financial and donor institutions able to help the
countries on its agenda. The Commission should also
involve all actors, including women’s organizations.
In their report on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393,
annex), the co-facilitators recommended that special
attention be devoted to the partnership between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Gabon considers their recommendations a substantial
contribution. The Council would stand to benefit from
consulting with the Commission throughout all phases
of peace operations, from their preparation through
their renewal and to their withdrawal.
As we have often underscored, Gabon believes
that the issue of institution-building in countries
emerging form armed conflict should be planned for, as
circumstances require, when a peacekeeping operation
is established. Furthermore, we should not lose sight of
the fact that control of the political and security
process is, in our view, a central element of the
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy. To that end, we
urge our financial partners to continue their efforts to
finance reconstruction.
We welcome the fact all of those elements have
been taken into account in the draft presidential
statement that has been submitted to us, which we fully
support.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely and important
debate. It is most suitable that we address this issue
under your presidency, given your country’s
remarkable transition from the post-conflict stage to a
stable democracy. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his important statement.
I wish to extend a most cordial welcome to
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, a country that is also a paradigm of
today’s subject and a success in the United Nations’

19

S/PV.6472

peacebuilding efforts. Today, less than eight years after
its independence, Timor-Leste is a democracy with
stable institutions, looking confidently towards the
future. That is due to the success of the peacebuilding
efforts carried out in Timor-Leste, with institutionbuilding at the centre. But it is mainly due to the will
of the Timorese people and their political leaders’
vision of national ownership and leadership. Portugal
is honoured, alongside the other members of the
Portuguese-speaking community, to be deeply
associated with the successful path Timor-Leste has
followed.
In the early stages of the United Nations reform
process, Mozambique and Portugal jointly proposed
the creation of a framework within the United Nations
system that would help to bridge the gap between
security needs and the need to rebuild stable
institutions that would allow Governments in postconflict situations to effectively pursue their main
tasks. Without that, stability would be elusive and
relapse into conflict would be a serious possibility. In
time, that proposal led to the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which has been
chaired by our colleague Peter Wittig, whom I
congratulate on his commitment and leadership. I must
say that I share his analysis and suggestions concerning
enhancing the role of the PBC.
It is now a common assumption that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be seen as an
integrated effort and no longer as sequential activities,
and that peacebuilding activities should begin as soon
as the situation on the ground so permits, well within
the span of the foreseeable duration of a peacekeeping
operation and throughout its cycle.
The United Nations must enhance its capacity to
define integrated strategies from the outset and to
coordinate the activities of the different actors on the
ground — those in charge of security and the
development
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations — enhancing interaction with all the
relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations, neighbouring countries,
peacebuilding configurations and troop- and policecontributing countries. Much has been done in that
sense, but more still needs to be done.
Only with legitimate, credible and resilient
institutions will a State be able to discharge its
functions and meet the expectations of its citizens.

20

Only such institutions will be able to address the many
issues that remain in post-conflict situations and to
bring the resolution of political disputes into the
political process.
Each country is a different and specific case.
General recipes are dangerous, to say the least. But two
further elements are common and equally important in
all peacebuilding strategies: economic and social
development, and national ownership.
Institution-building alone will not suffice, since
no country will achieve sustainable peace and stability
without
economic
and
social
development.
Unemployment, especially youth unemployment, must
be addressed at an early stage of peacebuilding efforts
through concrete, focused initiatives. International
economic aid should be concentrated on projects that
take into account the economic, social and even
cultural realities of the country, its specific capacities
and the potential they offer for foreign investment.
Adequate management of natural resources should also
be incorporated early into development programmes
and infrastructure reconstruction. Development of
national capacities must be a constant objective in all
areas.
There is an obvious link between development
and peace. The nature of that link is perhaps not totally
clear, nor can one build upon a casual relationship
between the two. But they are surely mutually
reinforcing.
No one can better understand the situation in a
country than the people who live there. No foreign
commitment can replace their will, without which no
peacebuilding effort will be sustainable. The centrality
of national actors is therefore indispensable.
The importance of national ownership in postconflict peacebuilding is well known to all of us. The
partnership between the State and the international
partners must be based on a shared strategic
understanding of the objectives and the way forward,
with clear common goals, permanent and effective
dialogue and interaction with the people of the
country — the authorities, opposition parties and civil
society as a whole. It must include a smooth exit
strategy for the international actors. Gender issues and
the instrumental role that women play in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy,
expanding the scope of national capacities, are also of
particular importance.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

Peacebuilding is also an exercise in managing the
expectations of the authorities and the civil society of
the country in question and those of the mission and
other international stakeholders. That can be done only
through constant dialogue and through a real grasp of
political, social, economic and cultural realities and
their dynamics and evolution.
National ownership contributes to institutionbuilding, and, on the other hand, institution-building
reinforces
national
ownership
and
national
responsibility, thus paving the way for a successful exit
strategy of the international partners and self-sustained
peace and stability.
The European Union has long been committed to
supporting institutional development in post-conflict
countries. In that regard, as a member of the European
Union, Portugal naturally shares the position that will
be expressed by its representative during this debate.
In concluding, I would like to recall an
expression of Sergio Vieira de Mello, who personifies
United Nations involvement both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Timor-Leste. He said “The UN is
an instrument, a frame, an engine, a dynamic, as
conciliatory, as innovative, as successful as Member
States wish it, allow it and make it be.” That is our
common challenge and our shared responsibility.
Bearing that in mind, let me assure the Council of
Portugal’s commitment to contribute to a more
effective and coherent international responsible to
post-conflict peacebuilding.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for taking the initiative
to convene this thematic debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution-building. We welcome
the attendance of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of Timor-Leste. I also
thank Ambassador Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his statement.
Peacebuilding is the common challenge facing
post-conflict countries. It is also one of important
means through which the international community
helps prevent relapse into conflicts.
In the peacebuilding process, there are questions
that are not new but that have not yet been effectively
addressed, such as the following. In post-conflict
countries, how can peacebuilding work evolve at an
early stage so that a transition from stability to

11-21268

sustainable peace and development can be achieved?
How can coherence and coordination between the
United Nations and other relevant parties be
strengthened so that effective partnership can be
established? In what ways should the United Nations
and the international community provide support and
help to post-conflict countries in peacebuilding,
especially institution-building? In that context, China
would like to raise the following four points.
First, it is imperative that the post-conflict
countries bear the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding in their own countries. All sides must
fully respect the sovereignty and will of the countries
concerned. National ownership and national capacity
must be enhanced so as to lay the foundation for
sustainable peace and development. The role of the
international community is to provide assistance rather
than substitution.
Secondly, national capacity-building is the key to
success in peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. The
United Nations and the international community must
prioritize peacebuilding tasks, including institutionbuilding, in the light of the specificities and
circumstances of post-conflict countries and must
provide timely and tailored technical support and
assistance. In that regard, it is important to deploy
competent international civil servants with the right
skills to the post-conflict countries in a timely manner
and to vigorously help countries concerned to provide
training in the talents needed.
Thirdly, prioritization is important in helping
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. In such
countries a myriad of tasks must be restarted from
scratch, in a complex environment with fragile political
and security bases. The international community’s first
task is to help the countries concerned ensure basic
security, promote the political process, provide basic
services, support core government functions and
reinvigorate the economy and development. The
primary goal of the international community’s support
in institution-building is to consolidate peace,
safeguard stability, revive the economy and enhance
the rule of law. In that process, full consideration must
be given to the priority needs of the countries
concerned and full attention must be paid to their views
in formulating peacebuilding strategies.
Fourthly, the United Nations and the international
community need to enhance coordination so that

21

S/PV.6472

conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
promoting development can advance in tandem and in
an orderly manner. That entails setting up
comprehensive strategies for peacebuilding so that
experiences and lessons can be drawn quickly and
overlapping and waste of resources can be avoided.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for bringing the
critical issue of post-conflict institution-building to the
Council today. We have much to learn from your
experience, as well of that of East Timor. I welcome
the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister, as well as,
earlier in the day, the Secretary-General.
Helping build institutions is at the heart of
building peace. Without security for the State and
people, the economy and public services cannot
operate. Without revenue, there will be nothing with
which to pay for government services and functions
and no confidence in the financial viability of the State.
Without the rule of law, there will be no accountability.
And there is a need to build the institutional capacity to
resolve conflict peacefully.
The process of building institutions is not solely a
technical exercise, but also a complex political one. It
is often a core part of a peace agreement and is key in
shaping the relationship between the State and society.
It will also determine the level of confidence in the
peace process and the extent to which public
expectations are met. Achieving progress, particularly
in the security and justice sectors, is a prerequisite for
the sustainable withdrawal of peacekeepers.
But the process of building institutions is also a
prerequisite for broader conflict prevention. Fragility
and conflict are symptoms of institutional failure to
manage stress, such as resource scarcity, climate
change, corruption or organized crime.
The year ahead will again be a very challenging
year for the United Nations in supporting institutionbuilding. Challenges include supporting the needs of
post-referendum Sudan, extending the protection of
civilians and the rule of law in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and expanding protection and
access to justice in Liberia outside of the capital — for
which the Peacebuilding Commission will play a key
role.
But blockages in peacebuilding are all too often
due to failures or delays in institution-building. Those

22

may be due to political reasons. But they are also due
to continuing weaknesses in the ability of the United
Nations to provide assistance.
There are five issues that I believe we need to
focus on if we are to succeed this year.
First, time is critical. There needs to be the
political and bureaucratic will to deliver on time and
with sufficient scale to meet the volume of needs. That
applies internally to the United Nations system but
equally to Members States, such as through their
engagement on the boards. Business as usual is not
enough.
Secondly, United Nations support for justice and
security sector reform needs to be much more
effective. For that, there needs to be clear delineation
of who has comparative advantage for which roles, so
that we can invest in getting the predictable and
accountable response required. That should reflect the
right balance between immediate stabilization
requirements and longer-term institution-building.
Thirdly, planning between peacekeeping missions
and the funds and programmes needs to be genuinely
integrated. When this Council mandates a mission, we
need to be confident there is clarity on who within the
United Nations will do what and that the funds and
programmes have the means to ratchet up their
engagement to meet these expectations. This has not
been evident recently. We also want to avoid
peacekeeping troops being pulled into institutionbuilding activities, for which they are neither trained
nor mandated.
Fourthly, there must be better quality and speed
in civilian deployments. We look forward to the
civilian capacity review, and we also look forward to
the World Development Report, which will give further
insight into how to improve our record in
peacebuilding.
Finally, we need to give much greater focus to the
perspectives and experiences of the countries
themselves. We need to be better at assessing and
tapping into existing capacities and to ensure assistance
builds — rather than surpasses — national capabilities.
We welcome the formation of the new grouping
of 17 fragile and conflict-affected countries — the
so-called Group of Seven Plus that is chaired by East
Timor — to provide that voice and feed into the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and

11-21268

S/PV.6472

Statebuilding. We would be wise to listen to their
emerging findings during the course of the year.
Fragile and conflict-affected States are perhaps the best
judge of, and advocate for, the performance of the
United Nations and the international community.

making and implementing laws and regulations;
secondly, security and rule of law institutions; thirdly,
public finance institutions; and fourthly, institutions
entrusted with economic revitalization and the delivery
of basic services.

The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The post-conflict institution-building process
should be carried out based on the principle of the rule
of law. All international and domestic actors in the
process should fully respect a post-conflict country’s
constitution, its internal legal order, its international
agreements, rights and obligations, including the peace
agreement that ended the conflict, as well as all other
applicable principles and norms of international law.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
His Excellency José Luís Guterres, and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, His
Excellency Peter Wittig, for their statements.
Having come to recognize that institutionbuilding plays a crucial role in preventing the renewal
of conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina convened this
debate to ensure that post-conflict institution-building,
as such, becomes one of the priorities on the Security
Council’s agenda. We hope today’s debate will
highlight the importance of a more effective and
coherent international response to this complex and
challenging task.
Given the experience of my country, among
others, I would like to draw the Council’s attention to a
few key issues.
Building accountable, legitimate and resilient
institutions should be a strategic objective from the
early stages of a peacebuilding process. The traditional
approach leaves institution-building for a later stage,
focusing first on providing humanitarian relief and
rehabilitation assistance. However, it is usually too late
to start developing institutional capacities when
peacebuilding efforts are at the end stage. The
immediate post-conflict period offers the greatest
opportunity to strengthen the institutional capacities
needed to see peacebuilding efforts through.
Priority has to be given to the development of
those institutions that will prevent a relapse into
conflict and secure the survival and renewed credibility
and legitimacy of the State. While specific institutions
that should be given primacy will vary from country to
country, certain institutions are crucial to consolidating
peace regardless of the country context, and significant
efforts should be invested in their development. They
are: first, institutions carrying out political functions —
implementing peace agreements, carrying out
elections, resolving political disputes peacefully and

11-21268

The success of post-conflict institution-building
critically depends on forging between the international
community and a post-conflict society a partnership
that is based on a set of shared goals. When domestic
and international stakeholders build consensus on a set
of common goals, achieving those goals itself becomes
a driving force for institution-building. That in turn
stabilizes a post-conflict society by bringing all
stakeholders to collaborate on a shared agenda until the
risk of relapsing into conflict is eliminated.
Given the weakened and vulnerable state of postconflict countries, the international community may
initially have to assume much of the responsibility for
post-conflict institution-building and, in certain cases,
set up transitional institutions that carry out functions
and provide services that would normally be rendered
through domestic capacities. However, the objective of
institution-building should be to progressively reduce
dependence on the international community and
promote self-reliance by creating stable, viable and
responsive domestic institutions.
National ownership is a condition sine qua non
for the establishment of effective institutions and the
securing of sustainable peace. The transfer of
responsibility from the international community to
domestic actors and institutions is a very delicate and
extremely important task that should be carried out in a
gradual and timely manner. The installation of
transitional administrative mechanisms by the
international community should go hand in hand with
enhancing the capacity of domestic institutions.
Peacebuilding missions should be allowed more
flexibility in adjusting their institution-building
activities in order to account for changes and
developments on the ground. Coordination between

23

S/PV.6472

missions mandated by the Security Council and
country teams, including development agencies and
donors, must be clearly defined in order to avoid
redundancy and overlapping. The assessments of the
institution-building process in regular reports of
Council-mandated missions need to be improved. That
should also be taken into consideration when drafting
resolutions for renewing mission mandates or
peacebuilding configurations.
The Security Council should make greater use of
the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular with regard to the development of viable and
accountable institutions, in supporting domestic
stakeholders in the countries on its agenda, identifying
priority institutions to be developed and determining
existing capacity gaps that require immediate and longterm support from the United Nations and the
international community as a whole.
Allow me to offer two examples from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The first is our defence reform, which
started in 2003 and resulted in unified modern armed
forces that are operating under civilian command and
with democratic oversight in accordance with
commonly adopted standards. Several factors greatly
contributed to the success of this process: political will
and the consensus of domestic stakeholders in the first
place, followed by extensive consultations, the
involvement of all relevant domestic and international
stakeholders, a proper and well-executed strategy, clear
and coherent standards, good timing and a sufficient
level of financing.
The second example is our electoral process,
which in the first few post-Dayton years was organized
with the extensive support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. The responsibility
for the electoral process was gradually transferred to
domestic authorities, so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
today has full ownership of this process and the
capacity to conduct fair, transparent and credible
elections.
I would like to conclude by stressing that
coordinated, rapid action to support post-conflict
Governments in building credible and accountable
institutions is of critical importance to the success of a
peacebuilding process as a whole. If properly executed,
such action helps restore security, legitimacy,
accountability and effectiveness, thus delivering clear
peace dividends. Post-conflict institution-building is a

24

complex and demanding process, involving multiple
stakeholders and the need to find a balance between
achieving short-term results and long-term capacity
development. The search for optimal solutions that
achieve synergy in this multifaceted endeavour never
ends.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the previous
statements of its President on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The Council stresses the
importance of institution-building as a critical
component of peacebuilding and emphasizes the
importance of a more effective and coherent
national and international response to it, so that
countries emerging from conflict can deliver core
government functions, including managing
political disputes peacefully, providing security
and maintaining stability, protecting their
population, ensuring respect for the rule of law,
revitalizing the economy and providing basic
services, which are essential to achieving durable
peace. The Council emphasizes the importance of
national ownership in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines that the
primary
responsibility
for
successful
peacebuilding lies with Governments and
relevant national actors, including civil society, in
countries emerging from conflict and that the
United Nations can play a critical role in support
of building their national institutions. The
Council acknowledges the need for continued
improvement in the delivery of support in the
immediate aftermath of conflict in order to help
stabilize the situation, whilst at the same time
starting the longer-term process of institutionbuilding, including those institutions that promote
democratic processes and foster economic and
social development, with a view to sustainable
peace.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the
United Nations and the international community
need to be more effective and coordinated in
assessing needs and planning for effective
institution-building, including how to make better
use of existing national capacities and

11-21268

S/PV.6472

perspectives in order to ensure national
ownership. The Council stresses the need for
mainstreaming support to national capacity
development in all United Nations peacebuilding
activities as a system-wide priority and
underscores that peacebuilding strategies and
institution-building should be considered in a
country-specific context.
“The Security Council stresses the need for
greater integration of effort, as well as
predictability and accountability within the
United Nations, in helping build institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. The Council
highlights the importance of coordinated, sectorwide
and
context-driven
approaches
in
governance, economic stability, enhancing the
rule of law and strengthening the security sector
that must be nationally owned.
“The Security Council stresses its
willingness to make greater use of the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The Council notes the potential role the PBC can
play in helping achieve critical peacebuilding
objectives, including the development of viable
and accountable institutions in the countries on
its agenda. The Council also stresses the
importance of focused and well-defined
partnerships among the United Nations,
development agencies, bilateral partners and all
other relevant actors, in particular regional and
subregional organizations, and the international
financial institutions, to implement national
strategies aimed at effective institution-building,
which are based on the achievement of results
and mutual accountability.
“The Security Council reaffirms the critical
importance of timely, flexible and predictable
funding for peacebuilding, including institution
and capacity building, and urges Member States
and other partners to increase efforts towards
achieving this goal, including through the
replenishment of the Peacebuilding Fund and
through multi-donor trust funds, acknowledging
contributions already made.
“The Security Council expresses its
commitment to continuing to improve its
consideration and reflection of early peacebuilding
tasks related to institution-building in the

11-21268

mandates and composition of peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and
integrated peacebuilding offices, with a view to
making the necessary adjustments, where
appropriate, according to progress achieved,
lessons learned or changing circumstances on the
ground. In this context, the Council notes with
appreciation the contribution that peacekeepers
and peacekeeping missions make to early
peacebuilding and recognizes the need to integrate
mission expertise and experience into the
development of peacebuilding strategies.
“The Security Council looks forward to the
report of the international review of civilian
capacity in early 2011, recognizing the need for
improved mechanisms for timely deployment of
skilled civilian experts in support of national
institution-building
needs
in
post-conflict
countries. The Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to include in the next follow-up report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict an assessment of the impact that his
agenda for action has had in contributing to
building viable institutions in post-conflict
countries, as well as additional recommendations
to improve the effectiveness of the United
Nations contribution to more effective, stable and
sustainable institutions that can help prevent a
relapse into conflict.”
This statement will be issued as document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/2.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak also on behalf of the Permanent Representatives
of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in our
respective capacities as Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for the Central African Republic, GuineaBissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. We also
associate ourselves with the remarks made earlier this
morning by the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Wittig of Germany.
Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to hold
an open debate on this important topic, and would like
to take this opportunity to share lessons learned from
our experience on the ground. Our intervention has
three elements. First, we will present our views on the

25

S/PV.6472

conceptual and substantive aspects of institutionbuilding in a post-conflict context. Secondly, we will
offer suggestions on how the United Nations system
could more effectively contribute to that effort. Finally,
we will address the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the country-specific Chairs in
advising the Security Council.
In our experience, the process of institutionbuilding is a critical component of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Where State institutions are missing or
fragile, violence more easily spreads through
vulnerable societies, organized crime finds easy
purchase for illegal activities, and reconciliation and
recovery are delayed. The building, rebuilding and
strengthening of core State functions is the sine qua
non condition for overcoming conflict.
In such context, local capacity is too often
overwhelmed by daunting challenges. This is evident in
all five post-conflict situations on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, despite the best efforts and
commitment of the authorities concerned. One example
is the lack of administrative resources in Liberia or the
Central African Republic. There are only 91 magistrates
available to deliver public administration services in the
Central African Republic, and 13 magistrates in Liberia
with proper legal training. Burundi’s justice system is
struggling to manage the 60 per cent of inmates
awaiting trial in overcrowded prisons. In Sierra Leone,
a dedicated national police force is hampered by the
critical lack of available transportation.
Institution-building is about ensuring the
sustainable, equitable and effective delivery of security
and basic services to a national population.
Functioning institutions not only protect citizens, but
also empower greater participation in political
decision-making, especially with respect to groups that
are traditionally marginalized at the national or local
levels. Critical examples include security forces that
uphold human rights, a justice system that offers
independent adjudication, transparent mechanisms for
political
participation,
well-managed
public
administration, and effective strategies for spurring
economic recovery and social development. In most
post-conflict countries, it may also be important to deal
with the past through processes of transitional justice
and national reconciliation. Moreover, it is not enough
to focus only on central Government. Conflicts often
emerge from and disproportionately affect rural areas,
where the extension of basic services tends to lag.

26

It is also important to enhance the capacity of
institutions in charge of economic revitalization, public
administration and the provision of basic services.
These institutions are indispensable to promoting
poverty reduction, which is a powerful tool for
addressing some of the root causes of social strife and
build long-lasting peace. Social policies may likewise
have a positive impact in the political process.
While each post-conflict situation is different and
there are no one-size-fits-all blueprints, our experience
has yielded several useful lessons.
First, stable institutions cannot be imposed; they
must be trusted and accepted by citizens. They have to
be built and sustained by the individuals concerned.
International institution-building efforts have to
involve national actors at the outset in order to better
identify and employ available local capacity. In this
respect, civil society is a core pillar of institutionbuilding, and the participation of women is of
particular importance.
Secondly, institution- and State-building in postconflict situations require sustained support from the
international community. It is a matter of years,
possibly even decades. It is complex. It is costly. It
requires predictability of resources and the will of the
international community to remain engaged for a
prolonged period.
Thirdly, institution-building requires responsive
financing. The catalytic role of the Peacebuilding Fund
should be supported and supplemented by other
national and international mechanisms that allow a
similar or higher degree of speed and flexibility.
Fourthly, institution-building involves negotiating
competing objectives and a readiness to accept
imperfect outcomes. One constant challenge lies in
managing the dilemma between the slow pace of State
institution-building and popular expectations for rapid
improvement. Institution-building must go hand in
hand with the delivery of basic services that directly
impact the everyday lives of citizens.
Finally, when assessing the institutional
weaknesses of post-conflict countries, the international
community should adopt a comprehensive approach
and take into account the factors that hamper social and
economic development. In particular, roster-holders
should consider increasing the availability of experts in
social and economic policy, with enhanced emphasis

11-21268

S/PV.6472

on South-South expertise and greater participation by
developing countries.
Allow me now to offer some suggestions on how
the United Nations system could more effectively
contribute to peace- and institution-building.
Starting with the role of the Security Council, the
five country-specific configuration Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission believe that institutionbuilding deserves greater and more in-depth attention.
As it requires both considerable time and resources,
institution-building should be addressed in the early
stages of peacebuilding processes. Likewise, when
considering mission mandates, the Council should take
institution-building into account in a manner that
retains a tight focus on core stabilization priorities and
relies on the comparative advantage of other actors.
The Council should also continue to mandate
integrated missions to deliver a comprehensive
approach to peace consolidation, including by serving
as a point of coordination with other actors in the
international community.
The scope and complexity of institution-building
often demands a wider and more sustained focus than
the Security Council is capable of providing alone.
Bilateral and multilateral partners and development
actors have a critical role to play. Of particular
importance are regional institutions and organizations
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the East African
Community. Aid coordination is also crucial for
avoiding conflicting strategies, overlapping activities,
critical gaps and inconsistent financing.
Within the United Nations system as a whole,
there is an enduring need to better define the
Organization’s roles and responsibilities in key
peacebuilding sectors, including institution-building.
Doing so will enhance the overall efficiency of the
United Nations system and enable stronger support for
senior leaders in the field. In that context, relations
with the World Bank and other multilateral forums,
such as the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, are of crucial importance.
Closer institutional coordination is required, as
cooperation with the United Nations remains too
dependent on personal relationships or ad hoc
arrangements in the field. Effective post-conflict
institution-building also requires a wide range of
specialized civilian expertise, particularly in the areas

11-21268

of justice, security-sector reform, governance,
economic recovery and social policies. Yet, both the
United Nations and the broader international
community still struggle with how to develop and
deploy such capacity in a timely and targeted manner.
In particular, more attention needs to be paid to
drawing on and building the pool of talent available in
affected countries. That should be the first priority for
institution-building efforts. Similarly, more work is
needed to tap latent expertise within the global South.
For those reasons, it is important to further
strengthen mechanisms for South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation between the North and the
South. It is also clear that the United Nations can, and
must, do more to provide field missions with the
expertise they need. That will require the United
Nations to both improve its own procedures and to
serve as a platform for drawing on the wider capacity
available within Member States. In that respect, the
Chairs look forward to the recommendations of the
review of international civilian capacities.
In the view of the Chairs, the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture could be better used to
foster and monitor institution-building efforts and to
improve coordination among the full range of relevant
actors. The Security Council should increasingly draw
on, and better define, the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advisory role, especially in terms of supporting
institution-building
efforts
undertaken
by
non-Secretariat entities, providing more sustained
attention to peacebuilding issues beyond the immediate
scope of stabilization efforts and addressing longerterm issues that have implications stretching beyond
the period that the country is likely to be on the
Council’s agenda.
With respect to the countries on the PBC’s
agenda, the country-specific configurations strive to
improve coordination of institution-building efforts in
accordance with the peacebuilding priorities identified
with national authorities. The Security Council could
benefit from the experience and knowledge of the
country-specific configurations by inviting the Chairs
to brief the Council regularly on the progress of
institution-building and other peacebuilding efforts, by
consulting with the Chairs when renewing or amending
mission mandates and by considering the participation
of the Chairs in Council missions to countries on the
PBC’s agenda.

27

S/PV.6472

For other post-conflict countries, the Security
Council could consider establishing regular coordination
mechanisms with other international and regional actors,
including the World Bank. A multi-tiered approach by
the PBC can play a useful role in this respect, as can
groups of friends of post-conflict countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdalaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation’s appreciation to Bosnia
and Herzegovina for convening this important debate
on the theme of “Post-conflict peacebuilding:
institution-building”, emphasizing the consistent
priority that has always been stressed by Governments
in post-conflict countries. I would also like to associate
my remarks with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Bangladesh in his capacity as
coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement for
peacebuilding activities.
Over the past six years, the United Nations has
been
successfully
shaping
its
peacebuilding
architecture, adjusting it to address the challenges and
fill in the gaps emerging from past experience in
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations, as identified
in the recommendations of the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the ongoing
review of the international civilian capacity. We are
confident that Member States will continue to support
international efforts through the Organization’s
principal organs, which significantly contribute to
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries, in particular
those of the Peacebuilding Commission, along with the
efforts by the Secretary-General.
In that context, Egypt is confident that the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Peacebuilding Commission review will contribute to
further strengthening the role of the Commission in
establishing the vital peacebuilding platform. Egypt is
coordinating on this issue with the African Union and
will present, at the African Summit to be held in a few
days at the end of this month, a proposal to establish a
regional centre in Cairo to support peacebuilding and
institution-building capacities on the African continent.
The success of institution-building in postconflict situations largely depends on a strategic vision
that should be established on the fundamental pillars of
national
ownership,
innovative
approaches,
comprehensiveness, and multi-pronged partnerships.

28

The doctrine of transferring responsibility for
peacebuilding, and consequently institution-building,
to the international community is a falsely premised
one. National ownership is a sine qua non for a
successful peacebuilding process. In no case can the
international community, even at the stage of conflict,
provide services that would otherwise be provided by
national or transitional Governments. Accumulated
international and regional expertise have proven that
national ownership of all phases of any peacebuilding
process, including institution and civilian capacitybuilding, is the essential requirement for the success of
such efforts.
National and transitional Governments in postconflict countries must have the responsibility in
identifying peacebuilding priorities and should be at
the core planning and implementation of peacebuilding
strategies, supported by a vibrant national civil society
and assisted by the international community. They
should always maintain the ability to terminate any
peacebuilding activity at any time, in true reflection of
the principle of national ownership.
In this context, institution-building represents a
vital component of peacebuilding strategies, requiring
innovative
methodologies
beyond
traditional
approaches. The requirements for stabilizing a newly
established peace in a post-conflict situation extend
beyond the traditional goals of security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
rule of law.
If the aforementioned goals are to be successfully
realized, other vital priorities must be achieved in
tandem, in particular the strengthening of economic,
financial, social and political institutions and civilian
capacity-building in all fields. Such an approach
requires a thorough analysis of existing national
capabilities and resources, as well as the challenges
facing successful, comprehensive and gradual
institution- and civilian capacity-building on a case-bycase basis.
The efforts of post-conflict countries to address
institution- and civilian capacity-building and to
respond to these challenges should be supported from
the early stages by multi-pronged partnerships within
and outside the United Nations system among the
relevant United Nations bodies and the United Nations
field operations. Furthermore, the United Nations
should not be the only player in institution- and

11-21268

S/PV.6472

civilian capacity-building. This responsibility should
also be shared by the donor community, international
institutions — in particular, international financial
institutions — and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, drawing in particular on the vast pool of
regional and international expertise and resources.
Establishing
the
appropriate
environment
required for exit strategies of peacekeeping operations
necessitates the active involvement of peacebuilders
and development actors at the early stages of any
peacekeeping operation. Providing the needed support
to the efforts of national Governments and civil society
in post-conflict countries requires innovative
coordination and collaboration among the principal
organs of the United Nations and within the United
Nations system, as well as maximizing the benefits
from the established peacebuilding architecture.
Finally, efforts to rehabilitate and establish
national institutions and the capacities needed to
support them, as well as creating the enabling
structural, economic and social environments for their
sustenance, will not meet with success without
adequate, reliable, predictable and flexible funding,
without conditionality or earmarking. In addition, we
need to establish monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms to ensure the fulfilment of national and
international financial commitments needed to realize
the nationally agreed institution- and civilian capacitybuilding priorities. They would also ensure the
consistency of the priorities of international funding
mechanisms, including the Peacebuilding Fund, with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the concerned
countries, and address the need to consider innovative
methods to strengthen the resources of such
mechanisms, particularly the Peacebuilding Fund.
In this connection, at the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, Egypt suggested the convening
of an annual donors’ conference for the Peacebuilding
Fund, similar to the annual pledging conference for the
Central Emergency Response Fund, in order to ensure
the mobilization of increased funding for future
peacebuilding activities. We hope that this proposal
will garner the necessary support for its full
implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like thank and
commend the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina

11-21268

for organizing today’s open debate on this important
issue.
We currently have a sound conceptual framework
and a better understanding of post-conflict
peacebuilding, thanks to the considerable endeavours
made within the United Nations system in recent years.
We now need to focus more on translating this
framework into concrete action, both in New York and
in the field.
For its part, Turkey has been increasingly
engaged in preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
which are closely interlinked. We believe it essential to
use these tools within a coherent and strategic
framework. Turkey placed particular emphasis on these
issues during its Security Council membership. Now,
together, with Finland and the Group of Friends, we are
working on how to further the concept of mediation,
both within the United Nations and beyond. In our
view, peace mediation and facilitation efforts are the
most cost-effective and efficient way of preventing and
resolving conflicts.
The concept paper presented by Bosnia and
Herzegovina (A/2011/16, annex) and the presidential
statement just adopted (S/PRST/2011/2) contain
pertinent points about a wide range of issues on the
peacebuilding agenda. For this reason, and in order to
adhere to the time limit for statements, I will touch
upon only a few points that I deem particularly
important.
First, peacebuilding is primarily a national
responsibility. Hence, as has been stressed by many
delegations, national ownership is of critical
importance. The effective and sustainable realization of
peacebuilding goals requires the active engagement of
all local stakeholders, including civil society,
professional associations and women’s organizations.
Therefore, one priority of peacekeeping operations
should be to win the hearts and minds of the local
people and to work together with them. This will not
only inoculate the operation against criticism that it has
been imposed on the national Government and
population, but will also increase its success. National
ownership and capacity-building are also essential
elements of a successful exit strategy.
At the regional level, the support and cooperation
of regional actors, particularly neighbouring countries,
is another essential aspect of successful post-conflict

29

S/PV.6472

peacebuilding and institution-building. Many conflicts
have cross-border dimensions beyond domestic
political circumstances. Accordingly, the scope of
conflict analysis and response needs to be broadened,
not only conceptually, but also geographically.

My delegation has aligned itself with and fully
supports the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union. However, allow me to take part in
this exceptionally relevant and timely debate by adding
a few short comments in my national capacity.

If our peacebuilding endeavours are to succeed,
we should pursue an integrated and comprehensive
approach. This approach should be based on coherence
among political, security, development, human rights,
humanitarian and rule of law objectives. We believe
that it is necessary to take complementary actions in all
those areas. It is also always important to bear in mind
that every country is unique. Local conditions, needs,
opportunities and limitations may differ considerably.
This means that the prioritization of peacebuilding and
capacity-building activities must be country-specific.
Strategic planning for peacebuilding activities must
therefore also be sufficiently flexible.

One of the main purposes of every functioning
State should be the prompt, efficient and sustainable
delivery of core services to its citizens. Armed conflict
annihilates not only this basic function of the State but,
unfortunately, much more precious assets as well:
human lives, health and dignity. It is thus only natural
that post-conflict recovery start with emergency relief
and humanitarian assistance. At the same time, it
would be reasonable, if not necessary, to include in this
process, from its very beginning, appropriate
investment towards the recovery of the social network,
on which everyday life depends. Genuine and
sustainable peace can be achieved only through
thorough rebuilding of core national institutions and
their functions, as well as their employment on behalf
of all social, religious and ethnic groups.

In view of resource constraints, the success of the
overall effort depends on the ability to strategically
coordinate the activities of different actors. In this
regard, the United Nations has a unique role to play, as
it can coordinate the work of various stakeholders to
deliver as one on the ground. United Nations support to
regional and subregional organizations should be
increased in order to develop their capacities to better
perform United Nations-mandated tasks in the future.
Before concluding, let me also underline the
importance of mainstreaming women’s participation at
all stages of the peacebuilding effort. Turkey welcomes
the increasing awareness within the United Nations
system and among Member States of the importance of
removing constraints on women’s full participation in
the peacebuilding process. We look forward to the
further empowerment of women’s role in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mediation endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, let me thank
you, Madam, and your team for successfully
conducting the Council’s work during this month. At
the same time, we would like to commend Bosnia and
Herzegovina for selecting this important topic as the
subject for this open debate. We are confident that,
based on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s wide experience in
this field, the Council will have a successful debate and
achieve mutual understanding on this important
subject.

30

As we have heard time and again today, national
ownership is the key tenet from which all peacebuilding
efforts should start, and to which they should ultimately
return. Thus reliance on and strengthening of local
capacities, no matter how scarce, are fundamental
preconditions for successful peacebuilding. Such an
approach introduces a unique perspective otherwise not
available to outsiders, consolidates necessary national
governing structures and policies and paves the way for
greater acceptance of a peacebuilding mission by the
local population. It strengthens the hope that a
peacebuilding dividend will be distributed among the
local population and that peacebuilding efforts will
survive long after the first appearance of signs of
possible and expected donor fatigue.
In this context, Croatia is following with great
interest what we hope will become a new and
widespread practice of incorporating all peacebuilding
efforts into a single national strategy instrument that
encompasses all relevant peacebuilding programmes
and activities. At the same time, Croatia believes that,
on the other side of the equation, the international
community, the United Nations and its agencies and all
other stakeholders should attentively follow suit by
unifying their actions under a proclaimed agenda,
clearly dividing their roles and responsibilities and
ensuring appropriate coherence and coordination in
order to deliver as one.

11-21268

S/PV.6472

From the very beginning, Croatia has strongly
supported the establishment of the Senior Advisory
Group tasked to undertake a review of international
civilian capacity in order to strengthen the availability,
deployability, coherence and appropriateness of
civilian capacities based on an assessment of existing
capacities. We very much look forward to the
upcoming report on this issue.
We all agree that timely, flexible and predictable
funding plays a crucial role in any peacebuilding effort.
In that context, Croatia looks forward to further
strengthening of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank. We await with
special interest the Bank’s 2011 World Development
Report on the theme “Conflict, security and
development”.
Croatia is heartened to see that broad crossregional support for stronger peacebuilding is steadily
increasing, encompassing Governments, international
organizations and civil society. In that context, my
country sees particular importance in further support
to, and strengthening of, often feeble but steadily
growing civil societies in countries that have recently
emerged from conflict. Very often, civil society is
precisely the necessary link between relevant
international stakeholders and the strategy endorsed by
the local population that requires activation in order for
peacebuilding efforts to fully bear fruit.
Croatia recognizes and supports the Council’s
intention to further strengthen coherence among
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
in its work. In that regard, we particularly welcome the
Council’s practice of transforming some former
peacekeeping missions into integrated peacebuilding
missions. This practice perfectly fits the mandates and
activities of other stakeholders in charge of
peacebuilding,
especially
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, and opens the door for their further
fruitful cooperation. In that context, let me add our
hope that the Peacebuilding Commission’s relevant
knowledge and experience with respect to specific
issues of countries on the agendas of both the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission will find a
path to the Council’s deliberations.
Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General’s detailed
overview of the progress achieved in implementing his
agenda for action set out in his progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict

11-21268

(S/2010/386), which was recently presented to the
Council (see S/PV.6396), and particularly the
recommendations contained therein. We equally fully
support the Secretary-General’s report on women’s
participation in peace-building (S/2010/466) and his
strategic seven-point action plan introducing necessary
practical suggestions for more active engagement by
women in peacebuilding processes. In that regard, we
offer our support to the ongoing efforts aimed at
mobilizing resources for initiatives that address
women’s peacebuilding needs, advance gender equality
and empower women in peacebuilding contexts.
Finally, let me express once again our
appreciation for the excellent report on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
(S/2010/393, annex), which was presented recently by
the three co-facilitators and adds substantially to our
comprehension of the complex issue of peacebuilding,
opens new avenues for its further exploration and
offers many valuable recommendations.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
conviction that the new momentum witnessed in the
field of peacebuilding, as well as the many valuable
proposals and recommendations that have resulted
from the regular and periodic reviews of peacebuilding
activities, will not be wasted but will soon lead to new
synergy between all relevant actors and yield eagerly
awaited results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Please allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Madam, and your
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of January. I thank you for convening
today’s
important
meeting
on
post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution-building. Our thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his remarks. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Deputy Prime
Minister José Luis Guterres, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of Seven Plus, of which Afghanistan is a
member.
Institution-building is one of the essential
components in establishing a peaceful and sustainable
future in any post-conflict situation. The requirements
for successful institution-building in post-conflict
settings include recognizing unique contexts; steady
provision of resources; growth of human capital;
national, regional and international cooperation; and

31

S/PV.6472

strategic patience through the transition period. In
Afghanistan, we have learned first hand the importance
of each of these requirements.
In the ubiquitous debate on the current situation
in Afghanistan, it is easy to overlook the 30 years of
conflict that Afghanistan has overcome in order to
reach a point at which, today, we can discuss
institution-building and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Let us not underestimate the time it takes to surpass the
challenges of history. An environment such as
Afghanistan’s, which has faced complex conflict,
power struggles and ongoing violence for decades,
cannot be changed overnight. As we engage in each
and every discussion about the training of the Afghan
army and police, the timeline for military engagement
or international partnerships, we must keep this context
in mind.
In 2001, Afghanistan was considered to be the
most failed State in the world. The fall of the Taliban
left a weakly governed State with no professional
police or army to quell the ongoing fighting around the
country. In 2001, Afghanistan lacked State institutions
and had a budget of merely $27 million. After having
hundreds of thousands of military and non-military
Government employees in the early 1990s, educated
and skilled workers fled the country and its
Government was left with fewer than 2,000 employees
with higher educations. Many Government institutions
were non-functional because basic staffing and
resourcing needs were not met.
Given the magnitude of destruction, stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan have produced impressive
results. Despite its uphill climb since the time of
Taliban rule, Afghanistan has experienced political
transformation and development over the past decade,
achieved through the support of the international
community. The political process for the continued
growth of the country is in place. Nearly 7 million
refugees have returned. Women’s roles in politics have
steadily increased. Civil society has emerged
triumphant in a more unified and organized manner.
There are many areas in the country where we are
witnessing governance for the first time in decades.
Progress in the area of infrastructure development,
including building and paving roads and increased
access to water, education and health care, has been
among the most rapid of any post-conflict nation in
decades. Women and girls now have equal access to
education.

32

Security institutions have developed, supporting
the emergence of Afghan national ownership. The last
year has shown that it is possible to increase the
Afghan
National
Army
substantially
and
simultaneously to see its planning and combat abilities
improve. Local administrations have increased their
involvement in security efforts, particularly through the
engagement of the Afghan people, especially elders, in
defence programmes in villages.
As a measure to end violence and achieve lasting
peace, we in Afghanistan have prioritized reintegration
and reconciliation. We continue to encourage members
of the armed opposition to put down their weapons,
choose the path of peace and join efforts for
stabilization and rehabilitation in the country. Progress
continues towards implementing the recommendations
of our National Consultative Peace Jirga, which
constitutes the core of our reconciliation efforts. Now
that we have come halfway, it is the Taliban’s turn to
fulfil its responsibility. If the Taliban wants to join
peace talks, it must end violence and terrorist attacks,
including suicide bombings, the planting of improvised
explosive
devices,
kidnappings
and
targeted
assassinations, and sever ties with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups.
We must also anticipate the challenges we will
face going forward. The biggest issue — not just for
Afghanistan, but for any post-conflict country — is the
sustainability of peace. The functionality of institutions
is necessary; a country must have the resources, human
capital and capacity to stop the threat of insurgency if
it is to avoid relapsing into conflict. Capacity-building
is essential if State institutions are to operate
effectively. Empowering State institutions means
enabling a national Government to provide services for
its citizens.
In
any
post-conflict
setting,
sustained
international engagement in the institution-building
stages beyond military involvement is necessary for
peacebuilding efforts to endure. In Afghanistan, an
additional component of the stabilization process is
effective regional cooperation. Progress is at risk of
unravelling if these partnerships do not remain strong.
Democratization in post-conflict countries is a
multidimensional challenge. We have learned from our
experience that the democratization process requires
sustained security, as well as political and development
support. However, as has been emphasized time and

11-21268

S/PV.6472

again, democracy grows from within and external
actors can only support it. The international community
and
key
national
stakeholders
must
work
collaboratively with integrative strategies to provide
effective support for democratization.
In the coming years, national ownership and
leadership with continued international partnerships
will be key for Afghanistan. The adoption of the Kabul
process involves greater Afghan responsibility for
security, development and governance in the country.
The significant increase in the amount of international
funding channelled through the Afghan Government
reflects renewed support for national ownership. The
Afghan Government is committed to assuming full
responsibility for security efforts with the support of
the international community by the end of 2014. It is a
gradual and conditions-based process that relies upon
support for the building of the Afghan security forces’
size, strength and operational capability.

11-21268

Building peace by developing institutions can
help address the causes of conflict. However, it is
necessary to end violence in order to create an
environment in which institutions can flourish.
Progress can be destroyed when conflict flares up. We
must not forget the lessons we have learned in
Afghanistan. A school or clinic built in six months can
be destroyed in only six minutes by the Taliban or
other extremists. Furthermore, the importance of
effective international partnerships during post-conflict
situations cannot be overestimated. In this regard,
adequate resourcing and capacity-building are
preconditions for ensuring lasting peace.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, therefore, with the concurrence of Council
members, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

33
