S/PV.8966

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8966th meeting

Tuesday, 15 February 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy/Mr. Kirpichenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Ms. Bongo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 January 2022 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2022/50)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-25814 (E)
*2225814*

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

Arab Emirates, including attacks on a civilian airport
and nearby industrial areas in which three civilians
were killed, it should be obvious to everyone just how
high the stakes have been raised.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 January 2022 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2022/50)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Security Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/50, which contains the text of
a letter dated 25 January 2022 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Grundberg, Mr. Griffiths and
Ambassador Ferit Hoxha, Permanent Representative
of Albania, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: The continued military escalation
of the conflict in Yemen has escaped no one. I am here
today to discuss those worrisome developments and to
share with Security Council members my efforts to try
and reverse that trajectory and initiate a long-delayed
political process.
The recent months of escalation have put the
spotlight on the regional dimension of the conflict in
Yemen. I have always seen a peaceful and prosperous
Yemen as the key to stability on the Arabian peninsula.
That was already true before the current war. Following
the attacks last month by Ansar Allah on the United
2/19

15/02/2022

The Secretary-General has condemned those
attacks and I echo that condemnation. Furthermore, the
attacks on the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia
indicate how this conflict risks spiralling out of control
unless serious efforts are urgently made by the Yemeni
parties, the region and the international community to
end it.
For Yemenis, the past month was marked by a
multiplication of front lines and an appallingly high
record number of civilian casualties. The coalition air
strike on a detention facility in Sa’ada, which killed
or injured more than 300 detainees, was among the
worst civilian casualty incident in three years. The
sharp increase in air strikes in Yemen, including on
residential areas and civilian infrastructure in Sana’a
and Al-Hudaydah, is alarming. Once again, I am
compelled to remind all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law. I repeat my
condemnation of any indiscriminate attack against
civilians and civilian infrastructure inside Yemen and
outside its borders.
As Martin Griffiths will elaborate upon, Yemen’s
war continues to be fought in the economic arena as
well, with warring sides battling over resources, trade
flows and monetary policy. The impact of that aspect of
the war continues to irrefutably hit Yemen’s population
as a whole. The past month has seen particularly severe
shortages of fuel and oil derivatives, notably in areas
controlled by Ansar Allah, which has put unprecedented
strain on people’s everyday lives. After a long delay, four
fuel ships were granted clearance to enter Al-Hudaydah
this month. Only one was for the general market. That
is not enough to meet the needs of the population. I
once again call on the parties to remove all obstacles to
the import and domestic distribution of fuel and other
basic commodities.
The war is also being fought in the public domain,
where media rhetoric has become increasingly hostile
and has been combined with intimidation and the
detention and harassment of media professionals
and activists in Yemen. That contributes to a toxic
environment in which there is a need for dialogue. I urge
all sides to protect press freedom and to immediately
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8966

and unconditionally release detained journalists and
political activists.

the calls of the Council for restraint and de-escalation
remain unanswered.

Despite all those challenges, there is a way out of
the war. Allowing the war to continue is a choice and
so is ending it. We all know that ending it will not be
easy, but I firmly believe that it is possible. To that
end, I am developing a framework that will set out my
plan to move towards an inclusive political settlement,
including the establishment of a multitrack process.
Through that process, the warring sides’ interests can
be addressed within the context of a broader Yemeni
agenda along the three tracks of political, security and
economic matters.

As we have seen over the past two years, positions
are mutually exclusive, with demands on sequencing
and guarantees unable to be met by either side.
Nevertheless, my efforts in that regard will continue.
I remain actively engaged with the warring sides in
pursuit of any opening and will report back to the
Council on any progress.

As part of that effort, next week I will begin a series
of structured bilateral consultations aimed at informing
and refining the framework. I will engage with multiple
Yemeni stakeholders, including the warring parties,
political parties, representatives of civil society and
Yemeni experts in the political, security and economic
arenas. The consultations will explore Yemenis’
priorities for the immediate and longer-term for the
three tracks, as well as their aspirations and broader
vision for ending the conflict.
Ensuring inclusivity and including women will
be an important aspect of the consultations. I count
on the support of the Council to encourage all actors
to participate constructively without delay. This is a
real opportunity for Yemeni parties to shift gears and
charter a peaceful way forward.
The framework will be the operationalization of my
core mandate of laying the foundation for an inclusive
political process that can sustainably end the war. For
every year that the war is allowed to continue, that
task becomes more challenging but no less necessary.
For too long, Yemenis have been without a political
process and without hope that the conflict can end. By
initiating a structured process that seeks to address
the key elements of the conflict, hope for an end to the
devastating military, political and economic battles can
be restored. I look forward to presenting my framework
later this spring.
In parallel, I am continuing to explore every
possibility of fast-tracking de-escalation. I have
continuously engaged with the warring parties on
possible mutually agreeable compromises. At recent
meetings held in Riyadh and Muscat, I urged the conflict
parties to engage in de-escalation talks and presented
options for moving forward. Until now, my calls and

On that note, allow me to welcome Major General
Michael Beary to the Council in his new role as
Head of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement. Major General Beary assumed
his duties on 19 January and has commenced his own
important engagements with parties in Aden, Sana’a
and Al-Hudaydah in order to assess their positions
and explore openings for de-escalation of violence in
Al-Hudaydah.
I will continue working on the two lines of effort
that I have laid out to the Council: establishing a
multitrack process that can produce durable solutions
to the conflict, while seeking any opportunity for
immediate de-escalation. My conviction is that a
structured and focused approach that does not shy
away from the fundamental and complex challenges is
needed. However, trust is low and ending the war will
require uncomfortable compromises that no warring
party is currently willing to make.
It is therefore incumbent upon all of us, including
the Council, to exert every possible effort to impress
upon the parties to the conflict that there is no
sustainable military solution and that their quest for
a perfect moment of balance on the battlefield when
the other side is sufficiently weakened to accept its
fate is futile. Dialogue and compromise are required if
Yemenis are not to be left suffering until the parties
are tired of fighting. A political process under United
Nations auspices, supported by the Council, is our best
way forward.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: You will understand, Sir, if I start
by saying what a privilege and pleasure it is to be sitting
next to Hans Grundberg in this Chamber. I know that,
like all of us, you wish him all the best. Much of what I
will say will echo and mirror his own remarks.

22-258143/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

The war in Yemen and the wider crisis that it has
unleashed, as we have heard, continue to threaten
millions of lives across the country and for now that
crisis shows no sign of abating. As Hans Grundberg
has so aptly described, we have seen over the past
six weeks a sharp and dangerous escalation of the
conflict, with devastating consequences for civilians
and civilian infrastructure. More than 650 civilian
casualties were reported in January, which means that
on average 21 civilians were killed or injured every
day by air strikes, shelling, small-arms fire and other
violence — by far the highest toll in at least three years.
The war is finding people in their homes, schools,
mosques, hospitals and other places where civilians
should be protected. On 21 January, an air strike hit
a detention facility in Sa’ada, killing or injuring more
than 300 detainees. Cross-border attacks have also
intensified, killing, injuring and threatening civilians in
the region. As Hans Grundberg has said, international
humanitarian law very clearly requires all parties to
respect the principles of distinction and proportionality
and take all feasible precautions to avoid harm to
civilians and civilian infrastructure. As he did, I urge
the parties to uphold those obligations and I call for
accountability for any serious violation.
The recent escalation is the latest turn in a conflict
that has dragged on for seven years. Yemen has become
a protracted crisis. A generation of children is growing
up with no thought other than war. Throughout the
crisis, humanitarian partners have done everything
they can to reduce people’s suffering. In 2021, nearly
200 organizations worked together through the United
Nations response plan to assist more than 11 million
people every month and those programmes are reaching
every one of Yemen’s 330 districts — the entire country.
On a separate note, I am also pleased to report
recent progress in efforts to resolve the FSO SAFER
tanker issue, including an agreement in principle to a
United Nations-coordinated proposal to shift the oil to
another ship.
However, as we have said before, working in
Yemen is often much harder than it should be. Access
impediments remain one major problem. Aid workers
face far too many restrictions, including a lack of
facilitation of their presence, movements and activities.
Visas, notifications and other routine processes have all
created challenges recently. International humanitarian
4/19

15/02/2022

law requires all parties to facilitate access and ensure
freedom of movement for humanitarian workers.
Security challenges have also persisted. Last
week, armed men abducted five United Nations staff
on official mission in Abyan governorate. We are all
working urgently to secure their immediate release,
with support from the Government of Yemen. Those
kinds of incidents are, of course, utterly unacceptable.
The three United Nations workers who were arrested
several months ago — two in Sana’a in November and
one in Ma’rib in December — also remain in detention.
I believe the one in Ma’rib may have just recently been
released, which I very much appreciate.
However, by far the biggest challenge for aid
agencies right now is funding. The humanitarian
operation, which has been a lifeline for millions of
people across Yemen over so many years, is about
to start doing a lot less. Aid agencies are quickly
running out of money, forcing them to slash life-saving
programmes. By the end of January, nearly two thirds
of major United Nations aid programmes had already
scaled back or closed altogether.
In December, the World Food Programme (WFP)
reduced food rations for 8 million people. Starting next
month, those 8 million people may get no food at all,
if not a reduced ration. In March, we may also have
to cancel most United Nations humanitarian flights in
Yemen, which would cause enormous problems for the
aid operation and the movement of our staff.
There is, it seems, no money. Looming disruptions
to water and sanitation services — again, for want of
funds — could soon deprive 3.6 million people of safe
drinking water, which would put them, and especially
children under the age of 5, at greater risk of deadly
diseases. Programmes to combat gender-based violence
and promote reproductive health are also on the
chopping block, as are a range of critical activities in
the health, shelter and other sectors.
The Council has heard aid agencies warn about
funding shortages in the past. I have listened to my
predecessor speak in the Council along those lines. But
the scale of the current gaps is unprecedented in Yemen.
We have never before contemplated giving millions of
hungry people no food at all or suspending the flights
we need to get aid workers and supplies into, around
and out of the country. If those gaps are not addressed,
it will simply be a death sentence for people whose
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

coping mechanisms are in some cases completely
exhausted and who rely on assistance for their survival.
Agencies are doing what they can. Last week,
I released another $20 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund to shore up operations
around Ma’rib — the second time we have done so this
year. The WFP, meanwhile, has exhausted its internal
loan mechanisms to keep its programmes going a bit
longer. None of those are sustainable solutions.
We obviously cannot let the aid operation in Yemen
fall apart, so I am very grateful to the Governments
of Sweden and Switzerland for co-hosting, with the
United Nations, a high-level pledging event for Yemen
to be held on 16 March. The Secretary-General has
made it clear to me and to all of us how willing, open
and wanting he is to intervene to remove that funding
gap. I implore all donors to use that opportunity to
demonstrate their commitment to the people of Yemen.
We are also keenly aware that people’s survival
cannot rely only on the ebbs and flows of humanitarian
funding cycles. A more sustainable approach, as
Special Envoy Grundberg mentioned, is both necessary
and achievable.
As we have said before, the international community
must come together to address the underlying drivers
of need in Yemen, especially the collapsing economy.
The United Nations economic framework offers
a path forward in that regard. It brings together
initiatives that could make an immediate difference
in boosting incomes, reducing prices and enhancing
macroeconomic stability.
That includes foreign-exchange injections, which
the Government of Yemen is working hard with its
partners to secure, as well as policy changes, such as
resuming civilian flights through Sana’a airport, lifting
restrictions on commercial imports and using import
revenues to pay public sector salaries. It pains me to
refer once again to those measures, which we have
needed for so long and for which we are still waiting.
Paying those salaries will also help preserve basic
services. Finding one’s way out of a crisis and making
one’s way in the world is nearly impossible if one is
too sick, too hungry or undereducated. Like economic
support, preserving basic services is key to reducing
humanitarian needs.
Finally — and the Council will not find this
surprising — I want to stress that the best thing anyone

S/PV. 8966

could do for the people of Yemen would be to find a just,
lasting end to the war. That is no small feat, as I know
well. Therefore, I want to offer my unqualified support
for everything Special Envoy Grundberg has just said
and for all the work he is doing under exceptionally
difficult circumstances, as I should know well.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Hoxha.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), pursuant to paragraph
19 (e) thereof. The last such briefing took place one
year ago, on 18 February 2021 (see S/2021/167, annex
III). As such, this briefing will cover the period from
19 February 2021 to date.
Since my predecessor’s briefing to the Council,
the members of the Committee have met four times
in informal in-person consultations and three times
virtually in the “informal informals” format via closed
video-teleconference (VTC).
During the closed VTC held on 26 March 2021, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts
on an interim update related to the 30 December 2020
attack on the airport in Aden.
In the closed VTC held on 21 May, the Panel
of Experts on Yemen presented its programme of
work for the renewed mandate, which had begun on
29 March 2021.
During the informal consultations held on 16 July,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict.
On 13 August, in informal consultations, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts
on its mid-term update, which was submitted to the
Committee on 27 July. Of the eight recommendations
contained in that update, the Committee acted on three.
During the informal consultations held on
10 November, the Committee held a discussion related
to Committee practices and procedures.
On 17 December, in informal consultations,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was the first time that the

22-258145/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

Special Representative had briefed the Committee. The
Committee heard a further presentation on other matters
from the Panel of Experts, updating the Committee on
its review of the finance section of the Panel’s previous
final report (see S/2021/79).
During the closed VTC held on 21 January 2022,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of
Experts of its final report, which was submitted to
the Committee on 23 December 2021. The report was
transmitted to the Security Council on 26 January and
has been issued as document S/2022/50. Discussions on
the six recommendations addressed to the Committee
are ongoing. They relate to the implementation of the
targeted arms embargo, compliance with international
humanitarian law and related issues, the preservation of
Yemen’s economy and increasing support for demining
activities. The remaining 13 recommendations are
addressed to the Council.
During the reporting period, on 25 February 2021,
through resolution 2564 (2021), one individual was
designated on the resolution 2140 (2014) sanctions list.
Further, on 9 November 2021, the Committee approved
the designation of the 2140 sanctions list of three
individuals. The Committee also concluded the process
of consideration of a delisting request submitted by an
individual who remains on the list through the delisting
focal point, pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006).
Also, during the reporting period, the Committee
expressed support for one exemption request under
paragraph 3 of resolution 2511 (2020). No negative
decision was taken by the Committee on the exemption
notification under sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 12 of
resolution 2140 (2014).
Lastly, during the reporting period, the Committee
received eight implementation reports from Belgium,
Lebanon, Mauritius, the Philippines, Romania, Spain,
Thailand and Ukraine, respectively. The Committee
also continued to receive vessel inspection reports
from the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy,
the Under-Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representative of Yemen for their briefings.
We heard today that since the most recent Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.8946), there has been a
notable escalation in the conflict, including reprehensible
6/19

15/02/2022

Houthi cross-border attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The latest attack
on Abha International Airport wounded 12 civilians,
while the 17 January attack on the United Arab Emirates
killed three civilians. The United Kingdom condemns
in the strongest terms the Houthis’ repeated terror
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure and
against Yemenis and Yemen’s neighbours.
There remains no military solution to this conflict.
As the Special Envoy said, such a hope is futile. We
call upon all parties to de-escalate urgently and to
engage with the new United Nations-led peace process.
We welcome and fully endorse the Special Envoy’s
proposals to begin wide-ranging consultations with
the parties to the conflict, as well as the principles
for the United Nations plan. I commend the Special
Envoy’s inclusive approach, which will ensure that
a wide range of Yemenis have the opportunity to
participate. The United Kingdom encourages all
parties to participate and to engage constructively in
the upcoming consultations.
We are also keen to ensure that regional partners
are part of the solution. The presence of the United Arab
Emirates on the Council is very welcome in that regard.
The United Kingdom also hosted a Quint meeting on
Yemen in late January, where Oman, Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and the United States came
together to coordinate our approach to the conflict in
Yemen. During that meeting, we reaffirmed our mutual
support for the Organization’s efforts to find an urgent
and comprehensive political solution.
As Mr. Griffiths flagged, the humanitarian response
faces dire funding shortages. As we approach the
seventh anniversary of the conflict, the humanitarian
picture is bleak — a “death sentence” in the words of
Mr. Griffiths. The World Food Programme has warned
that without funding now, only 3 million people will
receive full food rations in February and only 2 million
in March. With the annual high-level pledging event
set for next month, the United Kingdom encourages the
Under-Secretary-General’s call to encourage existing
and new donors to pledge as generously as possible.
Finally, we welcome David Gressly’s leadership
and update on the progress towards finding a solution
to mitigating the risks posed by the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. It remains an urgent environmental concern,
and the United Kingdom stands ready to help.
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Grundberg,
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and the Permanent
Representative of Albania, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings. We also
recognize the work of the delegation of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines in leading the 2140 Committee for
the 2020-2021 biennium. We welcome the delegation of
Yemen to this meeting.
Mexico expresses great alarm about the increase in
the spiral of violence and civilian deaths in Yemen in
recent weeks. My country reiterates its condemnation
of the numerous attacks by Houthi militias against
Emirati and Saudi targets, including most recently
against Abha International Airport in Saudi Arabia.
We also condemn the indiscriminate attacks against
the population and civilian structures, such as the
Sa’ada prison, where 90 people were killed, and
the water reservoir in Sahar, which interrupted
the supply of drinking water to 130,000 residents.
Attacks against essential civilian infrastructure, in
addition to being unjustifiable, constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law, aggravate human
suffering and increase the demands on humanitarian
operations. Mexico echoes the Secretary-General’s
call for the parties to exercise maximum restraint,
promote de-escalation and respect the principles of
proportionality, distinction and precaution.
A nationwide ceasefire and the advancement of the
political process, facilitated by the Special Envoy, is
the road map for a solution to the Yemeni conflict and
the formula for advancing towards lasting peace in the
Arabian Peninsula. We insist on the need to respect the
arms embargo, in accordance with the resolutions of
the Council, including resolution 2616 (2021).
Finally, Mexico welcomes the recent talks held by
the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator with the
parties, aimed at reaching an agreement to transfer
the oil on the FSO SAFER oil tanker to another vessel
and thus address the environmental, economic and
humanitarian threat that the tanker represents — a threat
we have denounced time after time in the Chamber.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would like
to thank our briefers — Special Envoy Grundberg and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their continued
efforts. I thank our Albanian colleague, Ambassador
Hoxha, for his report on the Security Council Committee

S/PV. 8966

established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). We also
welcome Major General Beary as he takes up his duties
as the Head of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement.
The United States joins others in strongly
condemning Houthi attacks striking civilian sites
across the region over the past month, including
multiple attacks on both the United Arab Emirates and
Saudi Arabia that killed innocent civilians. We stand
united with our Saudi and Emirati partners and remain
committed to helping them defend their territory and
residents, which include tens of thousands of United
States citizens. We are also concerned about the tragic
loss of life following a Saudi-led coalition air strike
that hit a migrant detention centre in Sa’ada in January,
killing nearly 100 civilians.
Despite the Council’s condemnation, the Houthis
continue to detain our current and former Yemeni local
staff, some of whom are now United Nations employees,
and to control the compound formerly used by
our Embassy. Further, the Houthis have barred detained
United States staff from any contact with their families.
We call for the immediate release of our Yemeni
employees unharmed and for the Houthis to cease all
threats against our employees and their families.
The inescapable conclusion is that we have failed to
demonstrate to the Houthis that there are consequences
for that behaviour. The Houthis have made it clear that
they seek to disrupt regional security, target civilian
sites and disrupt maritime commerce. We must do more
to counter such attacks with a unified voice, including
by imposing tangible costs.
The Houthis’ Ma’rib offensive, including repeated
attacks that have killed and wounded civilians, has
represented the most significant impediment to peace
efforts. It is clear that the Houthi military offensive
will only bring further suffering and worsen the
humanitarian plight of the Yemeni people. It must end.
We are witnessing a dangerous escalation in Yemen,
and we call on all parties to de-escalate, to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including those related to the protection of all civilians,
and to participate fully in an inclusive United Nationsled peace process. We applaud the attempts made by
Special Envoy Grundberg to develop a framework
for peace, and we welcome his consultations with the
parties and civil society on that framework. A return
to talks is urgent, and we look to the United Nations to

22-258147/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

provide the parties with a path forward to peace on an
urgent basis.
Furthermore, we welcome the Special Envoy’s
engagement with the parties and critically needed
de-escalation proposals. We call on all parties to
facilitate the Special Envoy’s timely and meaningful
engagement with all relevant Yemeni groups and
parties, including women, civil-society leaders and
other marginalized groups. The Council should support
the Special Envoy’s efforts and press the parties for
full cooperation.
We are concerned that the Houthis are refusing
to receive the Special Envoy in Sana’a. We should all
be clear: imposing preconditions on meetings with the
Special Envoy is completely unacceptable. An inclusive
Yemeni-led political solution is the only way out of this
tragic war and its resulting humanitarian catastrophe.
Accountability for human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law are also key to ensuring a durable peace for all
Yemenis. As we all are aware, more than 20 million
Yemenis need urgent humanitarian assistance. We
discuss this conflict as 16 million Yemenis, including
7 million children, go without life’s basic necessities.
We call on donors to provide urgently needed funding.
We are cautiously encouraged by the ongoing
discussions that we have heard about to address the
SAFER oil tanker, and we reiterate our calls for the
Houthis to allow a credible solution to proceed urgently
in order to prevent an unimaginable and entirely
avoidable humanitarian and environmental disaster.
Finally, we thank the Panel of Experts on Yemen
for its work shining a light on the darkest elements of
this conflict. The panel’s findings are invaluable in
helping the Council carry out its responsibilities.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence among us of Mr. Hans Grundberg,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and I thank them for the high quality
of their respective briefings. I thank Ambassador
Hoxha, the Permanent Representative of Albania, for
the information he provided us in his capacity of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014). I also welcome the participation
of the representative of Yemen in this meeting.
8/19

15/02/2022

What we have heard just now makes us reflect
on the impasse in the conflict in Yemen. That
multidimensional political, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis, compounded by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, is far from nearing its end because
of the persistence of fighting, with the parties trying
to consolidate their control over the territory and the
people, all of that in flagrant violation of existing
ceasefire agreements.
The escalation of violence is deeply alarming, with
continued fighting spilling over into neighbouring
States, which threatens to further destabilize the region
as a whole. The issue of access to weapons, including
small arms and light weapons, remains at the heart of
the war, and the implosion of the Yemeni economy is a
consequence thereof. The destruction of infrastructure,
as well as the fight for control over trade and natural
resources, is aggravating the situation, with basic
services not being provided and the unemployment rate
and poverty increasing.
We call for a truce in the fighting and for respect
for the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.
There is no military solution to the Yemeni crisis. The
civilian population should not continue to be the target
of deadly attacks or the victims of the impunity that
is ravaging the country. That impunity is a source of
the violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law, in particular arbitrary arrests, forced
disappearances, torture and other inhuman treatment.
Similarly, the Council must ensure that violence
against and violations of the basic rights of women are
unequivocally condemned and the perpetrators of such
horrors brought to justice. The international community
must show solidarity with Yemeni women.
Above and beyond the necessary ceasefire, the exit
from the Yemeni crisis requires an inclusive dialogue in
which all of the disparate parts of the country participate
in good faith. We call for a greater mobilization of the
international community commensurate with the plight
of the population. We encourage initiatives similar to
those of the countries that support the United Arab
Emirates to secure the air space against terrorist attacks.
It is clear that the Yemeni people are hoping for the
restoration of State authority throughout the territory
and for a return to stability and to the country’s key role
at the heart of the subregion.
In conclusion, we welcome the advances made
with respect to the FSO SAFER tanker, and we
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

would underscore the scope of the threat that it
represents in terms of the potential environmental and
humanitarian consequences.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Under-Secretary General
Martin Griffiths for their briefings. I also thank
Ambassador Ferit Hoxha, the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), for his briefing on the activities of the
Committee. India attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and to the work of the Panel
of Experts supporting it, and we look forward to the
renewal of the mandate of the Committee and the Panel.
India has been closely following the fast-paced
developments in Yemen with deep concern. The
number of fatalities is mounting, and the escalation of
the conflict is jeopardizing the chances of a ceasefire.
I reiterate India’s consistent call for an immediate
de-escalation of the conflict, followed by a nationwide
ceasefire. It is our considered view that the conflict
can be resolved only through dialogue and not on
the battlefield.
It is also of serious concern to us that Yemen’s
conflict is creating ripple effects on security and
stability in the entire Gulf region. Approximately
9 million Indians live and work in the Gulf region, and
their well-being and safety is of paramount importance
to us. We strongly condemn the continued cross-border
missile and drone attacks into the United Arab Emirates
and Saudi Arabia, which have resulted in the deaths
of and injuries to innocent civilians, including Indian
nationals. Two Indian nationals died in the attack on
the United Arab Emirates on 17 January, while on
10 February one Indian was injured in the attack on
Abha airport in Saudi Arabia. The deliberate escalation
of the conflict outside of Yemen’s borders and the
heightened provocative rhetoric by Ansar Allah is
deplorable. Instead of moving towards a solution to the
conflict, such actions by Ansar Allah only exacerbate it.
The conflict has also spilled over to the maritime
domain. The recent report of the 2140 Panel of Experts
documents various attacks and dangerous approaches
towards shipping and commercial vessels in the Red
Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of Oman emanating
from Yemen. We are also witnessing arbitrary seizures
and the detention of shipping vessels. India is deeply
worried by that trend, which threatens not only the safe
passage of commercial vessels but also maritime security

S/PV. 8966

in the region. I reiterate the Council’s unanimous call
for the urgent release of the crew members of the vessel
Rwabee, whose onboard crew includes seven Indians.
They continue to be detained unlawfully. Regular
access to them, as well as updates on their condition,
must be ensured by Ansar Allah, until their release.
The assumption of duties by Major General
Michael Beary as the Head of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement is timely.
We hope that his extensive engagement with all parties
in recent weeks will result in the reactivation of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint
mechanisms to implement the Hodeidah Agreement.
The disruption of key pillars of Yemen’s economy
has also contributed to the worsening of the economic
and humanitarian crises in the country.
In the absence of a political solution to the conflict,
the humanitarian aid operations have been a lifeline
for millions of Yemenis. We are worried that those
aid operations are now at risk due to severe funding
shortfalls. Yemeni women and children are bearing the
brunt of the closure or scaling down of major United
Nations aid programmes. We hope that donor funding
will be enhanced to support the 2022 United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Yemen.
A sustainable solution to the unfolding
humanitarian crisis lies in concrete short-term and
long-term economic measures that benefit the people
of Yemen. The economic framework for Yemen of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs identifies such measures, and
it needs immediate implementation. International
support — political and financial — is essential for
their implementation.
We once again call on all parties to renounce
military confrontation and make concrete efforts
towards establishing enduring peace in Yemen. The
aspirations of the Yemeni people and their hopes for
peace, stability and prosperity should be the focus of
those efforts. I reaffirm India’s steadfast commitment
to a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political process
with the goal of achieving an inclusive and peacefully
negotiated settlement to the conflict.
Quiet and constructive diplomacy is the need of the
hour. Actions that fuel tensions and further intensify
the conflict must be eschewed by all sides in the
greater interest of establishing conducive conditions

22-258149/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

for a political dialogue. In that context, we appreciate
the efforts of Special Envoy Grundberg in reaching
out to all the parties to the conflict to get them to the
negotiating table to restart the political process. Parties
should engage with the Special Envoy unconditionally
and constructively.
We also encourage the Special Envoy to continue
his coordination with countries of the region, as their
cooperation is critical in reaching a long-lasting
sustainable solution to the Yemeni conflict. Countries
in the region with influence on Yemeni parties must
also exert sincere efforts to restore peace and order in
Yemen, as that is in the shared interests of everyone.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s call for
an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire across
Yemen, followed by a robust and inclusive political
process. Such a process should fully respect Yemen’s
unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We believe that, with effective Yemeni,
regional, international and United Nations leadership,
a lasting and inclusive political settlement in Yemen
is achievable.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg, Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and Ambassador Hoxha for their briefings.
In the past month, the situation in Yemen
has continued to deteriorate, with conflicts and
confrontation between the parties intensifying and
cross-border attacks and air strikes escalating in turn.
China is deeply concerned about that, and we urge all
parties to immediately uphold a ceasefire and stop the
violence. We note that the Permanent Representatives
of the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia wrote
to the President of the Security Council several times
recently concerning the cross-border attacks on civilian
facilities in their territories by the Houthis. Those attack
resulted in civilian casualties and threatened regional
and international peace and security. China condemns
them and expresses its condolences and sympathy to
the victims and their bereaved families. We support
the efforts of the United Arab Emirates and Saudi
Arabia to safeguard their own security and stability.
All the parties to the conflict should strictly abide
by international humanitarian law, protect civilians
and civilian facilities and refrain from any action that
could exacerbate tensions. The Security Council has an
obligation to remain attentive to the situation in Yemen
10/19

15/02/2022

and the region and play its due role in de-escalating
the conflict.
No matter how great the challenges facing it, the
international community must adhere to the general
direction of a political settlement of the Yemeni issue.
The Special Envoy said just now that he will consult
with all parties on launching multi-track negotiations.
China welcomes that and hopes that he will help all
parties to the conflict to enhance mutual trust and
restart dialogue. The road map for peace in Yemen
should be operational and reflect the way forward
towards a political settlement based on the actual
situation on the ground. All parties to the conflict
should demonstrate political will and cooperate with
the Special Envoy without preconditions. The conflict
in Yemen has prolonged to this day. No one side can
emerge as a winner that takes all. Insisting on military
means will only lead to a lose-lose situation. We hope
that all parties to the conflict will make wise choices.
Countries in the region concerned should also play an
active role in encouraging peace and promoting talks.
Yemen is facing multiple challenges, such as
food security, the pandemic, an oil supply shortage
and unemployment. Alleviating the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen and saving the Yemeni economy
are urgent tasks for the international community.
Recently, the seventh shipment of Saudi aid to Yemen
arrived in Aden, providing strong support for Yemen’s
power supply. Under the coordination of the Yemeni
Government, a number of oil tankers entered the port
of Al-Hudaydah, easing the pressure on the oil supply.
The Yemeni Government is also actively coordinating
various departments to set up an emergency distribution
mechanism for petroleum products to ensure basic social
services. China welcomes those developments. At the
same time, the crisis in Yemen continues to worsen, and
the international community should provide assistance
to Yemen in a more effective and sustainable manner.
The United Nations recently launched an economic
framework for Yemen to implement a phased approach
to short-, medium- and long-term relief. China supports
that action. We hope that the international community,
including donor countries, will strengthen coordination
with the United Nations system, increase support for
Yemen and sustain the humanitarian projects in Yemen.
China has been actively participating in the work
of the Yemen Sanctions Committee and supports
the Committee, including the Panel of Experts, in
performing its duties in accordance with its mandate
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and playing its due role in promoting peace and stability
in Yemen. At the end of this month, the sanctions
measures against Yemen and the mandate of the Yemen
Sanctions Committee’s Panel of Experts will expire.
China will earnestly participate in the consultations
on the draft resolution on the extension. We hope that
the draft resolution will focus on the key issues of the
conflict in Yemen and take into account the reasonable
views of all parties.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Hans Grundberg, Martin Griffiths and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) for their briefings.
We are also concerned about the intensity of the
fighting, with the various actors hoping to be in a better
position to negotiate. That strategy is a dead end, as
many said before me. France also reiterates its call
for a nation-wide ceasefire. In that regard, we look
forward to hearing from Major General Beary about his
initial discussions on the future of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee.
The current conflict now extends well beyond
Yemen’s borders. That is a very worrisome development
and a destabilizing factor for the region. In that regard,
France strongly condemns the Houthi attacks on
the territories of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Such missile attacks are unacceptable and
must stop.
The human toll of the escalating violence is
extremely worrisome. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well
as civilian infrastructure, including detention centres,
must be an absolute priority.
Every effort must also be made to ensure full
humanitarian access to all those in need. We therefore
call for the removal of all bureaucratic obstacles that
limit humanitarian access.
It is also essential that the Yemeni Government
allow the replacement of equipment at Sana’a airport to
allow humanitarian flights to operate safely.
The donor conference scheduled for 16 March
should help to meet humanitarian needs. France, like
others, will be there.
Lastly, on the political front, France supports the
efforts of the Special Envoy to organize and maintain
a political dialogue with all parties despite a very

S/PV. 8966

deteriorated security context. France recalls the need
for all actors to fully cooperate with the Special Envoy
without preconditions.
We welcome and support the consultations that
the Special Envoy intends to organize shortly with the
Yemeni stakeholders. We call on our Council partners
to facilitate the Special Envoy’s efforts to resolve the
conflict in Yemen on the basis of the international
parameters, including the resolutions of by the Council.
We reiterate the importance of a dialogue that includes
all Yemeni stakeholders and ensures the effective
participation of women in the peace process.
Finally, we welcome the encouraging efforts led by
David Gressly on the issue of the FSO SAFER tanker
and call on the Houthis to cooperate as soon as possible
with the United Nations to avoid an ecological disaster.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Today’s detailed briefings
by Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, whom I thank for their updated
information, give once again a shocking account of the
developments and the situation on the ground.
The people of Yemen continue to suffer in their
hopelessness; women, men and children are starving,
deliberately used as targets; their lives and livelihood
are destroyed; sexual violence is persisting and children
are recruited as fighters. As we have heard, a neverending dire humanitarian crisis is only worsening.
Furthermore, fighting has intensified, infrastructure
continues to be destroyed, and the number of civilian
victims is the highest it has been in the past three years
and countless more have been injured or displaced.
As in every conflict, women and children continue
to bear the brunt of the conflict. Women’s rights are
violated and abused daily; their movement is restricted;
violence against women human rights defenders,
peacebuilders and journalists continues; and politically
active women in particular are systematically attacked,
detained, disappeared or killed. Every aspect of
horrible crimes has found refuge in the daily life of
Yemenis. And as if all this were not enough, every
two hours a Yemeni woman dies in childbirth from
benign and entirely preventable complications. This is
simply unacceptable.
The practice of the recruitment of children
continues. Countless children recruited by the Houthis
have lost their lives on the battlefield. The appalling
practice of training young children in camps as fighters

22-2581411/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

has to end. It represents a grave violation of the rights
of the child and international humanitarian law. It must
not be tolerated. The parties need to be reminded of
their obligation to respect international humanitarian
law and protect civilians.
The intensification of cross-border drone and
missile attacks committed and claimed by the Houthis
on the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia are worrisome signs of the intention and
persistence of the Houthis to further exacerbate and
expand the conflict. This must not be allowed.
We remain deeply worried by the lack of progress
in the political process. Albania believes that instead
of endless fighting in a conflict in which there are no
winners, the country needs a framework for a political
resolution of the conflict as soon as possible.
We commend the Special Envoy for his efforts and
we strongly encourage him to persist in working with the
parties to end fighting and commit to a comprehensive
and inclusive political process, which must include
women and civil society. We look forward with utmost
interest to the framework on a multitrack approach that
he mentioned today. In this respect, as we have seen
elsewhere, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women from all backgrounds and parts of the country
is important and an irreplaceable added value.
A nationwide ceasefire at the earliest date should
be the priority from a short-term perspective.
Let me conclude by mentioning three specific issues.
First, I praise the work of the Resident Coordinator
for Yemen in finding a sustainable solution to the issue
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker in the Red Sea.
Secondly, I reiterate that the detainment by the
Houthis of Yemeni nationals affiliated with the United
States and the United Nations must immediately cease.
Thirdly, I reiterate our condemnation of the seizure
and detention of the United Arab Emirates-flagged
merchant vessel, and the call on the Houthis to release
the ship and crew, as the Security Council requested on
14 January (see SC/14765).
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Hans Grundberg
and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for
their sobering briefings. I would also like to thank our
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Albania, for
presenting the periodic report of the Security Council
12/19

15/02/2022

Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). And I welcome the Permanent Representative of
Yemen to this meeting.
There is no shortage of worrisome trends in Yemen
that merit the Council’s attention, many of which
have been addressed at today’s meeting, from the
deterioration and instrumentalization of the economy to
the dramatic funding gap faced by humanitarian actors;
from the lingering risk posed by the FSO SAFER oil
tanker to the need to enhance female participation in
resolving the conflict.
Today, however, I will focus on two issues: the new
heights of violence against civilians in the conflict and
the situation of Yemeni children.
First, we must condemn the horrific violence that
has convulsed Yemen over the past few weeks. As
we have heard from our briefers, January witnessed
more than 600 civilian deaths and injuries, the highest
monthly record of civilian casualties in more than three
years. A single air strike against a detention facility
in Sa’ada resulted in the death or injury of more than
300 civilians. We have also seen repeated attacks
against civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools, telecommunications equipment and water
infrastructure, including reported attacks yesterday
in Sana’a.
Drone and missile attacks conducted by the Houthis
against the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia in
January and February have also resulted in civilian
casualties. Less than a week ago, the Houthis launched
an attack aimed at a civilian airport in Abha, Saudi
Arabia. Brazil thoroughly condemns these senseless
attacks, which serve as tragic reminders that the war in
Yemen poses a threat not only to Yemenis, but also to
civilians in the wider region.
Attacks on civilians are unacceptable and must
be met with unequivocal condemnation. Our foremost
tool in combating such attacks is ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law. The principles
of distinction, proportionality and necessity are not
optional, as stressed by our briefers today. The fact
that civilians live in areas controlled by a non-State
actor or in the territory of an opposing State does not
make them legal targets, and their lives merit the same
protection as ours.
This point was made repeatedly during the open
debate on the protection of civilians in urban settings,
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

hosted by Norway last month (see S/PV.8953), and must
be taken to heart by the parties on the ground and by
all other relevant actors. While a nationwide ceasefire
and sustainable peace are the ultimate goals pursued by
the Security Council, we must defend compliance with
international humanitarian law norms every step of the
way. When violations occur, they must be investigated
impartially and their perpetrators held accountable.
The second issue I would like to emphasize today
is the condition of Yemeni children. In seven years of
war, they have been deprived of their right to health,
to education and to regular family lives. They have,
indeed, lost friends and family. To our shame, more
than 10,000 Yemeni children have lost their lives or
been maimed in conflict, and tens of thousands more
have died from the secondary effects of the war.
The direct involvement of children in the conflict
is especially appalling in Houthi-controlled areas.
While they are not the only ones to have committed
grave violations against children, Houthi leaders have
made the indoctrination and recruitment of children a
systematic and unapologetic part of their rule.
Reportedly, the number of children who have died
on the battlefield reaches into the thousands, including
during the ongoing offensive against Ma’rib, the
majority of them in the Houthi camp. The obstruction
of humanitarian access has also been especially
concerning in Houthi-controlled areas and has vast
repercussions for children who require emergency aid.
Civilians, including children, have borne the brunt
of the violence inflicted by the warring parties in
Yemen. We must do our utmost to ensure respect for
international law and to safeguard what remains of the
childhood of Yemeni children.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Hoxha for his briefing and for taking on the role
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014).
We are greatly concerned about the serious military
escalation by all parties to the conflict in Yemen. We
echo the Secretary-General’s concern that January saw
a record-shattering number of civilian casualties in
Yemen, including in the Sa’ada attack.
We also continue to be alarmed by the increase
in the number of cross-border attacks in the region,

S/PV. 8966

including against the United Arab Emirates and Saudi
Arabia. Norway condemns those attacks, and we are
concerned about the increased tension in the region,
including the consequences for maritime security.
Norway strongly calls on all parties to exercise
restraint and rapidly de-escalate military activities. The
civilian harm caused by the hostilities is shocking. It is
deplorable that recent air strikes and missile attacks hit
civilian infrastructure.
Norway welcomes the recent report of the Panel
of Experts on Yemen (see S/2022/50) and thanks
the Panel for calling attention to the widespread
breaches of international humanitarian law, including
indiscriminate attacks, the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict and sexual and genderbased violence. We remain deeply concerned about
the widespread human rights violations and abuses.
The Panel’s documentation and investigation of those
violations are instrumental to the Security Council’s
work. We urgently call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and to ensure the protection of civilian lives
and infrastructure.
There are no military solutions to the conflict in
Yemen. A nationwide ceasefire and a turn towards
political dialogue is the only path to bringing about
peace and security for the people of Yemen. We call
upon all parties to prioritize the needs and interests
of the Yemeni people by fully cooperating with the
Special Envoy, without preconditions or delay. We
thank Special Envoy Grundberg for sharing his plans
for his upcoming consultations on a negotiating
framework with a broad number of parties. We fully
support his approach.
Life-saving humanitarian efforts in Yemen remain
crucial. We are especially concerned about the harmful
coping mechanisms to which families and communities
must resort to amid the steep increase in the price of
basic goods and cooking gas. Fuel shortages also present
serious challenges, and water scarcity, as a result of
climate change, exacerbates existing vulnerabilities.
We hope that the pledging conference in Geneva
next month will garner the necessary support for the
humanitarian response in Yemen.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, let me
thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths

22-2581413/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

for their briefings. We very much welcome their
commitment and efforts to bring about an end to the
conflict in Yemen and alleviate the deep suffering of
the Yemeni people.
We are also grateful to the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014),
Ambassador Hoxha, for his report on the work of
the Committee.
We also welcome the participation
representative of Yemen in today’s meeting.

of

the

Ghana remains concerned about the deteriorating
security situation, which has engulfed Ma’rib and
Shabwah, and continues to impact negatively on the
economic and humanitarian situations in the country.
Having listened to the briefings, I wish to make the
following remarks.
We have witnessed with grave concern the
alarming rates of casualties in blatant disregard for
civilian lives. We condemn in particular the attack
on the Sa’ada detention centre, which killed many
people, and the killing of children in Al-Hudaydah.
All parties must prioritize the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure and adhere to the principles
of proportionality, distinction and precaution, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. We
call on the leaders of the parties, in the true interests
of their people, to set aside their differences, commit
to an immediate nationwide ceasefire and engage in a
political process to find a lasting solution to the conflict.
In line with resolution 2564 (2021), the people of
Yemen must chart their own path to peace through a
Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political process, under
the auspices of the United Nations. Ghana therefore
supports the efforts of the Special Envoy to develop a
framework for an inclusive political process, in concert
with the parties and other actors, and looks forward to
concrete steps in response to the urgent situation on
the ground.
In pressing for an inclusive process, we reiterate
the call for the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all aspects of the political negotiations.
Beyond the durability that the participation of women
affords to peace processes, the parties must acknowledge
the right of Yemeni women to be part of the solution.
Yemen continues to experience the worst
humanitarian crisis, as 80 per cent of its population is in
need of humanitarian assistance and faces the imminent
14/19

15/02/2022

threat of widespread famine. We denounce the undue
bureaucratic obstructions to humanitarian operations,
by which the parties seek to advance their own political
and military objectives, and urge immediate and
unhindered humanitarian access to all areas where
assistance is needed. In addition, international funding
support is urgently required to bridge acute funding
shortfalls for humanitarian operations.
We welcome the intention of the Governments
of Switzerland and Sweden to co-host a pledging
conference in March and encourage the international
community and donors to support the United Nations in
raising the estimated $3.9 billion necessary to meet the
rapidly growing needs.
With regard to the economic situation, the parties
must be encouraged to deliver on their commitments in
the Stockholm Agreement without further delay. Unless
the Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah ports are reopened to
commercial imports and humanitarian aid, the importdependent economy of Yemen will continue to fail, and
a famine will not be averted.
Lastly, allow me to echo the concerns about the
FSO SAFER oil tanker and the danger it poses to the
marine environment of the Red Sea and the safety of the
Yemeni people. We thank Resident Coordinator David
Gressly and his team for the ongoing progress in efforts
to secure United Nations access to the tanker, and
urge them to carry out all activities with transparency
and in a manner that will sustain the assurances and
guarantees of all concerned.
I conclude by emphasizing that the solution to
the crisis in Yemen is political. In that regard, I urge
the members of the Council to support efforts to end
the armed conflict across all front lines. Only then
can the humanitarian and economic issues be more
effectively addressed.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General
and the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) for their briefings and welcome
the participation of the representative of Yemen at
this meeting.
Kenya regrets the alarming escalation of hostilities
in Yemen and their spread across the region. We strongly
condemn the repeated launching of attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure in Yemen, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Such acts violate
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the basic principles of international humanitarian
law, and we call on the Security Council to adopt
relevant measures aimed at holding accountable all
those responsible.
Last month, we witnessed some of the highest
levels of civilian casualties since the war started.
It is evident that there can be no military solution
to the crisis in Yemen. Any use of terrorism or any
form of violence to advance political or ideological
interests must be condemned. We continue to remind
all Yemeni stakeholders that the time has come for
them to reconsider their hard-line positions to make
necessary compromises to break the existing stalemate.
It is important that they agree on a nationwide ceasefire
within an agreed time frame and purposefully work
towards a negotiated political solution.
We believe that that would usher in an environment
of hope for sustained peace and economic recovery. We
therefore support the Special Envoy’s efforts towards
producing a political framework. We further emphasize
that the only sustainable solution has to be a Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned inclusive peace process. The recent
military escalation has greatly aggravated regional
tensions and have increased opportunities for threats
from terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida and Islamic
State affiliates.
As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths with regard to the gravity of the humanitarian
situation and funding challenges, we cannot overstate
the need for effective, sufficient and sustainable
humanitarian operations. The situation continues to
deteriorate, and we call on all stakeholders, international
donors and friends of Yemen to unite and generously
contribute to the 2022 humanitarian response plan at
the upcoming pledging conference in March. On that
note, we warn all those perpetrating violence in Yemen
that their actions are negatively impacting on continued
international assistance.
I reiterate our deep concern about the status of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker and the looming threat that it
poses to the livelihoods of millions of people in the
region. As deliberations continue, we urge all the
parties and Governments in the region and elsewhere to
redouble their efforts to avoid an environmental disaster.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with
the people of Yemen in their quest for lasting peace,
security and prosperity.

S/PV. 8966

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): First, I would like to
thank our briefers today — Special Envoy Grundberg,
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Ambassador
Hoxha. I very much look forward to hearing later from
Major General Beary. We support their vital work in
trying to forge pathways for peace and improve the
lives of Yemenis.
As we heard in stark and horrifying terms today,
January 2022 marks the deadliest month on record for
civilians in Yemen in the bloody conflict. It is estimated
that more than 650 civilians lost their lives or were
injured over the past month alone, which is one every
hour. From Ma’rib to Taiz, Shabwah to Al-Hudaydah,
the people of Yemen continue to pay a dreadful price,
while warring parties wreak havoc and destruction on
their country.
We reiterate the Secretary-General’s condemnation
and share his deep concern about coalition air strikes
across the country in recent weeks, including those in
Sa’ada, which struck a detention centre where migrants
were held and was among the worst civilian-casualty
incidents in Yemen in three years. The victims included
women and children. Vital civilian infrastructure was
also disabled or destroyed, and essential services were
disrupted. As Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel briefed the
Security Council last month (see S/PV.8953), all aspects
of life have been devastated by the ongoing conflict and
military escalation.
We repeat that cross-border attacks claimed by the
Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates are totally unacceptable. Ireland
strongly condemns all such attacks, including January’s
attack on Abu Dhabi’s international airport and the
Musaffah industrial area, which killed three civilians.
All parties must fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law in relation to
the protection of civilians and civilian objects and
adhere to the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution.
The path forward must also include an end to
impunity and the pursuit of accountability for all
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The message that we
have relayed time and time again at the Council still
stands: there can be no military solution to the conflict.
We call for an immediate de-escalation in violence and
on all parties to engage in good faith with Special Envoy
Grundberg towards an inclusive politically negotiated

22-2581415/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

solution, including on the framework outlined today.
We call on women, youth and civil society to take their
rightful places at the tables where those solutions will
be shaped.
The current escalation seriously undermines peace
efforts and worsens an already-dire humanitarian
situation. As we heard today, more than two thirds of
the population are now in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance following seven years of war and economic
collapse. The most vulnerable are increasingly unable
to cope, and hunger remains alarmingly high.
We welcome the timely allocation via the Central
Emergency Response Fund to support those who have
been displaced and forced to flee their homes in recent
months. However, the severe funding shortfalls faced
by the aid operation, as described by Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths this afternoon, are deeply concerning.
It is clear that Yemenis need the strong support of the
international donor community to allow aid agencies
on the ground to continue their vital life-saving work.
The need to strengthen and rebuild the fragile economy
is also clear. In that regard, we look forward to further
progress towards realizing the proposed United Nations
economic framework.
To conclude on a vitally more hopeful note, we
welcome recent progress on the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. The United Nations-coordinated proposal
to shift the oil on-board the vessel to another ship
represents a potential first step towards mitigating the
grave environmental and humanitarian threat posed
by the vessel. We encourage all parties to continue
to engage constructively with the Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator on concrete action towards
a sustainable solution.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank both Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Ferit Hoxha, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for their valuable briefings. We also listened to
the briefing by Special Envoy Hans Grundberg.
What we have heard today confirms the continued
failure of the political process under the leadership
of the United Nations to deal realistically and firmly
with the continuously intransigent position of the
Houthi militias and their dangerous escalation, which
makes it impossible to reach a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis.
16/19

15/02/2022

Over the past months, we have heard numerous
briefings, including from Mr. Grundberg, calling on
us to give him an opportunity for his efforts to bring
the Houthis back to the negotiating table. However,
after United Arab Emirates civilian infrastructure
was subjected to terrorist attacks that claimed the
lives of innocent civilians, we can only ask when the
appeasement of that terrorist group will end?
On its part, the United Arab Emirate reaffirms
its sovereign right to take all the measures necessary
to protect the security and stability of its territories
as well as the safety of its citizens and residents from
any terrorist attacks, in accordance with its obligations
under international law. We reiterate that the Houthi
terrorist attacks are flagrant violations of all norms
and international law and have persisted despite
condemnation by the Security Council and by more
than 120 countries and international organizations.
That escalation reflects the nature of the Houthis’
aggressive behaviour in the region, which has reached
unprecedented levels. They continue to target the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and threaten international
navigation and the global economy. Therefore, stopping
the Houthis’ aggression requires the international
community to take serious, decisive and tangible steps,
all of which keep in mind the nature of the Houthis’
extremist ideology and their true intentions.
As a priority, the international community should
place significant pressure on the Houthis and their
supporters to stop all their violations and attempts to
impose control over Yemeni territory by force. Such
pressure begins with imposing further sanctions on
them and cutting off their funding sources, as well as
enforcing the arms embargo imposed on Yemen by
resolution 2216 (2015) and imposing a maritime ban
and enhanced enforcement.
We refer to the recent report of the Panel of Experts
(see S/2022/50), which unequivocally documented the
continued violation of the arms embargo. We condemn
the Houthis’ continued violations of the Stockholm
Agreement, as they have militarized Al-Hudaydah port
to store weapons and launch attacks that threaten the
navigation security and the countries of the region.
Accordingly, we call for the presence of the United
Nations in the port to monitor it and prevent its use
for military purposes. The Houthis have committed
terrorist acts and should be designated as such by the
international community.
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, we reaffirm our steadfast position in
support of a political track that reflects the reality in
Yemen and addresses its challenges in a tangible way
that contributes to ending the crisis, as is embodied
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s initiative. We also
support the resumption of political negotiations among
the Yemeni parties. However, it must be noted that the
Houthis have demonstrated that they will not commit
to any agreement without clear international pressure.
As we have seen with the issue of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, the Houthis continue to break their promises
and block the United Nations team from making its
necessary assessments.
Lastly, we express our deep concern over the
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situations in Yemen. We condemn all violations by the
Houthis against humanitarian workers, as well as the
continued diversion and obstruction of aid. We also
condemn Houthi violations against women, including
sexual aggression, and against children by recruiting
them into their military ranks. In that connection, we
reaffirm my country’s continued solidarity with the
Yemeni people while providing them with humanitarian
and development assistance to alleviate their suffering.
In conclusion, we stress that a political solution
is the only way to end the Yemeni crisis. We reiterate
the importance of continued United Nations and
international efforts to that end. It is time for the
Security Council to put a stop to the Houthi militia’s
senseless actions so that Yemen can recover and build a
secure and stable future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We wish to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Grundberg, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Griffiths, for
providing an overview of the political and humanitarian
situations in Yemen.
We continue to closely monitor the escalation of
hostilities in Yemen, including in Ma’rib and Shabwah
governorates, which are becoming increasingly
ferocious and resulting in a growing number of
casualties among civilians, as well as refugees and
internally displaced persons.
We are seriously concerned by the continuing
attacks on civilian infrastructure, both in Yemen and

S/PV. 8966

beyond its borders in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. We are convinced that such attempts to shift
hostilities from Yemen to the territory of neighbouring
States have the potential for a further escalation of
violence. At the same time, we must acknowledge
that the return of strikes and related violations of
international humanitarian law are a direct consequence
of an acute military and political crisis that has lasted
for almost seven years. The new spiral of escalation
poses a genuine threat to regional security.
In that regard, we urge the warring parties to
strictly abide by international humanitarian law and to
fully and immediately reject all operations that result
in the destruction of civilian infrastructure and civilian
casualties. We are extremely concerned by the growing
number of such incidents that occurred recently.
On our part, we intend to continue to actively
urge the official Yemeni authorities and the leadership
of Ansar Allah to display a constructive approach
and readiness to compromise when addressing their
differences. We believe that our common goal is to
ensure a comprehensive and lasting resolution of
Yemen’s numerous problems, which are also affecting
neighbouring States.
Traditionally, the central role in that process is
assigned to the United Nations and the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Grundberg, who was hosted by the Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 26 November 2021. We
support the Special Envoy’s activities as a mediator and
trust that he will soon come up with specific modalities
of a road map for a settlement. That settlement should
be inclusive in nature and based on the principles of
taking into account the opinions of all elements of
Yemeni society, including representatives of all creeds,
political forces and regions of the country. To that end,
we support his plans to conduct consultations with all
Yemeni stakeholders regarding the settlement’s new
framework parameters.
Against the backdrop of an impasse in the political
process, we are particularly concerned by the dire
socioeconomic and humanitarian situations in Yemen,
which have long been teetering on the brink of disaster.
As we heard today, that applies to the entire territory
of Yemen, regardless of who is in control. Not a single
area of Yemen can be called a safe place in terms of
sustainable food and medical supplies. In that regard,
we once again remind all parties to the conflict of the
need to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access to all

22-2581417/19

S/PV.8966

The situation in the Middle East

those in need; to lift the land, air and sea blockades on
the country; and rescind all restrictions on deliveries of
foodstuffs, medicines and other basic goods to all areas
of Yemen without exception.
In conclusion, we stress that the conflict in Yemen
has a regionwide impact, given that it affects, inter
alia, the safety of navigation. We also recall resolution
598 (1987) and other initiatives, including the Russian
concept of collective security, designed to stabilize the
situation in the Persian Gulf region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, please allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s Security Council presidency for
the month of February. I wish you every success. I
also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Norway for her successful work last month during
Norway’s presidency.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Hans Grundberg for their valuable briefings. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Albania for
his briefing.
The Iranian-backed Houthi militias continue to
choose war over peace, undermining the security and
stability of Yemen and the region. They continue to
reject all peace proposals and initiatives and to waste
all opportunities to advance the political process. They
persist in their escalation and military aggression
against the Yemeni people. Those actions prolong the
conflict and make the road to peace more difficult and
costly from an economic, political and humanitarian
perspective. Peace is a product of strong will, not
wishful thinking. Our will is strong to achieve peace
for our people, who yearn for development, justice,
equality and the rule of law.
The Yemeni Government once again emphasizes its
support for all efforts aimed at achieving comprehensive
and sustainable peace in Yemen that are in line with
the agreed terms of reference — the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015), which represents
18/19

15/02/2022

the main and firm basis for the United Nations-led
peace process. While the Yemeni Government has
engaged positively with the efforts of Mr. Grundberg
and has facilitated his job, the Houthi militias continue
to obstruct his efforts and refuse to meet with him
in Sana’a.
The Houthis would not have insisted on rejecting
peace had it not been for the Iranian regime’s
interference in the internal affairs of my country,
undermining the stability and security of Yemen and
the region, prolonging the war and exacerbating the
humanitarian crisis by violating the Council resolutions
on the arms embargo. According to international
evidence and reports, the Iranian regime continues to
supply Houthi militias with weapons, military knowhow and all types of missiles, which the militias use
against the Yemeni people and threaten international
navigation, as we have seen recently with the hijacking
of the Emirati ship Rawabi, now under the control of
the Houthi militias although the Council has called for
releasing it with the crew.
The Houthi militias continue to use ballistic
missiles and drones to attack civilians and civilian
infrastructure in the United Arab Emirates and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in flagrant violation of
international law and international humanitarian law.
They continue to threaten vital institutions and energy
supplies, constituting a direct threat to international
peace and security.
The most recent such terrorist attacks are those on
Abu Dhabi and the Abha Airport, which the Yemeni
Government condemns in the strongest terms. We
call on the international community to confront the
terrorist attacks by the Houthi militias, which threaten
regional and international peace and stability. We
call on the Council to assume its responsibilities and
to act decisively to put an end to those Houthi acts
of aggression and their repeated terrorist attacks in
Yemen and the region. We urge the Council to place
more pressure and sanctions on the militias in order
to deter their terrorist behaviour and to cut off their
financing. Issuing statements will never convince the
Houthi militias to stop their war and terrorist attacks.
The war continues to exacerbate the suffering of
the Yemeni people. The Houthi militias have continued
their indiscriminate attacks on residential areas and
camps for displaced persons in Ma’rib, launching three
ballistic missiles today on the populous city, with total
22-25814

15/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

disregard for the lives of civilians, including women
and children. Those attacks force civilians to flee,
some more than once, the crimes of the militias, who
kill innocent people, plant mines and destroy houses,
schools and religion sites. They obstruct, loot and divert
humanitarian assistance — and even use that assistance
to blackmail civilians. They have exacerbated the
humanitarian and economic situation by imposing
taxes and duties on traders and importers, leading to an
increase in food prices and lower purchasing power and
pushing more civilians into poverty.
The Houthi militias have obstructed Government
efforts and measures aimed at reducing the suffering
of the Yemeni people in areas under their control.
The Houthi militias continue to take advantage of the
humanitarian situation for political ends.
Nevertheless, the Yemeni Government remains
committed to its responsibilities and to making every
effort to alleviate the suffering of all the Yemeni people.
We look to the international community to further
support our plans and programmes to achieve economic
recovery and stability and to support development
and humanitarian projects. It is important to build
the capacities of governmental institutions, including
by channeling donor funds through the Central Bank
of Yemen. That would help shore up the value of the
national currency, improve living conditions, reduce
suffering and incorporate development priorities and
needs into all humanitarian interventions to achieve
early recovery. Those are urgent issues that cannot wait
until the war is over.
The Yemeni Government looks forward to the
pledging conference on Yemen to be held in March.
We call on the international community to keep

S/PV. 8966

Yemen at the top of its priorities and to continue its
generous support, including by announcing pledges and
fulfilling commitments. That is necessary to bridge
the funding gap and meet the increasing humanitarian
needs while avoiding any disruption in life-saving
assistance provided by partners at the humanitarian and
relief levels.
Millions of children in areas under the control of the
Houthi militias are being recruited and brainwashed.
They are being taught extremism, hatred, rejection of
others and a culture of death, which is one of the most
dangerous consequences of this war, with disastrous
effects for the present and future of Yemen and the
region. We call on the international community and the
Council to redouble their efforts to end those dangerous
Houthi practices and violations against children in
Yemen and to take the measures necessary to hold
accountable those responsible for child recruitment into
the ranks of the Houthi militias.
The Yemeni Government supports United Nationsled efforts to address the situation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker in order to avoid a catastrophe. We warn against
the continued Houthi blackmail of the international
community, exploiting the situation to buy more time.
We call for decisive action to put pressure on the
Houthis to address the situation in order to avoid an
ominous disaster.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

22-2581419/19
