S/2017/596

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2017
Original: English

Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of the previous report of 28 April 2017
(S/2017/371).
2.
On 20 April 2017, in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq for
Political Affairs, György Busztin, met with the Undersecretary of Bilateral
Relations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Nizar al -Khairallah. The
meeting highlighted an improvement in the relationship between Iraq and Kuwait,
which has helped to strengthen cooperation and coordination on the file on missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, and emphasized
the excellent cooperation and coordination between the Iraqi Ministries of Foreign
Affairs and Defence and between the Iraqi authorities and their counterparts,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Kuwaiti
National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, which have
been instrumental in moving the work forward. My Deputy Special Representative
encouraged the Ministry to continue its close coordination with relevant Iraqi
authorities on these issues and expressed hope that the implementati on of a holistic
approach, which includes more efficient coordination and information sharing
among all the entities involved, work with the witnesses and the use of modern
technology at the excavation sites, can lead to tangible results. Taking into
consideration the positive results and the significant increase in the number of
witnesses coming forward, he also encouraged relevant Iraqi institutions to continue
the widely distributed public announcement campaigns. Mr. Al -Khairallah
expressed the unwavering and sincere commitment of the Government of Iraq and
its dedication to continuing to make the efforts necessary to achieving specific
progress in bringing the file to a close. He also welcomed any suggestions or
proposals from the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) that could
help to achieve progress.
3.
On 3 May, in Kuwait, my Special Representative met with the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Khaled
al-Hamad al-Sabah, who underlined the good relations that have developed between
the two States over the past years and expressed the readiness of Kuwait to support
and assist Iraq in its efforts to regain stability and security in the post -Islamic State

17-11218 (E)

120717

*1711218*

S/2017/596

in Iraq and the Levant era. Sheikh Al-Sabah also highlighted the great humanitarian
significance of the missing persons and property file and urged a stronger
commitment and enhanced efforts from the Government of Iraq in trying to locate
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, missing Kuwaiti property and the national
archives. In addition, he reaffirmed the readiness of Kuwait to support the efforts of
Iraq financially and technically through the tripartite mechanism.
4.
On 8 May, in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative met with the
Ambassador of Kuwait to Iraq, Salem Ghassab Mohammed al-Zamanan, who
reiterated his wish to see more progress on the ground to close the file after
26 years, highlighting the importance of Iraq redoubling its efforts to achieve the
desired results, while acknowledging at the same time the continuous commitment
of Iraq to the issue.
5.
On 14 June, the Security Council issued a press statement on Iraq -Kuwait,
specifically on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, following its consultation on the
previous report. In the statement, Council members welcomed the strong bilateral
relations between the two countries and commended the continued support of the
Government of Kuwait for Iraq in its effort to achieve stability. The members of the
Council, while recognizing the considerable challenges facing Iraq at this time,
called upon the Government of Iraq to continue its efforts to achieve tangible
progress with respect to returning all missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
or their remains, in addition to returning Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives.
6.
On 20 June, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Haider al-Abadi, visited Kuwait as
part of his regional tour, in an effort to foster regional cooperation, promote
development opportunities and support security and stability in the region.
Mr. Al-Abadi stressed that relations between Iraq and Kuwait had developed
significantly and that the objective of his visit was to maintain that relationship with
the Government of Kuwait and expand it further in security, economic, agricultural
and commercial fields.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
7.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to
gather information on a number of potential burial locations, including the Jahra’
and naval base sites in Kuwait and the Radwaniyah, Khamisiyah and Salman Pak
sites in Iraq. As part of those efforts, the Ministry has been investigating
information received from witnesses and cross-checking it with other government
institutions in an effort to verify claims and identify exact burial sites.
8.
From 11 to 18 April, excavation work was carried out by the technical team of
the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the potential burial site in Khamisiyah, during
which eight coordinates were determined and 185 probing trenches dug. No human
remains were found.
9.
From 21 to 27 April, the technical team of the Ministry undertook excavation
works on a potential burial site in Karbala’ province, during the course of which
80 probing trenches were dug. The work did not yield conclusive results. In
addition, the team carried out exploratory and field survey missions in the region,
specifying 45 coordinates for further consideration.
10. On 3 May, in Kuwait, my Special Representative met with the members of the
Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, who
2/5

17-11218

S/2017/596

expressed their appreciation for the ongoing efforts of Iraq and reiterated their wish
to see more tangible results on the file. The Committee members noted that they had
encouraged regular information sharing with the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, in
particular between the tripartite mechanism sessions, as a means of ensuring
appropriate follow-up.
11. On 7 May, the technical team of the Ministry carried out an exploratory
mission in a potential burial location in Samawah province in the presence of the
ICRC Forensic Adviser. During the mission, three coordinates were indicated for the
future excavation works.
12. On 9 May, in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative met with the Head
of the International Organizations Department of the Ministry of Foreign A ffairs of
Iraq, Sundus Omar Ali, and advised her that the Government of Iraq should fully
cooperate with the tripartite mechanism at all levels and utilize new technology in
the search for the missing.
13. On 15 May, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq issued a public call for witnesses
that was broadcast on Iraqi satellite television channels, inviting all those with
information on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals to come forward.
14. On 22 May, for the first time in 14 years, Iraq hosted the Tech nical
Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism, which held its ninety -ninth session in
Baghdad. UNAMI attended the session in an observer capacity. All the members
expressed their appreciation for the commitment and efforts of Iraq with regard to
the file and for successfully hosting the meeting in Baghdad, the first under the
auspices of an elected national Government. The Iraqi delegation stated that the
country’s highest authorities were fully committed to this international and
humanitarian obligation. It also expressed its intent to continue to work on the file
until it reached positive results, in order to alleviate the suffering of the families of
the missing. The ICRC and Kuwaiti delegations thanked UNAMI for its continuous
commitment to and support for the tripartite mechanism.
15. Discussing the work undertaken by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the
Khamisiyah site during the reporting period, all parties highlighted the importance
of the site and agreed to keep it a priority. The delegation of Kuwait also
emphasized that activities relating to the Khamisiyah site should follow a three track approach, namely, efforts to reach witnesses, exploration and excavation
missions, and finding new technologies to enhance the search, and should continue
in parallel. The ICRC delegation updated the members on the progress of the in depth scientific review project, which has encompassed a review of the archives, the
gathering of documents and the analysis of data. The first draft of the report will
have been ready by August 2017 and will have been preceded by bilateral
consultations with the members of the tripartite mechanism.
16. On 24 May, in Baghdad, UNAMI attended the forty-fourth session of the
Tripartite Commission in its observer capacity. The Iraqi delegation reiterated the
priority that the file represented for the Government of Iraq and its interest in the
activities of the Commission, underlining both the moral obligation to the families
of the victims and its commitment to further strengthening br otherly relations with
Kuwait. The Kuwaiti delegation expressed its full understanding of the challenges
faced by the Government of Iraq and highlighted the importance of continuing the
team efforts, collaboration, exchange of information, assistance and s upport among
the members of the tripartite mechanism. The delegation also praised the initiative
to undertake an in-depth scientific review as a useful and practical measure intended
to enhance field search efforts, and the public announcement campaigns br oadcast
by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, which had resulted in an increase in the number
of people coming forward to provide information.
17-11218

3/5

S/2017/596

17. During the meeting, the observer status of UNAMI was renewed, with the
delegations expressing gratitude and appreciation for the Mission’s efforts on and
support of the humanitarian process. The meeting participants reconfirmed their
dedication and commitment and the determination of all members to pursue the
common goal of resolving the remaining cases of missing persons. It was suggested
that new technology be used and a more proactive approach in making contacts with
international experts and other countries or organizations dealing with this issue be
taken in an effort to share experiences and make further prog ress on the file.
18. On 8 June, in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative met with the
Deputy of the General Legal Adviser and Head of the Technical Committee in
charge of the file on missing Kuwaiti persons and property at the Ministry of
Defence of Iraq, Brigadier General Hazem Qassem Majid. My Deputy Special
Representative commended the Government of Iraq for hosting the tripartite
meetings and welcomed the positive and fruitful atmosphere that prevailed
throughout the sessions. Brigadier General Majid underlined the continuous
commitment of the Government of Iraq regarding the file and the detailed efforts of
the Ministry of Defence of Iraq to reach potential witnesses by collaborating with
other relevant Iraqi institutions.
19. In a press statement of 14 June following the previous report, the members of
the Security Council noted the limited progress made on this issue recently and
expressed their regret that no case of missing Kuwaiti persons had been solved and
no human remains had been exhumed during the previous 12 years. They recognized
the important steps that had recently been taken to reinvigorate the file of missing
Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals and were encouraged by the
commitment of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, as evid enced by recent activities.
The Council also expressed strong support for the perseverance of the members of
the tripartite mechanism and its chair, ICRC, and encouraged Iraq and Kuwait to
collaborate through that mechanism to achieve further tangible resu lts. In that
regard, the Council expressed support for my view that ascertaining the fate of
missing persons and providing answers to their grieving families depend on
steadfast commitment and relevant action and the adoption of new and innovative
ways to move the file forward.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
20. On 20 April, during the meeting in Baghdad with the Undersecretary of
Bilateral Relations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, my Deputy Special
Representative took note of a huge volume of Kuwaiti books located in university
libraries across Iraq and encouraged the Ministry to complete their cataloguing and
to organize their official handover to the Government of Kuwait. Turning to the
national archives, my Deputy Special Representative highlighted their paramount
significance and reiterated the proposal of UNAMI on conducting a specialized
campaign aimed at finding information on their possible location.
21. In its press statement of 14 June, the members of the Security Council strongly
encouraged the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to reconvene the Joint Property
Committee every six months, as previously agreed.

4/5

17-11218

S/2017/596

IV. Observations
22. The hosting of the Technical Subcommittee and the Technical Committee
meetings in Baghdad for the first time in 14 years marks another positive step
towards a steady and continuous strengthening of bilateral relations between Iraq
and Kuwait based on mutual respect, goodwill and collaboration between the two
neighbouring countries. The understanding and support demonstrated by Kuwait
towards Iraq, in particular with regard to the file, is praiseworthy, as is the resolve
displayed by the Government of Iraq to fulfil its international, moral and
humanitarian obligations and to reach tangible results. The lack of concrete positive
outcomes remains a source of disappointment and frustration to both countries,
however, in particular to the families of the missing. I echo the sentiments expressed
during the latest tripartite mechanism meetings in Baghdad, which were also
acknowledged by the Security Council in its statement of 14 June. The same
sentiments apply to the missing property file, on which the Government of Iraq
should be encouraged to make use of its increasingly positive relationship with
Kuwait and continue to remain steadfast in this undertaking while redoubling its
efforts.
23. I commend the Ministry of Defence of Iraq for its proactive efforts and
practical measures aimed at finding new sources of information that could assist in
locating potential burial sites, following up on and verifying witness statements and
undertaking exploration and excavation works. During the past year, the Ministry
has proved to be a dependable and reliable partner in this important humanitarian
process. I encourage the Ministry to continue to work with the same resolve and
determination to bring this file to a close in order to bring comfort to families who
have lost their loved ones. I continue to stress the importance for the Government of
Iraq of maintaining adequate institutional, financial, technical and other support to
enable the continuation of activities relating to this important humanitarian
endeavour.
24. I applaud the role, guidance and expertise of ICRC in supervising this process
and its continuous commitment to the success of this humanitarian work. I
commend the dedication of the members of the tripartite mechanism and their
contributions to its activities, which have been crucial to maintaining the
determination necessary to move the process forward. I remain convinced that
reinvigorated efforts, new ideas and the multifaceted and comprehensive approach
proposed at the tripartite mechanism meetings have the potential to bring a positive
outcome in the common pursuit of finding the remains of those missing for more
than 26 years.
25. With regard to missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, I
urge the Government of Iraq to bolster its efforts and activities.
26. I welcome the trust placed in UNAMI by the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait
during this process. I reiterate the unwavering commitment of UNAMI, my Special
Representative and my Deputy Special Representative to continuing to promote,
support and facilitate the efforts of the Government of Iraq on the file on missing
Kuwaiti persons and property.

17-11218

5/5
