S/PV.8312

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8312th meeting

Monday, 16 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Orrenius Skau. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-22408 (E)
*1822408*

S/PV.8312

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
World Cup
The President: Let me begin by congratulating
France on its victory in the World Cup Final yesterday.
I would also like to compliment Russia on a very
well-run tournament. Over the past four weeks in this
building, I think we have all seen the power of sports to
bring people together.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining the meeting via video
tele-conference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/429, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Salamé. I shall provide a briefing in my
capacity as representative of the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow me to congratulate Sweden on
its presidency of the Security Council this month. I am
grateful for this opportunity to brief members of the
Security Council on our work in Libya.
For the first few months of this year, Libya
enjoyed relative quiet from military actions. The
United Nations helped create that lull. By reviving the
political process with the delivery of the action plan
for Libya, we provided a peaceful means to be heard
2/9

16/07/2018

and the prospect of obtaining official positions. With
that has come increased dialogue and fluidity between
the localities and the political camps. The number of
civilians killed during the exchange of fire fell to only
four in March, and five in April. We capitalized on that
positive environment. Let me share four examples.
First, we provided a platform for reconciliation
agreements and discussion, opening our good offices
to all. We have hosted meetings on the most contentious
issues — for example, meetings on land property
grievances and consultations between internally
displaced persons and those from the areas from which
they have been displaced.
Secondly, we supported the conduct of local
elections, which took place in Zawiya on 12 May. Voter
registration is currently ongoing for similar elections in
the towns of Bani Walid and Dirge. Dozens of additional
municipal elections are expected to be held this year.
Thirdly, we have re-established the United Nations
in Libya — in Tripoli where most of the Mission now
resides and in Benghazi where our office will open in
the next few weeks.
Fourthly, — and I am particularly proud of
this — we have concluded the consultative phase of the
national conference process. Over the past 14 weeks, we
have held, thanks to our dedicated partner the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue, more than 75 meetings
in Libya and abroad. More than 7,000 Libyans — a
quarter of them women — participated. Two thousand
submissions were received online. One hundred and
thirty thousand followers joined the consultative
process on social media, while generating half a
million comments. Digital messaging has reached over
1.8 million persons. Furthermore, the proceedings were
covered in great detail by the Libyan media.
That bottom-up process is an integral part of the
action plan. It puts the Libyan people at the heart of
the political process, whoever or wherever they may
be. For many communities, that was the first time that
they were actively engaged in the political process and
consulted on the future of their nation. Specific events
were held for women, internally displaced persons
and young people, while others targeted far-away
communities in the south, abroad and constituencies
previously excluded. The local national conference
consultations have provided tremendous insight into
the hopes, fears and vision of the Libyan people for a
way forward. The next phase of the national conference
18-22408

16/07/2018

The situation in Libya

is the distillation of the thousands of pages of reports
into a full and final one, with national conclusions and
recommendations to support the next steps to complete
the transition. The date and the venue of the final event
will be determined soon.
Any political progress is linked to the absence of
military activity on the ground. Regrettably, the past
two months have been marked by military actions and
violent developments, thereby diverting attention and
losing some of the momentum we had gained. First, in
the eastern city of Derna, the Libyan National Army
move to take control of the city led to two months of
battle. The conflict ignited divides across the country,
and though the Libyan National Army is now in control
of the city, small-scale fighting continues. We then
witnessed the events in the oil crescent. On 14 June, a
coalition of armed groups, reportedly including foreign
mercenaries, attempted to seize control of facilities
in the oil crescent region. They successfully captured
them, entailing numerous casualties and significant
damage to critical infrastructure. The Libyan National
Army recaptured the area within a week in a move
most expected to re-establish the status quo, where
management of the fields would have reverted to the
internationally recognized National Oil Corporation,
which operates under the Government of National
Accord. However, on 25 June the Libyan National Army
announced that it would transfer management of the oil
facilities in the oil crescent and of other areas under its
control to a non- recognized national oil corporation
that exists in the east under a parallel authority.
Subsequently, the official National Oil Corporation
declared force majeure on the oil terminals of Sidra,
Ra’s Lanuf, Marsa Al-Hariga and Zuetina. As a result,
850,000 barrels per day of crude oil were prevented
from being exported. It is estimated that Libya lost
more than $900 million. The course of events drove
a wedge through the middle of the country, thereby
deepening division between institutions and regions.
The Secretary-General released a statement on the
matter and recalled all of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, while offering the good offices of the United
Nations. I have spent the past two weeks reaching out
to the various Libyan actors, while shuttling back and
forth to find a solution to the misguided crisis. I was not
alone in that. The efforts and support of many Libyans
and numerous Member States were invaluable.
On 11 July, control reverted to the National Oil
Corporation, and production resumed. The end of the

S/PV. 8312

immediate crisis has brought a collective sigh of relief,
but it is not the end of the matter. Events have brought
to the fore the underlying issues that are plaguing
the country and that I have repeatedly outlined to the
Council, namely, frustrations over the distribution of
wealth and the endemic plundering of resources. If
those matters are not expeditiously addressed, I fear
that the agreements made to resume oil production
will not hold, and it will be difficult to advance the
political process.
The Mission will redouble its efforts to push for
economic reforms, as the very stability and unity of the
country are at stake. If there has been a silver lining to
events, it is the fact that various authorities in Libya
now accept that they need to take action to protect the
country’s wealth. The request submitted to the Council
by the Government of National Accord for a review
of the official Central Bank of Libya and the parallel
central bank in the east is a welcome first step to bring
transparency to the finances of Libya. I encourage
Council members to consider the request in a positive
light. If the economy of predation is to be broken, its
methods must be laid bare, and, for that, Libya needs
all our support.
Libyans long to be rid of their current patchwork
of institutions. The national conference consultations
taught us that the Libyan people want clear and
effective leadership by legitimate bodies, brought about
by elections. It is telling that, although only 600,000
people voted for the House of Representatives in 2014,
already 1 million have recently registered to vote in the
next elections. However, a handful of people defy that
popular desire. The few who benefit from the status quo
will, if left unchecked, do whatever they can to hinder
elections. Unfortunately, they can do much, especially
as they hold crucial, and too often lucrative, official
positions. Without the right conditions, it would be
unwise to hold elections. Without sending clear and
firm messages to those who would attempt to stall or
disrupt elections, such conditions will not be met.
To the leaders of Libya, I say that it is time to
return control to the citizens. At the international
meeting in Paris on 29 May, the Prime Minister, the
Heads of Libya’s House of Representatives and High
State Council and the Head of the Libyan National
Army committed to engage constructively to enable
elections to take place by the end of the year. That
deadline is congruent with the action plan. I urge them
to stand by their commitment and for others to join

18-224083/9

S/PV.8312

The situation in Libya

them. Furthermore, the deadline that they agreed on
for the adoption of legislation necessary for elections is
fast approaching.
Although we welcomed the resumption of
deliberations by the House of Representatives on 25 and
26 June, and once again today, on necessary legislation
for a referendum on the constitutional draft, that is not
enough. It has been evident that many members of the
House of Representatives, who last month completed
their fourth year in office, have not demonstrated any
enthusiasm in terms of their attendance or of adopting
viable electoral legislation. Members of the House
of Representatives should take notice. Libyans are
demanding the holding of elections and becoming
impatient with those who are finding multiple ways
and means to postpone that moment. I recently met
with the Speaker of the House. He promised a vote on
a law for the referendum of the Constitution within the
next two weeks and that electoral legislation would be
voted on immediately thereafter. I truly hope that that
pledge will be honoured this time. I urge the members
the Council to pressure the House of Representatives
to deliver on its historic responsibility and achieve that
goal in a timely fashion.
A constitutional framework is required to hold
elections and end the transition. Since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8263), I have engaged in broad consultations
on the matter of how and when to establish a new
Constitution for the country, while speaking with senior
Libyan judges and constitutional experts from every
side, as well as with the Libyan people. Both experts and
the public agree that a clear constitutional framework is
a national priority. However, they are divided on how
to proceed. Many would like to see a referendum on
the current draft constitution, while others completely
reject the text. It is a complex issue with no easy options
or straightforward solutions. It is exactly because
of that complexity that the international community
must show unity. Once we reach a reasonable level of
conformity of views among the Libyans, which we are
working on, the international community must stand
together behind that Libyan vision. If even a single
Member State chooses to act alone, the process will
not advance.
Technical preparations are under way for elections
that are scheduled to be held at the end of the year.
Officers are preparing and the planning process is
moving along swiftly. Electoral security arrangements
are being worked on, including by the newly
4/9

16/07/2018

established unit for those matters in the Ministry of
the Interior. While the terrorist attack against the High
National Elections Commission devastated much of its
headquarters, I am pleased to report that on 12 June,
the Commission was granted a new compound. There
is much work to be done to refurbish the premises and,
accordingly, concerted efforts are being made by the
Government, the United Nations and international
partners to renovate the buildings and replace the many
items destroyed during the attack. I am happy to report
that yesterday the Government of National Accord
approved 66 million Libyan dinars to fund the elections.
The decision of the Security Council to impose
sanctions on six leaders of human trafficking networks
was a positive step towards accountability for
exploitation and human rights abuses. Such progress
notwithstanding, impunity continues to reign in Libya.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the escalation
of fighting and violence, as witnessed over the past
two months in Derna and elsewhere in the country.
Concerns remain about human rights abuses, including
summary executions and extrajudicial arrests. I
reiterate the call on all parties to the conflict to fully
respect international humanitarian law, including
by taking all feasible precautions to protect civilians
and ensure that the wounded and sick — civilians and
those who participated in the hostilities — are cared
for, including through medical evacuations. As in other
areas in Libya where conflict has erupted, the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator and partners are
providing humanitarian assistance. Despite impeded
access, life-saving materials have been delivered, such
as medicine by the World Health Organization and
assistance to displaced persons, including 1,000 kits
for children. Additional assistance will be required, in
particular in the areas of health, shelter and mine action.
With regard to the city of Tawergha, only a small
number of people have returned. The conditions for a
safe and dignified return remain insufficient, as basic
infrastructure and services are lacking. At the start
of the month, demining teams were finally allowed to
enter the area and commence work. The current plight
of internally displaced persons is unsustainable from
a political and financial perspective, given the lack of
available resources to support them. They should be
given the right to integrate in their host communities as
efforts are made to facilitate their return.
Libya must urgently reverse the deterioration
in public service delivery. The United Nations is
18-22408

16/07/2018

The situation in Libya

working with the Libyan authorities, in particular
with municipalities across the country, to address
the challenges. However, without a resolution to the
country’s underlying economic problems, the situation
will remain an uphill battle. The human rights situation
and the humanitarian needs of migrants, refugees and
asylum-seekers remain dire. While some improvements
have been made in official detention centres, there
are many unofficial installations to which we do not
have access.
I am grateful for the continued support of the
members of the Council and of key Member States
actively engaged in supporting an end to the crisis in
Libya. I warmly note the arrival of the new Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Libya, Stephanie Williams, as a further reinforcement
of our efforts. The status quo in Libya cannot be
sustained. The country is in decline. The crisis in the
oil crescent gave us a glimpse of what is in store if
tangible progress is not made now: economic collapse,
the breakdown of public services and more frequent
and intense outbreaks of violence. In a country where
terrorists lurk; where criminals are waiting to engage in
the trafficking in migrants; where foreign mercenaries
are increasing in numbers; and where the oil industry
hangs in the balance, this situation should be of concern
to all. In order to help the Libyan people chart a course
to the future they deserve, the unified support of the
Council, Member States involved in Libya and our
regional partner organizations is vital.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I shall now give a briefing in my capacity as
representative of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution
1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I have the honour
to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 22 May to 16 July,
during which time the Committee met once in informal
consultations and conducted additional work via the
written silence procedure.
On 7 June the Committee approved the designation
of six individuals as subject to the assets freeze and
travel ban measures, in accordance with paragraph 11
(a) of resolution 2213 (2015). Prior to their listing, the
Committee held informal consultations on 25 May to

S/PV. 8312

discuss the proposal, in which Libya also participated.
As of 26 June, the Committee is considering a proposal
for the designation of another individual against several
designation criteria.
Concerning the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to two requests for guidance, received from
Malta and Malaysia respectively, which touched on
the scope and implementation of that measure. The
response to Malaysia confirmed the publicly available
entries on the sanctions list of the Committee. The
Committee also received additional information from
the Kingdom of the Netherlands regarding previously
exempted items.
With respect to the assets freeze, the Committee
received three notifications from the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, invoking
paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), regarding
the legal expenses of a listed individual, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, and a listed entity, the Libyan Investment
Authority. The Committee also received some
information from Malaysia on its implementation of the
assets-freeze.
With regard to the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum from Libya, the Committee
received information from Libya, as well as from the
Panel of Experts, regarding an attempt by a vessel to
carry out an illicit export of crude oil from Marsa Al
Hariga port in Libya. The Committee dispatched letters
to the reported flag State and to the reported State of a
company allegedly involved in the matter.
During the period under review, the Committee
received communications from the focal point for
de-listing, established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the de-listing requests
from the travel-ban measure of Aisha Al-Qadhafi and
Safia Fakash Al-Barassi. Those requests are currently
under the review stage stipulated in paragraph 5 of the
annex to resolution 1730 (2006). The Committee has
approved a travel ban exemption request from Safia
Farkash Al-Barassi. During the reporting period, the
Committee received, and responded to, a letter from
Libya regarding certain content of the last final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/466). The Committee
also referred the matter to the Panel for its follow-up,
as appropriate.
Lastly, on 5 March the Committee agreed to take
follow-up action on six of the eight recommendations
contained in the interim report of the Panel, which in

18-224085/9

S/PV.8312

The situation in Libya

various ways aimed at improving the implementation of
the arms embargo, the assets-freeze and the measures
in relation to attempts to illicitly export petroleum
from Libya. On three of the six recommendations,
more specifically referring to the arms embargo and
the assets-freeze, the Committee had agreed to task the
Panel with providing additional information. During
the reporting period, the Committee received additional
information from the Panel and is currently considering
any further follow-up action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
report presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission of Support in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, to whom we reiterate our support for the
outstanding work he continues to do. Similarly, we
are grateful for the report provided by Ambassador
Carl Orrenius Skau on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.
While taking note of the work carried out by the
Special Representative during the reporting period, it
is also necessary to reaffirm the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to complete and finalize the transition period. To
that end, it is essential that all parties and actors involved
commit themselves to the action plan promoted by the
Special Representative. We call on them to engage in
dialogue and to fulfil all their commitments in order
to achieve an outcome that meets the interests and
aspirations of the Libyan people.
We underscore the conclusion of the first phase of
the national conference, which was held in May, at which
more than 40 meetings were held in 27 Libyan cities and
towns and in which the Libyan people expressed their
will to achieve a united country with competent and
credible institutions that redistribute resources fairly,
and above all expressed their aspiration to have unified
security and order institutions capable of guaranteeing
their security and protecting their sovereignty. In that
regard, we echo the message of presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/11, of 6 June, and express our support for
all efforts to achieve definitive stability in Libya.
6/9

16/07/2018

We also take note of the commitment made by
the parties to holding parliamentary and presidential
elections at the end of this year. To that end and within
the framework of Libya’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, it is important that the
necessary consultations on the new constitution take
place expeditiously and that necessary legislation
be developed to establish clearly and concretely the
elements of and requirements for carrying out those
elections. Similarly, policy development is essential for
the establishment of formal institutions that are capable
of guaranteeing the integrity of that process.
Along the same lines, the registration of nearly
2.5 million people must serve to ensure the active
participation of the entire population, especially
women, who make up almost half of the electorate.
We are confident that the collaboration and technical
assistance of UNSMIL throughout that process will be
key to achieving that goal.
We welcome the joint visit of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Mine Action Service to the cities of Benghazi
and Misrata to assess the situation on the ground and
to participate in meetings organized by civil society
on mine action and humanitarian demining activities
in order to ensure the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons and their free movement.
Despite those positive developments, there has
been an alarming increase in violence and fighting
between the parties. In particular, the escalation of
violence in Derna is clearly a threat to the political
process and the security of the population. According
to the reports of various United Nations agencies, there
has been considerable damage to civilian infrastructure
owing to military action, including against schools,
mosques and private homes, as well as hospitals and
health-care centres, which have had to suspend their
functions. Regrettably, violence throughout the Libyan
territory has resulted in at least 16 fatalities and nearly
20 serious injuries as a result of those clashes and the
use of explosive devices in public and civil service
spaces. My delegation reiterates once again its call on
the parties and local actors to lay down their weapons,
respect international humanitarian law and avoid any
rhetoric that claims violence as a means of achieving
any objective, since such attitudes threaten the lives of
innocent people and undermine the progress made so
far in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
18-22408

16/07/2018

The situation in Libya

Furthermore, we express our concern about the
events that occurred in Ras Lanuf and Es Sider oil
fields in the Libyan crescent region and about the
measures implemented in managing the oil installations
and the production of oil and its by-products, which
considerably affected the production and export of
those products to the detriment of the Libyan people’s
interest. While the situation was resolved through
dialogue at the beginning of the month, it is important
for all parties to bare in mind that the only legitimate
entity with the power to administer the oil resources
in the country is the National Oil Corporation which
belongs to the Government of National Accord, as set
forth in resolutions 2259 (2015), 2278 (2016) and 2362
(2017). In that understanding and in accordance with
the Libyan Political Agreement, all parties and actors
involved must respect and strengthen State institutions,
establish channels for dialogue and negotiation when
they find themselves in disagreement, and avoid the use
of weapons and violence at all times.
In conclusion, we reiterate that there is no military
solution to the conflict. We therefore call on all parties
to join in the ongoing efforts to maintain an ongoing
dialogue to achieve a peaceful, orderly and inclusive
political transition that responds to the interests of
the Libyan people and allows them to freely and
consensually define their future. To that end, compliance
with the Libyan Political Agreement, recognized
through resolution 2259 (2015) and reaffirmed through
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/26 of 14 December
2017, is imperative.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the French football team
on their World Cup victory and the Croatian team on
an excellent game. I would also like to commend the
Russian Federation on its superb organization of the
World Cup. It was a very interesting time, and everyone
very much enjoyed it.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé and Carl Orrenius Skau for
their comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya
and on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.
My delegation expresses its concern about the lack
of progress in finding solutions for a political settlement
through dialogue among the main stakeholders in Libya.
That has a serious negative impact on the economic,

S/PV. 8312

social and humanitarian situation in the country. The
recent escalation of the situation in Libya’s oil crescent
is a clear indication of such developments. We join the
Secretary-General’s call for all natural resources, as
well as their production and revenues, to be under the
control of the recognized Libyan authorities.
Developments in the oil crescent have proven once
again that efforts should be aimed at establishing a
lasting political dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders
aimed at seeking a political settlement to the crisis by
implementing confidence-building measures. Those
efforts should contribute to the unification of Libyan
Government institutions, including its security and
armed forces. The absence of such a dialogue will
continue to create a breeding ground for the emergence
and illegal activities of terrorists, extremists and other
destructive forces in Libya.
Our delegation believes that the adoption of a
new constitution will create the legal framework
necessary for generating the institutional and
administrative structures needed to build lasting peace
in Libya. Special attention should be paid to adopting
appropriate electoral legislation, which along with
voter registration, will create the necessary conditions
for holding general elections.
The international community and the Council in
particular should place a greater focus on the situation
in Libya, along with the Syrian and the Yemeni
crisis among others. The instability in Libya has had
a significant impact on the situation in the region of
the Middle East and North Africa. All the efforts of
the international community to resolve the situation
in Libya should be conducted under the leadership
of the United Nations. My delegation reiterates its
support for the action plan of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salamé and commends the
committed work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate France on its victory at the
2018 FIFA World Cup and Russia on having organized
the tournament well.
I congratulate the Swedish delegation on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. I also wish to thank Mr. Ghassan

18-224087/9

S/PV.8312

The situation in Libya

Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing on recent political and
economic developments in Libya. I would further like to
thank His Excellency Ambassador Carl Orrenius Skau
for the briefing he delivered on behalf of the Chair of
the Sanctions Committee on Libya established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). I congratulate Ms. Stephanie
Williams on her appointment as the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
Recent meetings of the various Libyan parties, the
latest of which was held in Paris, represented a glimmer
of hope for all Libyan people that the country might
be extricated from the horrors of political paralysis
that it has endured in recent years, which negatively
affected all aspects of the life of Libyan citizens,
including by promoting instability and deteriorating
security in the country. In this regard, we commend
all efforts aimed at uniting the Libyan people and call
up the international community to urge the Libyan
parties to reach agreement and arrive at a settlement
that is acceptable to all so as to release Libya from its
ongoing ordeal.
We reaffirm the need to organize parliamentary
and presidential elections, which should be preceded
by the implementation of the constitutional and legal
arrangements necessary to the holding of the elections.
We also reaffirm the importance of creating a climate
conducive to the organization of these elections
by calling on all parties to accept their results. We
caution against the continuing search for solutions
that are at odds with the resolutions and declarations
of the Security Council, the most recent of which was
presidential statement S/PRST//2018/11, of 6 June 2018.
Despite all the efforts undertaken at the
international and national levels, it is clear and
unfortunate that some parties are aggravating the dayto-day lives of Libyan people by acting with the sole
aim of causing the current situation to persist. They
obstruct any attempt to restore security and stability
in the country and to unite Libyan parties under the
country’s flag. The recent attacks against oil facilities
in the oil crescent region by a lawless group, led by
an individual who is currently being prosecuted in a
Libyan court, triggered a crisis that has ended thanks
to the good-faith efforts of many individuals in Libya
and the world and that threatened cause a significant
deterioration in the Libyan economy. In this regard, we
welcome the joint communiqué issued by the United
States, France, the United Kingdom and Italy on 12 July,
8/9

16/07/2018

wherein they welcomed the resumption of operations
by the National Oil Corporation, which are critical
to all Libyans owing to the company’s legitimacy in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and
the Libyan Political Agreement. These countries also
welcomed the contributions of the Libyan National
Army to stabilizing the oil sector.
We call on both the Security Council and the
international community to grasp the fact that critical
measures are necessary against anyone who impedes
the interests and aspirations of the Libyan people to
establish a civil State in which they enjoy stability,
democracy and justice.
The United Nations resolutions calling for Libyan
ownership of the political settlement have not been
translated into reality. Negative foreign interference
in Libya has exacerbated the situation and created an
environment conducive to crises and mistrust among
the Libyan parties. We reaffirm the fact that the Libyan
people reject this ongoing, unjustified interference.
They aspire to build their country’s institutions and
establish a balanced relationship with the world, based
on mutual respect and common interests in line with the
principles of the United Nations and international law.
We call on those States to understand the logical
equation whereby Libyan stability is inextricably linked
to their own stability. Indeed, without stability in Libya,
these countries will encounter major issues that will in
turn cause other problems in those countries, such as
illicit migration, accusations of violations of migrants’
rights, human trafficking, the existence of terrorist
groups, and so on. All of these phenomena and problems
can be eradicated only if there is a good will and good
faith on the part of these States, and specifically if they
help to find a solution for the political stalemate that
has paralysed the country.
My country has called upon the Security Council
to set up an international technical commission under
the auspices of the United Nations that will consider
the revenues, expenditures and other transactions of
the Libyan Central Bank in Tripoli and Al Bayda. This
request is geared towards safeguarding the Libyan
people’s interests and is a sine qua non in the wake of
divisions among the Libyans. This step would lead to
uniting the Libyan financial institutions in order to
eliminate financial corruption and achieve economic
stability in the country. We hope that the Council
18-22408

16/07/2018

The situation in Libya

will establish the committee so that it can assume its
functions as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we reiterate what we have already
stated to the Council with regard to the high-level
meeting convened by the Secretary-General on
20 September 2017, at which a United Nations action
plan was announced with a view to bringing an end
to the crisis in Libya. We reaffirm the key role the
United Nations must play in achieving a settlement to
the Libyan crisis. In this regard, the Government of my
country reiterates its commitment to cooperating with

S/PV. 8312

the United Nations through the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, ending political divisions, reunifying
institutions and moving towards a new horizon that
will end the suffering that has plagued the daily lives
of Libyans.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussions
on this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

18-224089/9
