TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 6 JUNE 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l7 17) . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . * * . . . . , . 9 . .

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .,....

. . .. . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
[a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (I 973);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331 (1973) (S/10929) . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . , I * . * . * * . . . . . . *. . . . . .

1

SlPV.1717

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 6 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
PLesenf: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l717)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
lb) Report of the Secretary-Genera1 under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).
The meeting was called to order at Il. 5 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): Before
taking up discussion of the substance of the item on the
provisional agenda for today’s meeting of the Security
Council, I should like to pay a tribute to my predecessor as
President of the Security Council last month, the distinguished Permanent Representative
of the Sudan,
Mr. Abdulla, who very skilfully directed the proceedings of
the Council in May, I take particular pleasure in pointing
out that Ambassador Abdulla represents a country with
which the Soviet Union maintains friendly relations. Ambassador Abdulla is known as an experienced diplomat with
profound knowledge of matters affecting the practice,
procedure and substance of the work of the Security
Council. Under his effective guidance, the Council last
month considered the question of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia. Unfortunately, the Council was unable to conclude its consideration of that question by the adoption of
a decision which would have been in full accord with the
just interests of the liberation of the people of Zimbabwe. I
am sure that all members of the Security Council will agree
that Ambassador Abdulla guided the proceedings of the
Council with great skill last month. On behalf of the
Council, I have pleasure in conveying to him our congratulations, in paying a tribute to him and in thanking him
for the efforts he made while he held the office of
President.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

‘The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(6) Report of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

Security

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): As President of the Security Council, I have received letters from
the Permanent Representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Nigeria and Algeria to the United Nations. These
letters contain requests that the delegations of those
countries be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item just included in the Council’s agenda, In accordance
with established practice and the provisional rules of
procedure, I propose to invite the representatives of those
countries to participate, without the right to vote, in the
consideration by the Council of the question of the
situation in the Middle East.
3. In view of the regrettably limited number of seats at the
Council table, and bearing in mind the chronological order
in which the letters requesting permission to participate in
the discussion reached me, I propose, in accordance with
the Council’s established working practice, to invite the
representatives of the parties directly concerned, Egypt,
Israel and Jordan, to take the places reserved for them at
the Council table and I propose to invite the representatives
of the other countries to take the seats reserved for them in
the places specially set aside for that purpose at the side of
the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a seat at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak. Thus, I invite the representatives of Egypt,
Israel and Jordan to take the places reserved for them at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the B&dent, Mr, M. H. El-Zayyat
(Eapt),
Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr, A. H. Sharal
(Jordan) took places at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT {translation from Russian): 1 invite
the representatives of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Chad, Syrian Arab Republic, Nigeria and Algeria to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. W. S. Malecela
(United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. H. G. Ouangmotching
(Chad), Mr, H. Keiani (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. 0.
Arikpo (Nigeria) and Mr. A. Bouteflika (Algeria) took the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1 would
have preferred to invite them to take places at the Council
table itself, but, unfortunately, that is not possible because

11. The world is living through a period of major change
in international relations, a change from the dangerous
tension of the “cold war” to dhente and peace.

no more than three delegations from countries which are
not members of the Council may be seated at the Council
table at one time and one seat must be left free for the
delegations of those countries which will be participating in
the discussion of this item, when their turn comes to speak.

12. In these circumstances it is all the more unacceptable
that the situation in the Middle East should continue to be
an explosive one and to constitute a threat to international
peace and security.

6. As members know, at its 1710th meeting, on 20 April
1973, the Security Council, in resolution 331 (1973), took
a decision to meet specially to examine the situation in the
Middle East. Pursuant to that resolution, the SecretaryGenera] has submitted to the Security Council a detailed
report [S/10$29] on the efforts made by the United
Nations with regard to this important international question since June 1967. In accordance with that resolution,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, will be taking part in the Council’s
meetings; his mission and efrorts represent an important
and integral element in the succession of attempts made by
the United Nations to achieve a peaceful political settlement in the Middle East.

13, The Council’s discussion of the situation in the Middle
East which begins today offers a real opportunity
to
intensify the efforts of the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole to achieve a peaceful political settlement
and eliminate a hotbed of dangerous tension in the area.
The peoples look with confidence and hope to the United
Nations and its principal organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council, and
expect constructive and effective measuresaimed at establishingthe long-awaitedpeacein the Middle East.
14. It is the duty of the Security Council and each of its
member States to justify this high trust by an active
discussionof the item on the Council’sagenda,the problem
of a Middle East settlement, and by seekingeffective ways
to bring about such a settlement in the nameof peaceand
the security of peoples.

7. The Council’s decision to consider the question of the
situation in the Middle East was taken following a request
by Egypt, whose Foreign Minister, Mr. El-Zayyat, has come
to New York specially in order to be able to participate
personally in the discussion of this item by the Security
Council. I should like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. El-Zayyat, our distinguished friend and colleague from
earlier days in the United Nations, and also to welcome the
Foreign Ministers of other countries who will be taking part
in the discussion of this item.

15. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I am grateful for the
opportunity to introduce briefly the report prepared in
responseto Security Council resolution 331 (1973) which
the Council adopted on 20 April 1973. At that time the
Council asked for a comprehensive report giving a full
account of the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
pertaining to the situation in the Middle East since June
1967. Wehave done our best, within the limits of spaceand
time and taking into account the reports previousI>
submitted, to provide the Council with a balanced, objet.
tive and comprehensiveaccount.

8. As members know, the Security Council has frequently
considered the question of the situation in the Middle East.
The Council has already unanimously adopted the wellknown resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which
has won wide recognition, and a number of other decisions.
Resolution 242 (1967) is rightly considered by an overwhelming majority of States Members of the United
Nations as providing an international legal basis for a
Middle East settlement. Resolutions on this question have
also been adopted by the General Assembly. They are all
awaiting implementation,

16. The report before the Council describesgreat efforts
but little progress,and commentson it sofar have tended
to give more prominence to the latter aspect than to the
former. The fact remainsthat a settlement must primarily
depend on the Governmentsconcerned. Neither they nor
any other group of Governments has so far been able to
devisean effective meansof reachinga settlement. Thus the
Middle East problemin its various aspectshasbeen brought
againand againto the United Nations, which has now been
seized of it continuously for more than 25 years. Nor
should it be forgotten that during this period the Council.
and various instrumentalities set up by it and by the
General Assembly, have played a vital role in limiting
conflict and in preservingthe truce which has prevailed in
the areafor most of the time.

9. The Security Council’s decision to undertake a wideranging discussion of the situation in the Middle East in all
its
aspects testifies to the broad recognition by the
members of the Council of the responsibility placed on
them by the United Nations Charter and of the urgent need
to ensure progress towards a political settlement in the
Middle East. The international political importance which
States Members of the United Nations attach to the
consideration of this matter by the Council & also
demonstrated by the intention and desire of many States
Members of the United Nations to take part in the debate.

17. It is perhapsrelevant, at the openingof this important
debate, to remind ourselvesof the basic realities which
make the Middle East problem so hard for the Council tu
tackle. In the Middle East we see in an acute form the
interaction of historical developments and situations of
various kinds giving riseto emotion and resentment, to fear
and conflict, to a vicious circle of action and reactiorr,
violence and reprisal, and to a seriesof seemingly inslirmountable obstacles to the process of conciliation and

lo. The need to establish a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East without delay is particularly evident to all in
View of the auspicious changes which have come about in
the international situation, the noticeable improvement in
the political climate on our planet and the continuing
further easing of tension.
2

settlement. The fact that conciliation and peaceful settlement would unquestionably be to the advantage of all
concerned has not as yet carried enough weight to
counterbalance the intensity of feeling and conflicts of
interest which prevail in the area.

24. Mr. ELZAYYAT
(Egypt): Mr. President, first 1 should
like to thank you not only for giving me the floor, not only
for your courtesy and the kind words addressed to me but
more for convening this meeting. It is really the Council
which I am thanking, through you. Its ready acceptance of
our request for this meeting and its serious and constructive
reaction to that request has been sustained by the thinking
and efforts made in the time that elapsed between my
requesting the Council’s meeting and its convening. Without
naming names I wish to thank all concerned.

18. Another reality is the wider context of world relationships which are represented in the Council itself. It is no
secret that the Council consists of representatives and
groupings who represent fundamentally different attitudes
to certain international problems, one of which is that of
the Middle East. This second reality often makes it difficult
for the Council to act with unanimity in promoting
settlement of a problem as complex as that of the Middle
East. None the less, the debates and consultations of the
Council, however acrimonious they may have been at times,
have tended to act as a safety valve, as a process for
decreasing tension, and as a means of turning away from
conflict.

25. Second, 1 should like to mention with appreciation the
Secretary-General, his Special Rcpresentativc and all his
assistants and thank them for carefully preparing and now
presenting the report that the Council asked them to
prepare and submit. The report certainly deserves, and will
get from us, the most careful examination and attention,
and we shall not fail to make on a subsequent occasion any
comments or remarks that we may then wish to make.
However, it is important to say right now that Egypt agrees
with the Secretary-General when he says in his observations:

19. These realities must be seen in the perspective of the
relevant principles and provisions of the Charter, to which
all Member States have voluntarily adhered and which are
the foundation of the activities of all organs of the United
Nations, including this Council,

“The Security Council is, as far as 1 know, the only
forum where all the parties to the conflict have been able
to meet together in the same room. In the forthcoming
debate it is to be hoped that this advantage may be used
for constructive moves. . . .”

20. When it last considered the problem of the Middle
East as a whole, more than five years ago, the Council did
manage, after great efforts, to adopt unanimously a
resolution which was, and still is, the basis for the search
for peace in the Middle East. In adopting resolution
242 (1967) the Council demonstrated its willingness and
ability to agree on a basic -approach to an infinitely
complex problem, In now resuming the search for a
peaceful settlement the Council has raised hopes of its
possibilities for making progress. However, the Council
cannot succeed in this quest if the parties concerned do not
wish to avail themselves of its efforts and of its advantages
as a meeting place for all concerned, a forum of discussion
and an instrument for peace. But if, as I have said in the
concluding observations of my report, that wish is present,
this new effort to find a way to a settlement need not be
futile, however great the difficulties. Indeed at the moment
there seem to be few, if any, practical alternatives to the
efforts of the United Nations in the quest for peace in the
Middle East.

I agree with him even more when he says:
“The problem before the Council is an extremely
complex and difficult one, which no Government OI
group of Governments has been able to solve outside the
framework of the United Nations.” [S/10929, para. 1Id.]
It is inside the framework of the United Nations that we
put our case. It is inside the framework of the United
Nations that we think the responsibility of the world lies.
26. Third, 1 have seldom attended any other Council
meeting that warranted the presence of eight Foreign
Ministers. This shows, as should be obvious to all, that the
problem of which the Council is seized is a problem that
touches on such grave matters as the effectiveness and
usefulness of the Organization itself and the meaning of the
Charter, as well as such serious qucstians as security, ,justice
and peace in our region. I do not know how to convey my
thanks and appreciation for the presence of these Foreign
Ministers except by saying simply and sincerely that Egypt
already feels that its burden has been partially alleviated by
their presence.

21. Obviously I, as Secretary-General, my Special Representative, the Secretariat and the various instrumentalities
of the United Nations in the Middle East are at the disposal
of the Council and of the Governments concerned to assist
in any way we can.

27. We have requested this series of meetings of the
Council to examine and discuss the Middle East situation
after six years of effort and endurance have failed to put an
end to the Israeli %military occupation of our land. During
those six Iong years WC have tried every channel consistent
with our membership in this Organization and with OUT
commitment to accept the obligations contained in the
Charter and to carry out all its decisions and resolutions.
During those six long years the eyes of our millions of
people have remained turned to the United Nations, at
times to this Council, at times to the General Assembly and

22. May I express here, at the opening of this debate, my
earnest hope that the Council’s deliberations may contribute to the better understanding of the problem before
US and thus pave the way to a more constructive chapter in
the history of the Middle East.
23. The PRESIDENT ltranslation f?om Russianj: I thank
the Secretary-General’ for his statement. The next speaker
on the list is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt,
Mr. Mohamed Hassan El-Zayyat, on whom I now call.
3

while the Jewish authorities have systematically and perpetually imported hundreds of thousands of aliens to
replace the people of Palestine in their homeland-in their
homes and in their fields, but especially in their homeland.

at other times to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative. They have awaited with hope the tangible
results of these efforts and deliberations. Those hopes,
unfulfilled, are giving place to disillusion and scepticism.
Already many among our people doubt the usefulness of
my coming now to the Council. They question what the
Council can do while the aggressor is digging more
fortifications and creating more so-called new facts in the
conquered lands, acquiring all the time more armour to
silence our resistance and to terrorize us into surrender.
“Can this Council ever go”, they ask, “beyond making
appeals or expressing condemnations to be addressed to
those who disregard both and heed neither and understand
only the language of force? “. “How can the United Nations
and its bodies help dislodge the military occupants of
Egypt, Syria and Jordan and redress the injustices long
inflicted upon the people of Palestine? “, they ask. “Why
then”, they ask again, “do you go to the Council? “. We do
not come to the Council to seek a forum for propaganda.
We do not come here to score points or to seek a verbal
victory. We do not come to threaten or to seek a
showdown. We do not come motivated by mischief or to
cause pointless nuisance.

3 1. Six years ago, in June 1967, the rest of what had been
left to the native people of Palestine, including Arab
Jerusalem, was invaded and occupied by the military forces
of Israel. All the people who were in the then Palestine
either are now living under Israeli military rule or have been
pushed out of their country to live as exiles, homelessand
stateless.
32. Again six years ago, in June 1967, the Israeli military
violated the international boundaries between all of Palestine under the British Mandate and its neighbours. Over and
above their onslaught on Arab Jerusalem, the West Bank of
Jordan and the Palestinian sector of Gaza, the Israeli armies
crossed the Egyptian and Syrian frontiers, and seized and
occupied parts of the territories of Egypt and Syria; today,
almost six years to the day, the occupation remains.
33. In 1967, when an emergency special session of the
General Assembly was convened, some Members insisted on
immediate Israeli withdrawal to the lines from which they
had attacked on 5 June 1967. They thought this was an
urgent first requirement, to be followed by consideration of
the original Palestinian question. Other States had another
approach. Their approach was that it was an opportunity to
find a solution for the whole of the Middle East conflictthat is, for the problem of the Palestinians, as we11 as that
of the 1967 attack. The Assembly session, as we know,
ended without adoption of a resolution, although it should
be remembered that all United Nations Member States
agreed on one principle-namely, the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from all .the Arab territories occupied in 1967. A
Latin American draft resolution which our colleagues here
remember well stated that the Assembly:

28. A quarter of a century ago the General Assembly by
its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 recommended
the partitioning of the land of Palestine as it was under
British Mandate into two States, one Arab and one Jewish.
Member States of our Organization that have recognized
the Jewish State gave it recognition within the frontiers
allotted to it in that 1947 resolution, Thus the letter dated
14 May 1948 to the President of the United States by
which the Agent of the Provisional Government of the
Jewish State, Mr. Eliahu Epstein, sought and received
United States recognition clearly stated:
“I have the honour to notify you that the State of
Israel has been proclaimed as an independent Republic
within the frontiers approved by the General Assembly of
the United Nations in its resolution of 29 November
1947.“’

” 1. Urgently requests:
(a) Israel to withdraw all its forces from all the [Arabj
territories occupied by it as a result of the recent
conflict;“.2

29. Mr. President, you yourself, as representative of the
USSR, on 4 March 1949 addressed this Council to explain
the recognition that the USSR had given to Israel. Replying
to the query put by the United Kingdom, “Where are the
borders of that State? “, you said:

And unless I am mistaken, in which case I hope I will be
corrected, the delegations of the United States of America
and Israel voted for that Latin American resolution.

We all know that its territory has been defined by
the General Assembly resoluLion and that a special map
has been attached to that resolution. Those who are
interested in seeing the territory of Israel may refer to the
General Assembiy resolution of 29 November 1947 and,
the annexed map which clearly marks that territory.:’
[414th meeting, p. IO.]
“

.

.

34. On 7 November 1967 Egypt requested the convening
of the Security Council in an urgent meeting to consider
the dangerous situation caused by Israel’s refusal up to that
date to withdraw its armed forces from the territories
which it had occupied in June 1967. The Council, 011
22 November 1967, chose to deal again with the two
problems together. It did not limit itself to considering the
question of Israeli aggression against the three Arab States,
as requested by Jordan, Syria and Egypt: it sought a
simultaneous solution to this problem and also to the
problem resulting from the 1947 partition of Palestine and
the injustices inflicted on the Palestinian nation.

30. In the past quarter of a century the world has
witnessed the Palestinian people being systematicall?
turned into a nation of refugees, huddled in the sector of
Gaza under Egyptian trust, and in the West Bank of the
River Jordan under the rule of the Kingdom of Jordan,
1 See

The

Printir:g Office,

Department
Washington,

of Stnte Bulletirl
D.C.), vol. XVIII,

(Il.,% CJovernmcnt
p. 673.

2 O#ieial
Records
of the General Assembly,
Fifth
E?nergellcY
Special Session, Annexes,
agenda item 5, document
A/L.523/Rcv.l.

No. 464,

4

35. We then called for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all the territories
invaded in June 1967. Israel proclaimed that it had no
territorial designs against the Arab States at all. That
proclamation is contained in the verbatim records. That
proclamation is to be considered and contrasted with the
Israeli insistence now, officially communicated to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, that it
will never return all the occupied territories and never go
back to the lines of 5 June 1967.

41.. All those United Nations resolutions have, alas,
remained mere documents, pieces of paper, known by
numbers,repeatedlike charms,and their magichasbeenno
match for the power of the aggressor.
Today, six long years
after the Israeli military attack on 5 June 1967, the heavy
hand of military occupationis still stifling our national life.
A costly war is still imposedon US, a war that we intend to
end. The only way we canthink of to put an end to it is to
put an end to the military occupation. We have accepted
and we do accept all the resolutionsof the Security Council
and the General Assembly in deference to the will of the
international community.

36. Israel at that time claimed also that it attacked
because it had been exposed to the danger of extermination. This myth too has been dissipated by those who
created it themselves. According to a member of the Israeli
Council of Ministers-and I shall quote his words-during
the six-day war “the story of the threat of extermination
was invented by Israel to justify the annexation of the
occupied territories”.

42. Egypt acceptedthe packagedealembodiedin Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967; Egypt accepted the principle of the appointment of a Special
Representativeof the Secretary General, who was to be
AmbassadorGunnar Jarring. Egypt gave him its active
support and sincere co-operation when, on 8 February
1971, after four long years of arduouswork, he addressed
to us, and to Israel, his two identical aide-mCmoires
[S/10403, annex I/. Seven days later, on 15 February
[ibid., annex II/, Egypt gavehim the seriouscommitments
which he had askedfor, including readinessto enter into a
peaceagreementwith Israel if Israel also carried out all its
obligations under the Charter and asrequestedby AmbassadorJarring.

37. Another Israeli, General Peled, Chief of the Bureau of
Logistics during the 1967 conflict, asserted in 1972 that
‘<there had been no danger of the Hebrew State being
exterminated by Egypt”. He even went further and asserted
that there had been no proof that the Egyptians had really
intended to attack Israel at that time. Then there was
another statement. General Haim Herzog, of the Israeli
Military Intelligence, admitted, with some embarrassment,
the non-existence of such a danger. The daily newspaper of
the Labour Party, OT, in June 1972, published a debate
between Generals Weizmann, Gavish, Peled and Hcrzog in
which they all agreed, without ambiguity, that no danger of
extermination had threatened Israel before the Six-Day
War.

43. But Israel blocked the Jarring Mission. Israel challenged AmbassadorJarring’smandateand authority. After
a year of challenge,frustration and immobility, he again
tried to work, It wassuggestedin February 1972 that the
parties should exchange, thro@ Ambassador Jarring,
clarifications of their position on the various subjectsdealt
with in the Council resolution of November 1967, with a
view to formulating provisions for inclusion in a peace
treaty. Again, Egypt accepted in an effort to break the
impasse.Again, Israel scuttled this latest and last effort,
insisting that the so-calledJarring initiative of 8 February
1971 was outside his terms of reference. In a word, Israel
threw out the last long six years. It has aimed, and I am
sure it still aiming, at keeping the status I~UOin order to
perpetuateits occupation and, againI repeat, to terrorize us
into surrender.

38. SO, from thesetwo postures-havingno designson any
Arab territory and having fought just as a reaction to a
threat, and now satisfied that they have defeated the
threat-what remainsof the Israeliposturein the Council in
June 1967 is the insistenceon holding direct negotiations
under the Israeli occupation, between Israel and the
countries it occupies.This 1 do not think Israelwill change.
I do not think it will changebecause,as a victor, Israel
deemsit to be its right to meet the vanquishedand dictate
its terms. Further, this operation must and should be
carried out only outsidethis Organization, and only while
the forces of occupation can make this dictation possible.

44, The representativesof the four permanent membersbefore the admissionof China-France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the USSR, supported AmbassadorJarring’saide-m6moireof 8 February 1971. They, all
four of them, expressedsatisfactionwith Egypt’s response.
They, all four of them, askedthat Israel give a similarreply.
The four representativesof the four permanentmembersof
this Council, as you know Mr. President, requestedthe
Chairman of one of their meetings, AmbassadorGeorge
Bush of the United States of America, to convey this
position to the Secretary-General, which he did. He
conveyed to the Secretary-Generalthe fact that the four
Powers supported Jarring, found him to be within his
mandateand acceptedhis aide-memoire.

39. Since November 1967 the Security Council has met
several times to consider certain subjects and matters
emanating from this complaint-important matters such as
Jerusalem. The Council’s resolutionsare on record. They
certainly have the sameweight asall other resolutions.The
Council has adopted resolutions on the repeated attacks
and acts of violence committed by Israelin the region, and
hasalso adopted severalother resolutions.
40: The General Assembly, at four sessions,has also
discussedthe situation of the continuingaggression
and the
persisting military occupation of our countries. On
8 December 1972, the GeneralAssemblyresolvedto refer
the question to the Security Council [resolution
2949 (xVrrl/.
It is now before us.

45. But the Israelis simply believe that they have conquered and that therefore they must enjoy the fruits of
conquest, invoking the obsolete right of conquest. If this
right is resistedby Egypt, that resistancemust be broken.
5

that objection. They are apprehensive,they say, lest t&c
armsshould correct or upset the balanceor imbalance oi
power betweenIsraeland all the Arab countries combineit
after a decade.They are apprehensivethat such armsma?
upset the balance of power betweeh Israel’s 2.5 miIlil~rr
people and the 125 million Arabs-after a decade. Israel
then says that it has now to respond by escalating its
territorial claims vis-l-vis Egyptian lands and that it w$i
now have to keep more of those lands of Egypt, including
the line of mountain rangesin the middle of Sinai,

The conquered territories must be pacified and controlled
by all means. If the conqueror needs more weapons to
impose the conqueror’s will, he knows where to obtain
them. If the Council, if the United Nations deem inadmissible the acquisition of territories’ by force, that is, in
the eyes of the conqueror, a hypocritical. and immoral
posture to be rejected and disdained. The United Nations
has no power to dislodge the occupier militarily or
materially, and therefore it warrants no respect whatsoever.
46. Israeli leaders keep insisting on direct negotiations
with the Arab States “with no prior conditions”. Egypt
accepts to have any talks without prior conditions. But do
not let us be fooled. Everything, they claim, would be
negotiable. In the same breath, the Israeli Government has
declared and notified you, Mr. President, and this Council
officially by notifying Ambassador Jarring, that it poses a
very heavy pre-condition. In its communication to Ambassador Jarring dated 26 February 1971 /ibid., annex IIZ],
Israel says it would not withdraw to the prc-5June
boundaries:to wit, it will have to take a part of Egypt and
part of Syria and part of Jordan.This is a pre-condition.

50. What doesthis mean? Does it needany explanatirla::
First, the authorities of Israel do not expect and cert&l>
are not looking for a peaceful settlement in the areafcla si
least another decade.Second, when and if they have lI?ki,
they must be kept 5,000 per cent stronger than the Arabs,
per capita. Becauseif we are going 10 have all the arm6 in
the hands of 2.5 million which should be in the hands of
125million-I hope my arithmetic is wrong-it means0~s is
a ratio of 5,000 per cent. It also really meansthat Israe &
looking for any pretext to justify further expansion. 1’Ris
time it meanstaking half of Sinai; someother time thr:will be another pretext to take somethingmore.

47. Another pre-condition is the pre-condition of occupation. The peacediktut imposedby the victor upon the
vanquished is a pre-Charter concept which the United
Nations systemhasoutlawed.Basicnormsof contemporary
international law contain a rule on the non-validity of
treaties imposedunderoccupationunder the threat or use
of force, Article 17 of the Charter of the Organizationof
American States,signedin Bogotain 1948, states:

51. Mr, President,we are not trying to frighten you (‘Y ‘I-+
frighten ourselves.1havejust spent last night reading a ““‘I:;
long symposiumby seven former Israeli Chiefs of St&l*.
organized by the Israeli paper Mzariv on 6 January nt- !lirr
year and publishedby that newspaper.It is very long. rrn%?
1
hope I have been honest in trying to boil down to a p,$?
the opinionsvoiced by these sevenformer Israeli Chici%*+i
Staff. They are all in agreementon the following.

“No territorial acquisitionsor specialadvantagesobtained either by force or by other meansof coercion shall
be recognized.”
But this is perhapstoo old, it is 1948. Let us seewhether
there is some other fresh affirmation. The principle has
been clearly stated and solemnly codified in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties concluded by the
United Nations Conferenceon the Law of Treaties in
Vienna on 23 May 1969.3 Article 52 of that Convention
states:

52. First, they believethat the Arab leadersare now rr~J:m
and willing to sign a peace agreement with lsracl ora lb:
basis of Israeli withdrawal to the international horZe.b*
before 5 June 1967, which they call “the green lint’* i::
their symposium.There is a map showing a green lint; 13:i
the line of the beginningof the attack of 1967. 1 rca*i*>.!
they are all in agreementin their belief the Arab lcaderc t::
now ready and willing to signa peaceagreementwith I%?a::
on the basis of Israeli withdrawal to the intcrnatti~:nt!
bordersbefore 5 June 1967.

“A treaty is void if its conclusionhasbeenprocuredby
the threat or useof force in violation of the principlesof
international law embodiedin the Charter of the United
Nations.”

53. Secondly, they agreethat it is preferable for 1~3~: :
disregardthis Arab readinessfor peace and to hold lh~a Y.
the hope of complete Arab capitulation. That capitul:ts: -1’
is to comewithin 30 years.

48. Wehear of the needto guaranteeIsraeli security. For
the sake of this illusive security they import and manufacture the deadliestweaponsin the world today. If we
believe them, their security would be satisfiedby their
being 100 per cent militarily secure, which can only be
achievedat the expenseoi’ 100 per cent insecurity for our
peoples.

54. Thirdly, they feel there is now no military dall@? 2:
all from the Arab countries. They believe the contrary ByI “*z
true.
55. I do not know if it is possibleto reduce 80 or 90 p-t%
to one page,but I think that what I have said is susasr*.~J
by the verbatim symposium. There are many pages. j-- 9
different people are speaking. What I have just mid :s d
condensedversion. It representsthe inner thinking- -arriZ ;:
is frightful, really-of Israel. The significance of r?.ii
thinking should not escapeour friends who have a&-:u3
patience for an unlimited time, hoping for a just st>l~?=~:~:
finally to emerge.It should alsonot escapethe attcrltte~ri ( f
thosewho declare that they will always sustain the [TP~~XTI
so-calledbalance of power, for this is a posture he&~&

49. Israeli leadersnow object to American arms salesto
some Arab countries, It is not Israel’s objection or
acceptancethat is significant.It is the reasonthey gavefor
3 k
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the
Law of i%atieS, Documents oj‘ the Conjhrewe (United Nations
pL)blicatiOn, Saks No. E.7O.V.S), document A/CONF.39/27, p. 287.

6

tilted in faVOLlr of aggression and dreams of perpetuating
aggression.

couldnot haveresolved,that secureboundaries
for Israelbe
established
insideEgypt or insideSyria. The Israelborders
that the Councilwishedto be fixed and recognizedcould
exist only within the geographical
areaof Palestinewhich
the 1947 GeneralAssemblypartition resolutionhad dealt
with (resolution 181 (II)]. Any other propositionwould
evoke such questions-notvery seriousquestions-asthe
following.

156. While the lnilitary occupation remains, Israel continues its active war. It continues to change the physical
Character and demographic composition of the occupied
Arab territOriC?S in order to create what it has always called
JleW facts and to confront the world with them. To that
end, Israel resorts to lawless practices such as the tota]
destruction
of towns and villages, mass deportation of
jrrhabjtants
and, most important, establishment of Israeli
~J~~jtw atld pllIliIllilitary settlenlents jn the Arab territorjos--concerning
which these generals have said, “What we
build must stay; it is not prefabricated.”

61. Did the Security Council decide,could the Security
Council have decided,is it in the power of the Security
Council to decide to partition Egypt amongits Egyptian
inhabitantsand those of the JewishState to which the
1947 General Assemblyresolution allotted a part of
Palestineunder the British Mandate? Did the Security
Council decide,could the Security Councildecidenow to
partition Syria, or anyother country, amongits inhabitants
and those of the Jewish State to which the General
Assemblyallotted a part of Palestineunder the British
Mandate? Placingthe bordersinsideEgypt or placingthe
borders inside Syria, placing the borders outside the
international boundary of Palestineunder the British
Mandatewould indeedbe a new partition of Egypt and a
new partition of Syria, and a new partition of any other
Arab country-or of anycountry at all.

57. The whole membership of the United Nations must
reject these so-called new facts. It is the responsibility of
this Clouncil clearly to declare that all changes carried out
by lsrael in the territories it occupies are null and
void-whether
they are carried out in Gaza, in Sinai, in the
Golan I-Ieights or on the West Bank of the Jordan.
58. In its resolution 2949 (XXVII) of 8 December 1972,
tfre General Assembly called upon all States to avoid
actions, including actions in the field of aid, that could
constitute
recognition of Israeli occupation of Arab territories. The position of the occrrpying authority and its
obligations
in regard to the territories under military
occupation and to their inhabitants are clearly defined in
the basic norms of jnternational law and the Geneva
Conventions
of 1949. Third parties and all those persons
who
have taken or might consider taking measures or
actions
or engaging in enterprises regarding the Arab
territories
110w occupied by Israel that could constitute
rocognjtion on their part of that occupation or that might
help sustain it should know that Egypt and, I am sure, the
other Arab States do not and will not recognize the validity
of their actions. International law does not recognize such
validity.

62. My cominghere,the meetingof the Council,the time
which hasgenerouslybeengivento me, andthe time of the
Council itself will have no relevanceunlesswe hear the
aforementionedquestionsansweredloudly and clearly and
without any ambiguity,constructiveor otherwise.
63. If indeed it wasnot and could not have been the
Council’sintention to partition Egypt or any other Arab
country, then the Council’sdecisionandresolutionwould
have to demandthe immediateand unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli forces of occupationfrom all the
territories they now occupy, andto affirm the sanctity of
international borders. Furthermore, it would have to
resolvethat all the rightsand aspirationsof the Palestinian
nation be respected,includingtheir right to live in peace
within secureand recognizedboundariesin their homeland
of Palestineas it wasbefore the partition, asit wasunder
the Mandate.They shouldhavebeenthere,andin that land
they should have recognizedand secureboundaries,the
sameright accordedto the JewishState and to all the
people of the areaby the Security Council resolutionof
November1967.

59. The millionaires who *are gathering in Israel for a fund
of’ funds, with a one-million dollar share, should perhaps
hear that. Furthermore, the United Nations membership
~h0~11d--as, indeed, decided by the General Assemblyrefrain from giving Israel aid that might help it in its
continued occupation of Arab territories. On the contrary,
and in an effort of collective security reflected by the
presence of the eight Foreign Ministershere,help shouldbe
given to the victims of the military occupationin order to
rid themselves of this yoke.

64. Around this tablesit representatives
of manycountries
that have recognized Israel. We ask them: did they
recognizethe State of Israelin any placeexcept within the
60. Security Ccuncjl resolution 242 (1967) adoptedin
Nover-&er 1967, called for the withdrawal of Israeli territory of Palestineunderthe British Mandate?Hasany
military forces from the lands they had occupiedjn what State representedat this table that hasrecognizedIsrael
the Council then referred to as“the recent conflict”, The recognizedIsrael outsidethe territory of Palestineunder
the British Mandate? There can be only one answer:it is
G0uncjl stressedthe right of all nationsof the areato ]jve jn
peace within secure and recognized boundaries.The sug- clear that the boundariesthat have been recognizedfor
Thus,thoseboundaries
will have
gestion that omission of the word “the” before the word Israelmustbe in Palestine.
in paragraph1 (i) of that resolution means to be betweenIsraelandthe Palestinenation envisagedin
“territories”
that acquisition of the entire territory of a MemberState is the partition laid down in GeneralAssemblyresolution
181(II) of 1947. Thoseboundariescannever be outside
110~permissible but the acquisition Of Smdl amOunts Of its
the internationalboundaryof Palestineand,moreprecisely,
territory is permissibledoes not really Warrant mY cO1nmerit hcrc. Most obviously the Council did not resolve,and they cannotbe andthey will not beinsideEgypt.

7

with no hope or promise of redeeming the rest .of its
territory in any foreseeable future.

65. We have been subjected to force at various periods of
our history of thousands of years, and we have always
managed to shake ourselves free. Egypt does not now
concede the right of anyone to encroach on its sovereignty
or territorial integrity, which even in the darkest hours of
its history was left intact. Our territorial integrity and
sovereignty will not be touched no matter how strong the
forces which the aggressor has in its hands. Syria and
Jordan will certainly declare this same conviction.

73. Let me emphasize that such a so-called partial or
interim settlement is completely, definitely unacceptable to
Egypt.
74. Before ending these remarks I. should like again tcr
express my thanks to the Foreign Ministers of some Africarr
and Arab countries for being with US here, This is ark
historic meeting. My African and Arab colleagues expect 11~7
thanks from me. Our cause is their cause. We share reall!
the same things.

66. Today the people of Palestine live either under the
military rule of Israel or as refugees and homeless persons.
They are deprived of nationhood and of the right which the
United Nations Charter seeks for all, including the right of
self-determination, the same right sought and obtained by
Israel. The resolutions of the General Assembly and the
resolutions of the Security Council concerning Jerusalem
and the Middie East brought them little or no help at all.
With their continued suffering the area will know no rest.

75. Speaking of Africa I remember Ethiopia and I remember the League of Nations. Before the League of
Nations on 30 June 1936, the Emperor of Ethiopia had tllis
to say:
“ . . . the issue before the Assembly today , . . is ;d
question of collective security; of the very existence of
the League; of the trust placed by the States in
international treaties; of the value of promises made TV
small States that their integrity and their independence
shall be respected and assured . . . . In a word it is
international morality that is at stake.

67. We have come to the Security Council because the two
situations are intolerabIe. If we are to know peace under
international law, we must first secure the immediate Israeli
withdrawal from the Arab territories invaded in 1967. The
aspirations of the Palestinian nation will then have to be
satisfied and their rights guaranteed. A solution is needed
which will bring back justice and peace to an area now in
the ruthless grip of violence.

‘L. . .
“I ask the great Powers who have promised the
guarantee of collective security to small States . , . wll;ilt
tneasures do they intend to take?

68. We proclaim here our respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and our acceptance of all United Nations
resolutions concerning the present problem. It is obvious
that we cannot accept the continuation of the present
situation much longer.

“Representatives of the world, I have come to Gene!-,!
to discharge in your midst the most painful of the duties
of the Mead of a State. What answer am I to take back 1#!
my people? “4

69. We have repeatedly annouuced our readiness to
continue Ambassador Jarring’s talks with a view to
achieving a just and lasting peace. The price, however, has
not been and shall not be the betrayal of our territorial
integrity or the abandonment of the inalienable right of
the Palestinians as a nation to live in peace within
recognized and secure boundaries. The Council will certainly clearly endorse these objectives.

76. At motnents such as this one dots not seek to win 2
battle of words. The only battle I wish to win for tl~>
people is the battle against despair. Hope shall find 62~
Charter-abiding Members of this Organization ready to do
its will, Despair can only mean that in a coId werrIiJ
unprotected by the Charter each one of us will have to fe1n8
for himself as best he can. The question I am asking tlldd>
is the same that Ethiopia asked the League of Natiorls ii:
Geneva in 1936: what do I take back to my people‘?

70. We remain loyal to the international order which this
Organization represents and is meant to defend. It is,
however, our responsibility, which the Charter sanctions, to
try our best to repel the aggression and to end the
occupation of our homeland by every available means.

77. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1call t*fi
the representative of Israel.

71. A question you may like to put to the Israeli
representative, Mr. President, and one which I believe to be
pertinent, is whether or rrot Israel accepts this principle of
non-acquisition of territory by force. Would his reply be in
the negative or would there be no reply at all?

78. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I should like ter
express to you my respect and cordial wishes.
79. Peace is not an abstract concept. It is not a matter~~l
theory or formulae that can be worked out from a distanif.
It is a concrete situation which must be built and prescmr%?
by those who aspire to live in peace with each other. If d
State desires peace, it joins the other party in conslruding it.

72. And I have a word to say about the so-called interim
solution before ending. On 4 February 1971 President
Sadat envisaged an approach leading up to and organically
tied with a comprehensive settlement of the conflict. We
sought peace but Israel tried to turn it into a partial
settlement-in fact an end in itself which would leave it in
occupation of a part of Egyptian territory and leave Egypt

4 L,J+T,,~ of Nations,
No 1.~1. part II, p. 25.
8

Official

Journal,

SpECio[

SupPl~~~~~Y’

80. It is, therefore, regrettable that instead of taking the
road of dialogue and agreement, Egypt decided to turn to
renewed polemics in the Security Council.

conducting his mission under resolution 242 (1967). The
Arab refusal was a decisive turning point. Thereafter the
mission found itself in ever-growing difficulties.

81. Peace is not pursued by recrimination and by fanning
the flames of hostility. Israel has sought peace with Egypt
for 25 years. It appealed for peace when Egypt tried to
prevent Israel’s independence. It offered peace when Egypt
tried and failed to shatter Israel in the Arab invasion of
1948. It endeavoured to attain peace during the years of
Egyptian blockade and terror warfare that led to the
hostilities of 1956. It probed ail possible avenues to peace
in the pre-1967 period. It has repeatedly attempted in the
last six years to reach peaceful agreement with Egypt and
with the other Arab States.

88. Fourth, Egypt intensified its violations of the ceasefire along the Suez Canal until by early 1969 it declared the
so-called war of attrition against Israel. A solution was to be
achieved not through negotiation and agreement with Israel
but by the use of arms and through coercion by the great
Powers. When the four-Power talks began in April 1969,
President Nasser announced that in order to impress the
participating States with the need to exert pressure on
Israel he intended to “heat up” the cease-fire line-and he
did. In those conditions there was little that Ambassador
Jarring could do.

82. An ancient Jewish sage said: “The world rests on three
things-Truth,
Law and Peace.” Indeed, without truth there
can be no law and peace. We must seek out the truth, we
must see the facts as they are if we are to build peace.

89. Fifth, Israel persisted, however, in its efforts towards
agreement with Egypt. In September 1968 it transmitted
through Mr. Jarring to the Foreign Minister of Egypt
detailed proposals for peace negotiations. In October 1968
a peace plan enumerating nine points, including inter aliu
the establishmentof secureand recognized borders to be
laid down by mutual agreement,wassubmittedby hiel
to
the General Assembly.” Later Israeli memorandabasedon
the nine-point programmewere transmitted to the Governmentsof Egypt and Jordan. All this proved to be in vain.

83. Thus the Government of Israel has repeatedly declared
that it does not wish to freeze the existing situation or to
perpetuate the cease-fire lines but wishes to replace them in
peace with secure and agreed boundaries to be established
through negotiation with each of its Arab neighbours. This
position is clear. It cannot be distorted by propaganda
artifices, by misrepresentation of Israeli actions and misquotations from Israeli statements. The conditions of life in
those territories are well known. They have been witnessed
at first hand and have been widely reported by numberless
outside observers, including hundreds of thousands of
citizens of Arab States who visit them annually. There can
be no constructive purpose in charges which on the one
hand try to paint a picture of total darkness and, on the
other, allege at the same time that the high standard of life,
the impressive economic development, the freedom of
movement and expression either are meaningless or have
been ensured by Israel for ulterior motives.

90. Sixth, the attempt to use military and political force
againstIsrael failed. In August 1970 at the initiative of the
United States the cease-firewas restored and an understanding reached to resumethe Jarring talks. In approving
the Israel Government’s decision to accept the American
peace initiative, the Knesset expressed support for a
permanent peace with Egypt and Jordan inclusive of a
“withdrawal of armed forces of Israel from territories
occupied since the 1967 conflict and as a result of it to
secure and agreed borders to bc laid down in peace
agreements.” However, no sooner had that arrangement
entered into force than Egypt violated it by movingmissiles
into the standstill zone, thus raising the question of
confidencein undertakingssolemnly given.

84. This is equally true of misrepresentation of the
peace-making efforts since 1967. What, in fact, have been
the salient developments during this period in the search for
peace?

91. Seventh, Israel askedthat this grave issuebe clarified
and that Egypt rectify its breach of the agreementunder
which the Jarring talks had resumed and were to be
pursued.Egypt refused.

85. First, to the world-wide call to peace in the Middle
East, Egypt and other Arab States reacted with the
notorious Khartoum resolution of 1 September 1967: “No
recognition, no negotiation, no peace with Israel”.

92. Eighth, on 22 Decemberof that year the Government
of Israel neverthelessdecided to try againto help advance
the peace missionand declaredthat “the presentpolitical
and military conditions” enabled the Jarring talks to
resume.

86. Second, when the Secretary-General’s Special Representative commenced his mission at the end of 1967, Israel
presented to him a detailed agenda for direct peace talks.
Egypt rejected both the agenda and the idea of such
negotiations.

93. Ninth, Ambassador Jarring was invited to Jerusalem
for conversationswith the Prime Minister and the Minister
for Fore&n Affairs. Documentscontaining Israel’sviewson
“Essentials of Peace” were presented to him, for transmission to the Governments of Egypt and Jordan. Both
Israel and Mr. Jarring expressedthe hope that a processof
quiet diplomacy would now ensue to permit a serious
exchangeof i&as. The Egyptian Government reactedwith

87. Third, Ambassador Jarring proposed then a different
method. In March 1968 he invited the parties to send
delegations to Cyprus for conferences under his auspices.
Israel accepted. Egypt refused. This was a crucial test of the
parties’ attitude. The Secretary-General’s Special Representative tried to bring about meetings between the parties,
for this was the normal, logical and constructive manner of

5 See Officiul
Session, Plenary

9

Records
Meetings,

of the

General

Assembly,

Twenty-third

1686thtneeting,paras.109-118.

a series of papers couched in the language of propagandistic
recrimination and requested their circulation as Security
Council documents. The attempt at quiet diplomacy was
stillborn. The effort to initiate a meaningful exchange
collapsed. This was accompanied by Egyptian threats not to
prolong the cease-fire and to start shooting again. In these
circumstances, Ambassador Jarring suggested that Israel
accept the Egyptian position on the question of withdrawal.
94. Tenth, this suggestion was trdnstnitted in the aidemimoire of 8 February 1971. Israel was asked not only to
agree to withdraw to the old line but to do so in a prior
commitment. Egypt and its supporters had failed in their
attempt to introduce a provision for such withdrawal in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) adopted on
22 November 1967. Now it was put forward with a proviso
that Israel’s acceptance was a precondition for the continuation of the Jarring talks. The condition to continue
the talks was thus the exclusion from them of the central
question that was to be agreed upon between the parties:
the question of secure and recognized boundaries. The
aide-m&moire of 8 February requested also that the Goveinment of Egypt, on its part, give a prior commitment. In the
words of the Secretary-General’s report before the Council:
“The United Arab Republic would give a commitment
to enter into a peace agreement with Israel and to make
explicitly therein to Israel, on a reciprocal basis, various
undertakings and acknowledgements arising directly or
indirectly from paragraph 1 (ii) of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967).” [S/l 0929, para. 80.1
In this manner Egypt was asked in 1971 to accept the
essence of the 1967 resolution---conclusion of an agreement
with Israel on a just and lasting peace. In return for such
acceptance, Israel,was to accede to the demands for which
Egypt had failed to obtain the Security Council’s approval.
95. Eleventh, despite this development, Israel expressed its
readiness to pursue the talks without pre-conditions. Egypt
continued, however, to insist that Israel should accept the
Egyptian diktat.
96. Twelfth, all attempts by Israel and by others to
remove this impediment have failed.
97. Thirteenth, the 8 February 1971 aide-m&moire and
the General Assembly resolutions supporting it thus remained obstacles preventing progress in the Jarring mission.
They remain such obstacles to this very day. They also
endanger the only Security Council resolution which both
parties have accepted, Indeed, the commitments which
Israel took upon itself in respect of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) are contingent on its original text
and its original interpretation.
98. Fourteenth, another avenue was openedin early 1971,
when the United States proposed that Israel and Egypt
enter into proximity talks for a special arrangement to
reopen the Suez Canal to international shipping, providing
also for a withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Canal to an
agreed distance. Israel agreed. Thus far Egypt has not. In
July 1972, the Prime Minister of Israel appealed to the

President of Egypt to open a new chapter in the annals of
the Middle East by sitting down to the negotiating table.
On that occasion the Prime Minister clarified that for Israel
the partial Suez arrangement does not bear the character of
finality but is viewed as one step, after which additional
steps would immediately follow until eventually a permanent and agreed border had been established.
99. This is the record of the last six years. These are
Israel’s continuous efforts to reach agreement with Egypt.
This is the story of Egypt’s flight from peace. It is a story
of rejected peace proposals, of opportunities for peace
brushed aside, of efforts to bring the parties into meaningful exchanges undermined. Had Egypt reacted favourably
to these opportunities, peace might have already been
achieved.
100. Looming over these developments is a perturbing
question: Has Egypt abandoned the ultimate objective of
bringing about Israel’s destruction as an independent
State? This is a question asked again and again whenever
Egyptian leaders speak of Israel’s withdrawal as being only
the first stage in a continuing struggle that will go on. It is a
question which poses itself in the light of Egypt’s identification with terrorist organizations the avowed objective of
which is Israel’s liquidation. It is a question which turns
into grave suspicion of Egypt’s real intentions when Egypt
and other Arab States boost the terrorist organizations and
their aims in the United Nations by creating the issue of the
so-called “inalienable rights of the Palestinians”, at the
expense of the people of Israel, to the exclusion of the
Jewish people’s inalienable rights to self-determination and
national independence, and despite the fact that the
Palestinian State of Jordan is already a full-fledged Member
of the United Nations.
101. Notwithstanding
this sombre view of Egypt’s
position, Israel does not give up hope for peace and
understanding with its neighbours. Israel will continue to
search for peace with perseverance and goodwill. It will
strive for peace with determination to safeguard its rights,
but also with understanding and respect for the rights trlf
other States. It will be steadfast-in the defence of its vie\&
but at all times considerate of the views of its neighbours. It
will explore all realistic possibilities to attain genuine peace.
102. The melancholy chronicle of peace-making cfforls in
the last six years has much to tell about such possibilities.
To ignore the lessons of those years would leave US in the
morass of frustration. If there is a sincere desire for peace.
the mistakes of the past will not be repeated. If the road ti)
peace is to be kept open, it will not be encumbered with
new barriers even before the old ones have been removed.
103. The preceding years have made it abundantly clear
that the use of force against Israel is futile and will not
bring closer a solution of the conflict. The rights to life and
freedom and security are too precious for force to have any
effect on the Israeli people’s unity and determination to
guard and defend them.
104. The people of Israel have demonstrated that tlW
face with equal resolve other forms of coercion. The Arab
States have tried to bring it about in a variety of ways.

They thought to exert pressure through one-sided resolutions in the United Nations and in other international
organizations. Egypt and other Arab States have attempted
to impose their will through the two great Powers and
through the four permanent members of the Security
Council. They tried to pressure Israel through ad hoc
committees, through special committees and advisory
groups and through demands for time-tables, calendars and
guidelines contrary to Israel’s legitimate interests. The Arab
States apparently did not wish to recognize that, after 25
years of siege and embattlement and gigantic burdens and
vicissitudes, Israel is not a country that would yield to
coercion.

tested in the Middle East situation and have proved
unsuccessful and even harmful, the method of negotiation
has remained conspicuously absent. It has brought about
settlement of wars and disputes in other parts of the world.
It has achieved understanding between old and fiery
opponents, There is no justification whatever that this
method should be ostracized in the Middle East. It is
inherent in the 1967 resolution’s basic concept of agreement between the parties. The one way in which the United
Nations could at this stage make a constructive contribution to the solution of the Middle East problem would be
by encouraging the parties to enter into negotiations. If
Member States desire to assist the parties in a tangible,
effective manner, they will promote the initiation of h
negotiating process. Surely the exchanges of acrimony
across the Security Council table cannot be more edifying
or beneficial to the cause of the Arab States and Israel alike
than exchanges across a negotiating table.

10s. If the experience of the last few years has demonstrated an incontrovertible fact, it is that there can be no
imposition of a solution from the outside. If there is a
message to be retained from that experience, it is that Israel
will not be drawn into any process that would introduce
third Powers and their own differences, whether as
members of committees or participants in consulting
groups, into a conflict which only the parties themselves
can settle. Such processes would render the situation even
more complex than it is, and Israel will not prejudice its
search for understanding and agreement with its neighbours
by the deliberate injection of additional complicating
factors.

110. We take note of the statement made by the Foreign
Minister of Egypt that Egypt accepts direct negotiations
with Israel without prior conditions. Much that Minister
El-Zayyat said after that destroyed the significance of that
declaration and turned it into another seemingly polemical
argument. Yet, this is an opportunity that the Security
Council must not and cannot miss. This is a challenge to
which it must respond. This is the hour for the Security
Council to call on the parties to enter into direct
negotiations without any pre-conditions. The eyes of the
world are on this chamber. Will it now live up to the
historic test? Will it now turn away from the methods
which have proved to be fruitless in the past, and will it
guide the parties to the path of negotiations, the only one
that can lead to peace?

106. Another fundamental premise that emerges from the
experience of recent years is that Israel will under no
circumstances relinquish its right under international law to
have the boundary of peace established for the first time in
the Middle East through negotiation and agreement; nor
will Israel acquiesce in any other change in the substance,
balance or interpretation of resolution 242 (1967). Egypt’s
attempt to tamper with resolution 242 (1967), and especially to exclude determination of secure and recognized
boundaries from the process of agreement between the
parties, has been the main obstacle to progress in the search
for peace.

111. This is the road Israel invites Egypt and the other
Arab States to take. Israel considers that the most practical
way would be to follow this road step by step, beginning
with the proximity talks for the reopening of the Suez
Canal. Israel is prepared, however, to enter into any fret
negotiations without pre-conditions. It has no ultimative
demands. It does not ask Egypt to accept in advance any
Israeli views or positions on any point, and in the same way
it cannot accept in advance, as a pre-condition, the
Egyptian demands. Israel seeks an honourable, meaningful
dialogue in which the parties would engage in a joint effort
to find mutual accommodation and agreement on every
question.

107. The purpose of resolution 242 (1967) is to establish
a new situation and not to restore the one created by the
provisional military Armistice lines, a situation of vulnerability and peril that resulted in the 1967 hostilities. It is
clear, that the “secure and recognized boundaries” are not
defined in the resolution, being dependent upon negotiation and agreement. There is no rule or principle in
international law that prevents agreed border changes jn
peace treaties even when recognized boundaries already
exist. In any event Israel’s acceptance of the November
1967 resolution was and is based on that assumption.

112. The time has come to apply the method of negotiation. The alternative is the continuation of the impasse. If
Egypt wishes to move out of it, there is no justification for
delaying any further the negotiating process with Israel. If
Egypt recognizes Israel’s right to independence and
sovereignty and seeks genuine peace, there can be no reason
to hesitate about entering into a serious dialogue with
Israel. For the good of all nations in the Middle East this
will, hopefully, be soon.

108. It is thus evident from the preceding years that resort
to force, coercion, pressure and tampering with the original
text and interpretation of resolution 242 (1967) are not
methods that can bear fruit. These are means which will
impede the search for peace and have already done SO and
must not be tried again if there is to be progress towards
settlement.

113. Six years ago Egyptian belligerency, pursued against
Israel since 1948, reached its climax. The Arab Govemments, led and directed by Egypt, methodically prepared
and mounted an assault designed to bring about Israel’s
total destruction. The world watched and listened in shock

109. On the other hand there is one method that has not
been applied throughout these years-that
of dialogue
between the parties. While all the others have already been
11

and trepidation. The world has not forgotten. Israel has not
forgotten. We know what would have happened had Egypt
succeeded. We still remember President Nasser’s declaration
of 27 May 1967: “It will be a total war and the objective
will be to destroy Israel”.
114. When Israel emerged from the peril of those days, its
first act was to call for peace with Egypt and with other
Arab States. Today, we are doing that again. We hope that
this time Egypt will accept. We hope that this time it will
join Israel in building peace together, for that is the only
way in which it can be built.
115. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
on the representative of Jordan.

I call

116. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, allow me to
express to you my Government’s highest respect and
esteem on your assumption of your high office. Your wise
and firm leadership is a guarantee for the successful
management of the Council’s affairs.
117. After nearly six years of agony, failure, outbursts of
violence and the unmistakable signs of inevitable explosion,
the Security Council is taking up again what it had started
but left unfinished in November 1967. The urgent effort at
peacemaking, initiated by the Council then, is now, through
both commission and omission, nearly a dead body. The
omission belongs to the Council, which outlined in its
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 the course of
a just peace in the Middle East but failed to follow up its
pronouncement with concrete and timely action. The
commission falls upon Israel, which had created the
problem in the first place and has since 1967 worked
diligently to compound it and close every avenue for its just
and constructive
resolution. T]le Security Council is
meeting today to confront both those aspects of the
explosive Middle East situation.
11X. Let us start with the role of the Security Council.
But before I speak of whal the Council has omitted to do
and what it must, by right and by duty, do, allow me a
little introduction of my country’s place in the Council’s
concerns and proceedings. Jordan is a major aggrieved party
in the present conflict in the Middle East. It is connected
by bonds of history, geography, interest, grievance, suffering and claim for justice to the realities of war and peace
in the Middle East. It is a country torn by occupation,
bleeding every day in economic, human and emotional
terms. Over one third of Jordan’s citizens have been under
occupation since June 1967. Nearly one third of its total
population consists of displaced refugees tossed into its
embraces by the ruthless vivisection of Palestine in
1947-1948. Hundreds of thousands of its own and other
citizens have since the 1967 occupation flooded its eastern
region as displaced persons. The.- economic and social
burdens of the occupation, and its continuing corrosive
effects, are only matched by the anguish of national
dismemberment. Jordan has, therefore, a direct and urgent
interest in a serious and early action by the Security
Council to end the occupation, liberate the people now in
bondage and establish a just and lasting peace in the area.
With its Arab partners, Jordan is united in this goal because
it most directly feels the problem.

119. Let us now get back to the role of the Security
Council. The Council has two main sources of guidance 10
act upon in dealing with the situation in the Middle East.
The first source is its own constitution: the Charter of the
United Nations. The second is its own resolutions on the
question. How do those instruments of guidance apply to
the Middle East conflict?
120. One has to look at the condition in the Middle East
to come readily to the answer. One Member of the United
Nations, Israel, occupies today, and since June 1967, the
national soil of three countries Members of the United
Nations: Jordan, Egypt and Syria. It refuses to withdraw
under any conditions. Initially it cIaimed it was only
seeking guarantees for future peace after its withdrawal.
When the Security Council adopted a clear resolution to
that effect, and the Arab parties concerned gave their
assent, Israel reversed its position and spoke categorically of
retaining the Arab territories occupied through conquest, in
part or in totality, under any circumstances.
121. On this matter the guiding principles of the Securily
Council are clear. The Charter, the primary source, is based
on respect for the territorial integrity of States and on the
undertaking by Members not to use force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of States.
The most relevant Council document in this regard, after
the Charter, is Security Council resolution 242 (1967). It
emphasized unequivocally in its preamble the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, giving a
decisive judgement on how its provision for the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from the occupied territories is to be
understood. Neither the law of the Charter, therefore, nor
the provisionsof the Council resolution condone an Israeli
acquisition of ‘any part of the occupied territories. This is
both obviousand logical.
122. But for six yearsnow, the Council hasomitted action
on this matter while Israel has been actively doing and
saying the very opposite of what the United Nations rules.
Its leadersspoke loudly of their determination to stay in
and absorbwhat amountsto all of the occupied territories.
Its diplomatic agentsrecordedwith the United Nationsand
with its instrumentalitiestheir Government’sofficial polic>r
of expansionat the expenseof the occupied territories. The
actions of Israel matched the words. Israel is engaged
feverishly in consolidatingits occupation and absorbingthe
areasunder occupation. AU occupied areas are witnessing
the imminent danger of loss of national character. Settlementsare beingplanted in the various parts of the occupied
territories. By the beginning of this year over 50 setllementshad been establishedin the West Bank of Jordan,in
the Golan Heights,in Gaza and in Sinai. Mahoula,Argman.
Haboqi, Ma’aliah Ephraim, Kiryat A’rba, Rosh Tsorirn,
Shavot Allon, Gilgal, Meso’ah, Na’ran, Geteet, Ramal
Banias,Gesher,Ramat Shalom, Giv’at Yu’ab, Nahal GoIan,
Nahal El-Al, Nahal Uz, Nahal Yam, Nahal Sinai, Nahal
Netsorim, Nahal Morag and many others are mushrooming
in the occupied Arab lands and in the midst of the Arab
peoplewho inhabit those lands. Various meansare usedbY
the occupying Power to annex the areassurrounding those
settlements. Through outright confiscation, forcible
transfer of population or other meansof pressure the land
is being taken over by the occupation authorities, and the

Israeli physical and demographic presence is creeping into
the Arab areas. It is a process of national replacement,
lnuch more fearful and radical than the traditionally known
violations of human rights for people under conventional
occupation. It is a process that evokes the memories of
pre-1948
in Palestine, when piecemeal demographic
invasion-also
through agricultural-military
settlementscuhninated in the forcible and collective expulsion of the
people of Palestine and their exclusion from any right to
return to their homeland.

persons. Despite repeated calls on Israel by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the vast majority of
those displaced persons have not been allowed to return to
their areas of residence prior to the hostilities. From Gaza
alone, over 45,000 displaced persons are still dwelling in
temporary shelters in East Jordan-which
is perhaps understandable: the people of Gaza have been in the centre of
this massive demographic dislocation; tens of thousands of
them have been tossed about while their dwellings have
been bulldozed; Gaza itself is being quickly absorbed into
Israel .

123. Nowhere is this fearful operation of national and
cultural replacement more direct and immediate than in the
heart of the occupied lands, in Jerusalem. Inside and
outside the walls of the Old City in Arab Jerusalem
large-scale confiscation of land is coupled with the physical
elimination of ancient quarters for the erection, on their
ruins, of Israeli structures and dwellings. This is happening
all over occupied Jerusalem, Shu’fat, Sheikh Jarrah, Jabal
Al-Masharif,
Hai Al-Magharibah, Sharafat, Beit Hanina,
Qalandia, Al-Ram, Al-Tur, Al-Nabi Samuel-all those
ancient names and areas are quickly vanishing. The new
Israeli quarters which are being imposed on those Arab
areas would accommodate, according to an early version of
the Israeli plan, no less than 122,000 Israeli Jews. It is a
calculated demographic and physical strangulation of the
Arab inhabitants and owners of the land, and a gradual
elimination of the City’s Arab identity. It takes place
within the framework
of Israel’s official, if arbitrary,
annexation of occupied Jerusalem in 1967. It therefore
goes parallel with the other equally ruthless, legislative,
cultural and economic operations undertaken by the
occupying Power to effect the total absorption of
Jerusalem in the political and economic body of Israel.
Innumerable methods, both subtle and crude, are employed
by the occupation authorities to pressure the Arab inhabitants to give up or sell their property and to emigrate.
The long-established educational, cultural and legal institutions of the people of occupied Jerusalem are dissolved,
subverted or taken over by Israel. The beautiful, unique,
pluralistic and serene Jerusalem is now the victim of
physical and cultural mutilation and the captive of fanatical
chauvinism.

126. The sum total of what is happening in the occupied
territories is a sad and shocking spectacle of national
dissolution and national displacement.
127. For six years, the Security Council has watched but
refrained from action on this shocking spectacle. It is true
that other organs and committees of the United Nations
have concerned themselves with these problems and
adopted appropriate resolutions. Many times, the Assembly
has reproached Israel for its actions. Invoking the general
and specific instruments and provisions of humanitarian
international law, it called upon Israel to desist from
changing the physical character and demographic composition of the occupied territories. It condemned the
violations of human rights by the occupying Power. It
expressed its opposition to Israeli’s radical measures of
confiscation of properties, deportation, transfer of population, establishment of settlements,
collective punishment,
violation of religious sites and holy places, and annexation
of occupied areas. So did the Commission on Human
Rights, and repeatedly. In fact, the General Assembly
established the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human’ Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories-a committee which, incidentally,
was repeatedly denied entry and co-operation by Israel.
How reminiscent of Israel’s similar attitude towards the
mission set up by the Secretary-General in accordance
with
Security
Council resolution
298 (1971)
of
2.5 September 1971 on Jerusalem.
128, So the United Nations has indeed pronounced itself
many times on Israel’s policies and actions throughout the
last six years. But for those pronouncements and resolutions to have effect the Security Council must intervene
with its implementing power. That has not yet happened,
but that is what is needed. The reason why it has not
happened is the fact that since adopting its resolution of
November 1967 the Council has been deriving patience, if
not satisfaction, from two deceptive appearances: first, the
cease-fire system has not yet collapsed; secondly, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General assigned to
the task by the Security Council is still technically engaged
in the peace-making operation. Well, both appearances are
deceptive. I shall try to explain why.

124. As the heart of the occupied lands, Jerusalem, bleeds,
the rest of the body is being disfigured. While the Israeli
settlements mushroom on confiscated land in the occupied
West Bank, Gaza, Rafah and Golan, terrific pressures are
applied to the people to give up their farms and small
factories and join the horde of Arab cheap labour in Israel.
Permanent Israeli industrial projects are set up in tht
occupied territories. Cut-throat competition and discriminatory regulations are reducing the active and prosperous
inhabitants of the West Bank of Jordan to a state of
helplessness. The economy of the West Bank and of the
other occupied areas is manipulated to serve the needs and
policies of the Israeli economy. It is, in fact, being fully
integrated into the economy of Israel.

129. First, the cease-fire is an interim, transitional stage. It
cannot last or be an end in itself. It is not an alternative to a
peace based on respect for territorial integrity and freedom
from foreign domination. At this moment the cease-fire is
based on an abnormal situation. It freezes a situation which
is contrary to the very basis of the Charter of the United

12.5. Human beings, who are the most important component of nations, are the target of a systematic Israeli
game of geo-politics. Over a half-million Arabs from the
occupied territories had to flee the area of hostilities in
1967. East Jordan received some 400,000 displaced
13

Nations, a situation in which Israeli forces.occupy an area
three times the size of Israel, belonging to three countries
Members of the United Nations and inhabited by over a
million people. It is imperative for the Council to work
against the freezing of the present situation because the
freezing of the situation means its swift deterioration.
Under the umbrella of this frozen situation, Israel is
frantically changing the character of the occupied areas and
absorbing them irreversibly.
130. If nothing is done by the Council to halt the Israeli
actions in the occupied territories, the goal of peace will
continue to be eroded to the point where it could become
completely unachievable. Israel will have locked itself in its
insatiable greed and self-created vicious circle of violence.
131. So the cease-fire is a deceptive appearance. It cannot
be relied upon to produce peace by itself. It is no
alternative to a parallel and successful United Nations
operation to end the occupation and transform the ceasefire into a genuine and just peace.
132. There is another deceptive appearance which must
not distract the Council from coming to grips with its
responsibility in the Middle East. Tll’e valiant and honourable representative of the Secretary-General has not yielded
or given LIP in his determined effort to carry out his
mandate of peace making in the last five and a half years.
But his technical engagement in the effort does not relieve
the Council of its responsibility to render every support and
assistance to him and to remove the objective difficulties
and obstacles hindering the successful conclusion of his
efforts. At the moment the Jarring mission is completely
deadlocked. The factual and objective report of the
Secretary-General, which is now in the hands of members
of the Council, is a chronicle of Israeli obstructionism. It
shows clearly and poignantly that every time the Arab
parties opened themselves to an honourable peace Israel
blocked the road. Every time the Arab parties responded
positively to the initiatives of the Special Representative, of
the Security Council or of the General Assembly, Israel met
those initiatives negatively.
133. Two years passed after the adoption of resolution
242 (1967) with Israel refusing explicitly to accept the
resolution. Three years passed with Israel refusing to accept
or mention the word “withdrawal”.
Jordan and its Arab
partners received Ambassador Jarring a dozen times in their
capitals. They made clear commitments to the acceptance
and implementation of resolution 242 (1967) in all its
provisions. They accepted in it the balance of obligations
between the Israeli obligation to withdraw and the Arab
commitment to a guaranteed peace. They made clear and
positive statements in answer to Ambassador Jarring’s
questions regarding the provisions of the resolution such as
the definition of peace, the demilitarized zones, freedom of
navigation in the international waterways,
the refugee
question and others. But Israel neither accepted the
principle of withdrawal nor even gave the Special Representative its definition of the extent of its so-called “secure
boundaries”. When four permanent members met in consultation to render some necessary support and assistance
to the Special Representative, Israel raised sharp protesting

noises and exerted every effort to frustrate this Security
Council initiative. When in June 1970 the United States of
America undertook a unilateral initiative to reactivate tire
Jarring mission in the context of a general cease-fire, Israel
expressed bitterness and anger and chose the earliest
moment to sabotage the renewed peace efforts and suspend
its co-operation with Ambassador Jarring. When the Special
Representative, in the course of his normal efforts, made
ordinary and logical suggestions
in February 1971 involving
the principle of withdrawal, Israel virtually boycotted the
SpecialRepresentative’s
missionuntil this moment.
134. Whenever Governments friendly to Israel suggested
that the provision for withdrawal in resolution 242 (1967)
meant real withdrawal, Israel depicted this normal
suggestionfrom a friendly source as a cardinal sin and
heapedabuseon the leadersof those countries. How can
the mission of the Special Representative achieve any
measureof successwith one party so totally opposedto its
fair and objective operation?
135. We have heard the Israeli spokesmen speak of
“negotiation”. Wehave heard them poseasthe advocateof
dialoguein this question.But any deeper look beyond the
sloganreveals its deliberate misapplication in the present
situation. Negotiation is a method to achieve a concrete
goal. Israel’s verbal utilization of the slogan does not
exempt it from the goal that any peaceful method is
normally designedto achieve. What does “negotiation”
mean when Israel makes its own claims and territorial
ambitions not negotiable? What does negotiation mean
when Israel rejects beforehand the two main Arab claims,
which are the essence
of the presentissue? The Arab States
directly concerned define their case as the termination of
Israeli occupation and respect for the inalienable rightsof
the Palestinian Arabs expelled from their homes. The
United Nations hasexplicitly recognized both rights. Israel
is a priori opposedto both these rights, asthe recordsof
the United Nations show, but speaks‘at the same time of
“negotiation”. Nothing can be more meaninglessand
misleading. This is why the United Nations and the
international community cannot ahd should not leave the
situation in the Middle East to be decided by the party
which, at the moment, hasthe stronger coercive force and
the mostextreme territorial and political designs.
136. We must put the whole Middle East conflict with@
its simple and proper context. The ramifications of the
Arab-Israeli conflict are many and complex, but its essence
is simple. The Arabs did not create the Arab-Israeli
problem; it was imposed on them. It started when a
peaceful and prosperous land, Palestine, inhabited and
ownedby Arabs, wasforcibly emptied and taken over. The
Arab neighbourssharedthe grievanceof their uprooted and
displacedbrothers and sensedthe danger of the expanding
force in their midst. In their pain and alarm they soughtnot
revenge,but redressfor their grievance and assurancefor
their safety. Israel completely rejected the course of
peaceful redressto the Palestinians,including the appeals
and demandsof the United Nations that the displaced
Palestiniansbe allowed repatriation to their homes and
compensation for their losses. While Israel stubbornly
deniedjustice to the Palestiniansit was inviting Jews from
all over the world, on the sheerbasisof religion, to emigrate

and settle in the homes of the Palestinian Arabs. It followed
that the Arab States withheld their recognition of this
unjust situation. It also followed that the Israelis had to
pursue their logic of force to its necessary conclusion.
Hence the war of 1967, a dramatic expansion of earlier
limited attacks on the neighbouring Arab States, which
brought under Israeli occupation substantial territories and
masses of people belonging to three, Arab States.

necessary, in calling on him, to draw attention to one of the
provisions in the conclusions of the Special Committee on
the Rationalization of the Procedures and Organization of
the General Assembly approved by the General Assembly in
its resolution 2837 (XXVI). Paragraph 77 of those conclusions states, with regard to the “right of reply”, that the
Special Committee recommends to the General Assembly
that delegations should use restraint in the exercise of their
right of reply, both in the General Assembly and in the
Main Committees, and that their statements in exercise of
that right should be as brief as possible.

137. The Israeli pretexts for the war of I967 are immaterial. The supreme fact is that the impulse of force and
militarism has governed Israel’s approaches to the problems
it created with its neighbours. In the origin of the problem
Israel totally ignored the rights and even the existence of
the Palestinian Arabs when it commanded enough military
power. Later it resisted any just solution to their tragedy
for two decades, under the shield of its own or imported
power. Finally, it sought to silence the protests of the
neighbouring Arabs by a massive military conquest, believing that force was the way to break the back of the
complex political. human, ethical, emotional and geopolitical problems it had created with its neighbours. By its
intransigent and negative posture today it is escaping again
from a constructive solution to a violent confrontation.

141. This is a rule of procedure of the GeneraI Assembly
and it might be objected that it does not apply to the
Security Council, but, none the less, in view of the time
factor, I felt it necessary to recall this working practice of
the General Assembly
142. I call on the representative of IsraeI.
143. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I regret that I have asked for
the floor at this late hour. This debate and its unfortunate
polemics are not of our initiative, but I think that some of
the abuse and distortions to which the representative of
Jordan has subjected this Council cannot be left without
reaction.

138. But the logic of force is self-defeating. If the Israeli
Ieadership today does not know it, the Security Council
must. That is why the Council cannot, in fairness, accept
the role of an observer in this situation. The United Nations
is a party. It is not a third party. It cannot remain silent
while the logic of force unleashes destruction in the Middle
East. It cannot sit by and watch masses uprooted, borders
violated, national entities torn and one State engaged in a
fantastic game of destruction and self-destruction. The role
and duty of the Security Council are obvious. They are
made even more so by the fact that with the exception of
the attitude of one party, the objective conditions of peace
and justice are achievable. On our part, our position is
simple and reasonable. We want the occupying forces to
evacuate our national soil. No territorial exception is
morally permissible or practically feasible. We continue to
believe that the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian Arabs must be respected in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and its resolutions. On these
foundations a just and lasting peace can be established. We
are ‘committed to the preservation of such a lasting peace,
when its prerequisites are realized.

144. As I said in my first statement this morning, at least
let us see the facts, let us describe the facts as they are. I am
not going to enter into a lengthy discussion about Israel’s
acceptance of resolution 242 (1967) and of the principle of
withdrawal,
but what we have heard from the representative of Jordan today is an utter absurdity and I would
simply suggest to him that he reread and restudy the report
of the Secretary-General, and, if that is not sufficient, that
he should turn to a statement made by me on Israel’s
acceptance of that resolution-not in 1970 and not in 1971,
but on 1 May 1968 [1418th meeting/.

139. So the task of the LJnited Nations is simple but
serious. It requires that the international community
muster its will and resources and put them in the right
direction. If the United Nations fails in this, it will have no
excuse. The guiding principles are clear. The conditions of
peace in the Middle East are clear. The obstacles arc not
insurmountable. The United Nations must succeed in the
interest of peace in the Middle East. But it must succeed,
and even more so, in the interest of peace in the world and
a viable and civilized international order.

145. Jordan’s histo:y is interwoven with Israel’s. Jordan
has its origin as a distinct entity, in the 1922 partition of
Palestine. It was then that the greater part of Palestine was
separated from the territory on the West Bank of the river
and constituted into the Palestinian Arab Emirate of
Transjordan. However, the British High Commissioner of,
Palestine remained also the High Commissioner for the
eastern part of Palestine, for Transjordan. The population
of what had become Transjordan by that partition was
composed entirely of Palestinian Arabs. Transjordan was
barred to the Jews returning to their ancient homeland
pursuant to the mandate of the League of Nations. In 1948
the country became the Masher&e Kingdom of Jordan. It
could have been hoped that an Arab State constituted of
most of the territory of Palestine would at least respect the
Jewish people’s right to enjoy its freedom and to restore its
sovereignty in the remaining parts of the country which has
always been the Jewish national homeland. But this was not
to be.

140. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): The list
of speakers for today’s meeting is now exhausted. It was
mY intention to adjourn the meeting at this point, but the
representative of Israel has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply. In view of the time factor, I consider it

146. The history of Israeli-Jordanian relations is the tale
of repeated attempts to persuade Jordan to remain at peace
with Israel and of Jordanian refusals and decisions to
participate in the aggression of other Arab States against
the Jewish State. On the eve of Israel’s independence a
15

delegation headed by the present Prime Minister,
Mrs. Golda Meir, visited King Abdullah in Amman. It tried
to dissuade him. from attacking the nascent State. However,
on the day of Israel’s proclamation of independence the
Jordanian forces began their invasion in defiance of the
United Nations. Jerusalem with its holy places was besieged
and indiscriminately shelled. The Jewish quarter of the Old
City was razed and its entire population expelled. The
Jewish villages in the Etzion area south of Jerusalem were
overrun and completely destroyed. The village of Beit
Haarava, which had gained renown for its soil desalination
and successful cultivation on the arid shores of the Dead
Sea, was captured and devastated. The same fate befell
Atorot and Beit Yacov to the north of Jerusalem. All
inhabitants were driven out of these Jewish localities.
147. At the end of the fighting Jordan remained in control
of part of Jerusalem and of the West Bank. Unilaterally it
annexed the occupied territories. Now it sits as a Member
of the United Nations. In the entire world only two States
recognized that annexation. Nineteen years later, during
which period Jordan served as a base for almost continuous
terrorist murder attacks against Israel, the Government of
Israel appealed again to Jordan not to join in aggression
against it. On the morning of 5 June the Government of
Israel transmitted to the Jordanian Government a message
through the United Nations Chief of Staff, General Bull,
saying that Israel would not initiate any action against
Jordan even though by then the hostilities between Egypt
and Israel had already broken out, and appealing to Jordan
not to intervene and not to attack Israel. The Jordanian
answer came in a series of attacks at various points of the
Armistice Demarcation Line and in the bombardment of
West Jerusalem. Even after that the Government of Israel
tried three times during that day of 5 June to reach a
cease-fire with Jordan. The Jordanian Government rejected
all these efforts and intensified its attacks along the entire
front, concentrating particularly on Jerusalem.
148. The outcome is known. The Jordanian forces were
thrust out of the areas they had occupied in violation of the
United Nations Charter in the 1948 aggression. In the light
of these facts the charges of aggression levelled by Jordan
against Israel are historical, political and juridical nonsense.

of the Palestinians of the West Bank. For 19 years the
Jordanian Government could have shown its understanding
and sympathy for the Palestinian population of the West
Bank, Why did the Jordanian Government suppress them
politically? Why did it sentence them to economic stagnation? Why did it not help them to raise their standard of
living as Israel has done? Why did it not assist them in
developing their agriculture as Israel has in the past si.
years’? Why did it not encourage the establishment of
industry as Israel has done? If the Jordanian Government ir
sympathetic towards the Palestinian refugees, why did it
not provide them with full employment, with salaries equal
to those of non-refugees, with public services, as Israel has
done in less than a third of this time? Why did Jordan not
permit the founding of a university on the West Bank as
Israel has done? If Jordan really has at heart the freedom
and human rights of the Arab population of the West Bank.
why was there so much less freedom of thought and
expression and so much more political restriction than
there is today?
15 1. An understanding of the real situation on the West
Bank does not have to rely on Israeli sources. There arc
enough Arab reports which testify to it.
152. As for Jerusalem, it is still healing the wounds
inflicted on it by the Jordanian invaders. The latter left ml
stone unturned in the Jewish quarter of the walled city. All
houses, synagogues and institutions of learning were destroyed. Tombstones of the most ancient Jewish cemeter>-.
on the Mount of Olives, were removed and used for paving
roads and constructing latrines in Jordanian Army camps.
Access to the holy places of Judaism was barred for ihe
first time in two thousand years. Jordanian forces kept thl:
city under permanent threat of violence, opening fire time
and again on Jewish inhabitants and on tourists, killing anlf
maiming. Jordan, responsible for so much devastation itr
Jerusalem and desecration of its holy places, has no right
whatever to interfere in the life of the city, which is
flourishing and developing, the barbed wires and mincficld~
that bisected it gone, its inhabitants tranquil and secure, ill;
holy places protected under the administration of thctr
religious communities and free access to all of them erlsurclf
by the authorities.
153. Jordan’s presence on the West Bank was the result rrf
aggression and unilateral annexation. The only internatiwd
instrument sanctioning this presence was the Armistkc
Agreement with Israel, which established a teniporar>situation, with provisional military lines separating (11~
armed forces of the two parties. The definitive sitwuiar~
and the recognized State boundary between Israel ;gllj
Jordan can be determined only through negotiation and 3
peace agreement with Israel. Israel is prepared to enter intr!
free negotiations whenever the Government of Jor&m kb
ready for them. However, one thing is clear. The roil11 11%
peace does not lead through calumny and public polemics
in the United Nations. Let us, therefore, turn away fro):1
that and join together in constructing peace in the Middle
East.

149. So also are the allegations regarding the situation in
Israeli-administered territories. Jordan’s own record of
occupation of these areas is a grim one. The 19 years of
Jordanian rule was a period of suppression and exploitation, riots and strikes. Military repressive measures against
the local population, including the killing of demonstrators
and mass arrests were a daily occurrence. The West Bank
was deliberately kept in ;I state of economic neglect and
backwardness. Indeed it is instructive that the only way in
which Jordan ever expressed its purported concern for the
inhabitants of the West Bank has been in anti-Israeli
propaganda distortions. Why has the Jordanian Government’s interest in the life of these Arab inhabitants been
aroused only when Jordan was no longer in occupation of
the West Bank?

154. The PRESIDENT (translation jbom Russiarl): 1 call
on the representative of Jordan to speak in exercise or th:
right of reply.

150. For 19 years the Jordanian Government had the
opportunity to demonstrate regard for the rights and needs
I6

155, Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): I shall resist the urge to be
drawn into a polemical debate based, as far as one side is
concerned, on mythmaking-a
talent that the Israeli
representatives and their spokesmen everywhere have excelled in. In fact mythmaking has been associated with the
record of Israel in the Middle East. The chronicle of the
violent Israeli record in the Middle East is linked to it, The
myth of Zionism was the rationale for the uprooting and
dispossessing of the Palestinian people. The myth of
overwhelming Arab predominance and preponderance and
belligerent designs was the smokescreen for Israeli intransigence and militarism. Israel’s successive waves of
military expansion were covered by slogans of defensive
war and pre-emptive strike to frustrate Arab strangulation.
So the mythmaking and the distortion on the part of the
Israeli representativesare not new. However, the important
fact, which goes beyond all discussion and all disagreement
on the facts, is not a debate over the juridical, political
entities as much as the existence in that area of a certain
culture and a certain national entity which has been
usurped, uprooted and violated and an extension of which
is now under occupation by Israel. This has nothing to do
with 1922. It has nothing to do with what *legally
constituted Government existed and exercised jurisdiction
in this or that area.

of Jerusalem in 1948 owned 82 per cent of the whole city?
And even the reduction in ownership came as a result of
that artificial injection of an alien body throughout the
mandatory period.
158. However, I need not defend the unity of the people
of the two Banks of Jordan. It is no wonder that
Mr. Tekoah refers to this as occupation, That is a projection
of Israel’s own designs. When the people of East and West
Jordan decided in 1949, through a democratic and constitutional process, to join an equal and constitutional partnership, they were only expressing an objective human,
cultural and geographic reality; they were defending themselves.
1.59. With regard to Israel’s intentions towards Jordan and
the long years in which Israel chose to have a quiet and
friendly relationship with Jordan, I need mention only
several names, Qibya was not an attack by Jordan against
Israel: it was an attack by Israel against Jordan. So was
Nahalin; so was Samu’; and, of course, so was the massive
attack of 1967. Our record in the West Bank and in the
various parts of the Kingdom is something we take pride in.
Objective observers have repeatedly viewed with admiration
the fact that a small country with limited resources was
able, through sheer force of will, to create confidence and
bring about development and prosperity within its borders.
I shall resist the urge to dwell on this subject. It is enough
to mention that as one economic unit Jordan demonstrated
a remarkable rate of growth and modernization throughout
the 15 years prior to the Israeli occupation of 1967. In fact,
Jordan was undergoing one of the most far-reaching
economic and social advances among the countries of the
third world, This fact was readily recognized by Governments and international agencies, including the United
Nations, A United Nations publication of 1970 entitled ?%e
meusurements of development effort6 cited Jordan as the
first among 56 countries in terms of its rate of growth. In
all this, Jordan, with its limited size and resources, had to
rely on the resourcefulness of its own people. The proud
men of the West Bank, many of whom had lost land,
property and savings in the disaster of 1948, though not
technically refugees, were rebuilding with determination
and hope a new future and a new society.

156. Jordan is proud of its record. It has completed over
50 years of existence as a political entity in the Middle
East, but its roots and its people belong to an ancient
civilization that had its physical and human presence,
beyond the legal and the constitutional framework. It was
against that human cultural entity that Israel perpetrated its
first wave of aggression against the Arab world. There were
people-call them Palestinians, call them Arabs, call them,
more recently, Jordanians, call them whatever you wantwho existed and owned a certain land, Palestine. They
belonged to a certain cultural entity. It was against them
that a violent force, an alien force, embarked. It descended
upon them, violently expelled them and turned them into
exiles in 1947-1948. lt was in response to their appeals that
the Jordanian Government and other Arab Governments
then entered Palestine to defend them from annihilation
and from actual dispersement. The comparison between the
annihilation of the State of Israel and the annihilation or
expulsion or uprooting of the people in the area is the
difference between the myth and the reality. The living
body is there: the Palestinian Arabs. However, when Jordan
entered Jerusalem and the West Bank, it was an Arab
country, an Arab people, joining in the defence of a
neighbouring Arab people, at the invitation of and to
support that people. The natural union that emerged
between the West Bank of Jordan and East Jordan was
something that came about not by occupation of a foreign
country but by the constitutional democratic expression of
will, at the request of the people in that area and in defence
of their own national existence. It is enough to mention a
few Arab names in this connexion. These areas were taken
over by Israel not when Jordan attacked or when Jordan
entered the area in 1948 but before that: Qazaza, Haifa,
Salameh, Bir Adas, Kanna, Deir Yassin, Lejun, Tiberias,
Jerusalem, Jaffa and then West Jerusalem.

160. In the 1967 annual report of the World Bank, the
President of the World Bank commended the remarkable
performance of the Jordanian economy and indicated that
Jordan could maintain its growth and momentum and
could accordingly double its gross national product in less
than 10 years. The same was attested to by the International Monetary Fund and other objective organizations.
161. In Jerusalem Jordan continued the tradition of Arab
stewardship and Arab protection of the Holy Places which
had been in effect for centuries; it continued to maintain
serenity, peace and respect and freedom of access by all
faiths. It was not against Jews that there was any
discrimination, but it was Israel which, by taking a totally
negative attitude towards a solution, and even towards a

157. How can the Israeli representative claim any possession over Jerusalem, when physically the Arab population

6 United

17

Nations

publication,

Sales No. E.71.11.D.4.

to maintain that we want that to be done through this
Organization, through peaceful methods-not
with a sense
of vengeance but with a sense of grievance, and with a sense
of claiming justice. That is what we have asked this Council
do do; no fictions, no inventions, no mythical distortions
can change the issue which is before us.

partial acceptance of the appeal of the United Nations back
in 1949 [General Assembly resolution 303(W)]
to allow
freedom of access to the Holy Places by all sides, brought
about the reprisal of the Jordan Government against Israel.
It was Israel which rejected the appeal of the Conciliation
Commission in 1949 to allow freedom of access to all faiths
on all sides, when Jordan, Syria, Egypt and Lebanon
accepted it.
142. When the Israeli representative refers to the record or
the domestic affairs of Jordan, he is using an argument
which has long been rejected logically as an argument acl
hominem. The issue is not how a country rules itself; the
issue is not how successful it is in developing its economic
resources or in developing its political institutions perfectly.
The issue with which we are confronted is: Is any country
entitled to occupy another country and to dehumanize that
part which it occupies in the name of an imaginary, or
perhaps even a reaf, superior political institution or economic structure? That is precisely what the Israeli representative has been saying-.

166. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I cali
on the representative of Israel to speak in exercise of the
right of reply
167. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have taken note of the fact
that the representativeof Jordan explainsto us that hedoes
not wish to considerthe political, the juridical, eventhe
economic aspectsof the situation-all this after we have
heardaccusationslevelled againstIsrael in every singleone
of these realms: political juridical, economic. The reprcsentativeof Jordan wants to defend the feelingsof the Arab
inhabitantsof the WestBank. Now, let the Arab inhabitants
of the West Bank answerthemselvesin an Arab paper.The
Beirut daily AZ-Hawadesswrites on 23 April 1971 of the
Israeliadministrationas comparedwith the Jordanianrule.
I quote-and I have the paperherein Arabic:

163. But we are proud of our record in both social and
economic development and in the area of developing our
democratic political institutions, We cannot claim that we
have been perfect, nor can any country in the third world
claim any substantial measure of perfection; but we can
always claim determination and sincerity. The important
factor is that a country has no right to trample under foot
the national identity of another, to cross its border and
enslave its people. Whether that is done in the name of
superior economic potential or in the name of a “civilizing
mission”, this Council and the United Nations as a whole
have rejected that anachronistic and reactionary argument
in all the forums of the United Nations.

“Those arriving from the West Bank defined the
situation thus: We have not forgotten, nor will we ever
forget the type of rule which degradedour honour and
trampled the human feelingswithin us, a rule whichthey
built by their inquisition and the boots of their dcscrl
men.Wehave lived a long period under the humiliation OT
Arab nationalismand it pains us to say that we had to
wait for the Israeli conquestin order to becomeawareof
humanrelationshipswith citizens.”
168. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call
on the representativeof Jordan who wishesto exercisehis
right of reply,

164. What we are faced with is not a discussion of
comparative records or comparative political and economic
structures, The issue before us is that one country at the
moment occupies the territory and enslaves the people of
another nation. It has no right to do so, under any pretext,
under the slogan of any myth or in the context of any
mythological or fictional claims. The occupation must end.
The people in the occupied territories will have an
opportunity to express their choice; they can play their
role, which they have done and will continue to do, in the
construction of their political institutions and in deciding
their own future. This the Jordan Government has repeatedly said.

169. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): I shall be very brief. The
quotation that the representative of Israel has just 111;irshalledbefore us doesnot changethe main argument. hl!,
main point is not that economic, human and political
considerationsare not relevant-they are relevant-bul that
the overriding fact before this Council is that no cultural.
national entity can trample over another. That is the issue.
the main issue.
170. As for the quotation that the Israeli representative
hasjust brought before the Council, it is a quotation that
we have heard a number of times. One can always find
quotations in papers,either reflecting a genuine appraisal.
but subjective appraisal,of the source, or-and the Israeli
representativeshave been very good at this-reflecting the
opinion of a collaborator in the occupied territories, whidl
againis a normal situation in all national conflicts and 311
situations of occupation. But the overriding fact remains
the one I just mentioned before the Council. It is not just
the expressionof the feelingsof the Arabs. In addition to
the juridical and the political and the economic factors, the
important and overriding factor is that no country, under
any pretext, can trample over another culture, another
nationalidentity and another national State.

165. The only hindrance to this effective and most
constructive solution is the fact that Israel opposes it
because it cherishes and covets the territory of the people
who are now under its occupation, And if we defend the
right of those people, it is not only by the authority that
has been expressed through our constitutional structures
and through the freedom of expression of our people on
the West Bank, but also because, as a Member of the United
Nations, we cannot tolerate, nor can any other Member, the
usurpation of the lands of others, the encroachment on the
borders of others, or the enslavement of people belonging
to another State or nation. This is the issue before this
Council; and in asking it to bring about a solution of this
problem and an end to the occupation, we have continued

The meetingroseat 2.15 p.m.
18

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

2.00

(or equivalent
in other

currencies)

73-82001-June

1978-2,200
