United Nations

A/RES/63/183

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/430/Add.2)]

63/183. Missing persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Guided also by the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 1 and the Additional Protocols
thereto, of 1977, 2 as well as international standards of human rights, in particular
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 4 the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993, 7
0F

1F

2F

3F

0H

4F

5F

6F

Acknowledging the adoption of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 8 and looking forward to its entry into
force,
7F

Recalling all previous relevant resolutions on missing persons adopted by the
General Assembly, as well as the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council,
Noting with deep concern that armed conflicts are continuing in various parts
of the world, often resulting in serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8
Resolution 61/177, annex.
2

08-48177

A/RES/63/183

Noting that the issue of persons reported missing in connection with
international or non-international armed conflicts, in particular those who are
victims of serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, continues to have a negative impact on efforts to put an end to those conflicts
and causes suffering to the families of missing persons, and stressing in this regard
the need to address the issue from a humanitarian perspective, among others,
Considering that the problem of missing persons may raise questions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as appropriate,
Being cognizant that States that are parties to an armed conflict have a
responsibility for countering the phenomenon of missing persons and determining
the fate of missing persons and for recognizing their accountability as regards
implementing the relevant mechanisms, policies and laws,
Bearing in mind the effective search for and identification of missing persons
through traditional forensic methods, and recognizing that great technological
progress has been achieved in the field of DNA forensic sciences, which could
significantly assist efforts to identify missing persons,
Recalling the Agenda for Humanitarian Action, in particular its general
objective 1, to “respect and restore the dignity of persons missing as a result of
armed conflicts or other situations of armed violence and of their families”, adopted
at the Twenty-eighth International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent,
held in Geneva from 2 to 6 December 2003, and resolution 3 entitled “Reaffirmation
and implementation of international humanitarian law: preserving human life and
dignity in armed conflict”, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 November 2007,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General of
18 August 2008 on missing persons, prepared pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 61/155 of 19 December 2006, 9
8F

Taking note with appreciation also of the ongoing international and regional
efforts to address the question of missing persons and of the initiatives undertaken
by international and regional organizations in this field,
Urges States strictly to observe and respect and ensure respect for the
1.
rules of international humanitarian law, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19491 and, where applicable, in the Additional Protocols thereto, of
1977;2
1H

2H

2.
Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing in connection with
armed conflict and account for persons reported missing as a result of such a
situation;
Reaffirms the right of families to know the fate of their relatives reported
3.
missing in connection with armed conflicts;
Also reaffirms that each party to an armed conflict, as soon as
4.
circumstances permit and, at the latest, from the end of active hostilities, shall
search for the persons who have been reported missing by an adverse party;

_______________
9

2

A/63/299.

A/RES/63/183

5.
Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
necessary measures, in a timely manner, to determine the identity and fate of
persons reported missing in connection with the armed conflict and, to the greatest
possible extent, to provide their family members, through appropriate channels, with
all relevant information they have on their fate;
Recognizes, in this regard, the need for the collection, protection and
6.
management of data on missing persons according to international and national
legal norms and standards, and urges States to cooperate with each other and with
other concerned actors working in this area, inter alia, by providing all relevant and
appropriate information related to missing persons;
Requests States to pay the utmost attention to cases of children reported
7.
missing in connection with armed conflicts and to take appropriate measures to
search for and identify those children and to reunite them with their families;
Invites States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate fully with
8.
the International Committee of the Red Cross in establishing the fate of missing
persons and to adopt a comprehensive approach to this issue, including all such
legal and practical measures and coordination mechanisms as may be necessary,
based on humanitarian considerations only;
Urges States and encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental
9.
organizations to take all necessary measures at the national, regional and
international levels to address the problem of persons reported missing in
connection with armed conflicts and to provide appropriate assistance as requested
by the concerned States, and welcomes in this regard the establishment and efforts
of commissions and working groups on missing persons;
10. Calls upon States, without prejudice to their efforts to determine the fate
of persons missing in connection with armed conflicts, to take appropriate steps
with regard to the legal situation of the missing persons and the need of their family
members, in fields such as social welfare, financial matters, family law and property
rights;
11. Stresses the need for addressing the issue of missing persons as a part of
peacebuilding processes, with reference to all justice and rule of law mechanisms,
on the basis of transparency, accountability and public involvement and
participation;
12. Welcomes the panel discussion on the question of missing persons held at
the ninth session of the Human Rights Council, and takes note of the request of the
Council to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to prepare a
summary of the panel’s deliberations; 10
9F

13. Takes note of the request of the Human Rights Council to its Advisory
Committee to prepare a study on the best practices in the matter of missing persons
and to submit that study to the Council at its twelfth session;10
3H

14. Invites relevant human rights mechanisms and procedures, as
appropriate, to address the problem of persons reported missing in connection with
armed conflicts in their forthcoming reports to the General Assembly;

_______________
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1),
chap. II, decision 9/101.

3

A/RES/63/183

15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including relevant recommendations, to
the Human Rights Council at its relevant session and to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian
organizations;
17.

Decides to consider the question at its sixty-fifth session.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

4
