UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/12
14 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3881st meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 May 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council strongly deplores the three underground nuclear
tests that India conducted on 11 May 1998, and the two further tests
conducted on 13 May 1998 despite overwhelming international concern and
protests. The Council strongly urges India to refrain from any further
tests. It is of the view that such testing is contrary to the de facto
moratorium on the testing of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices, and to global efforts towards nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament. The Council also expresses its concern at the effects
of this development on peace and stability in the region.
"The Security Council affirms the crucial importance of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty (CTBT). The Council appeals to India, and all other States
which have not yet done so, to become parties to the NPT, and to the CTBT
without delay and without conditions. The Council also encourages India to
participate, in a positive spirit, in the proposed negotiations with other
States for a fissile material cut-off treaty in Geneva with a view to
reaching early agreement.
"With a view to preventing an escalation in the arms race, in
particular with regard to nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, and
to preserving peace in the region, the Security Council urges States to
exercise maximum restraint. The Council underlines that the sources of
tension in South Asia should only be resolved through dialogue and not by
military build-up.
"The Security Council reiterates the statement by its President on
31 January 1992 (S/23500) which stated, inter alia, that the proliferation
of all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to international
peace and security."
----98-13415 (E)

140598
