S/PV.8318

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8318th meeting

Thursday, 26 July 2018, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/528)
Letter dated 20 May 2018 from the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/531)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/655)
Letter dated 18 July 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/727)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-23994 (E)
*1823994*

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 1 June 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/528)
Letter dated 20 May 2018 from the Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/531)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/655)
Letter dated 18 July 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/727)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and Ms. Justine Masika
Bihamba, Synergy of Women for Victims of Sexual
Violence.
Ms. Zerrougui is joining via video-teleconference
from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2018/528, which contains
a letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/2018/531, which contains a letter dated 20 May 2018
from the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2018/655, which contains the report of the
2/23

26/07/2018

Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and S/2018/727, which contains a letter dated
18 July 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Ms. Zerrougui; Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi,
Permanent Representative of Kuwait, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Ms. Bihamba.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I should like to
thank the Council for affording me the opportunity to
brief it on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Less than five months before the elections, to be held
on 23 December, preparations reached a key turning
point yesterday with the opening of registration centres
for presidential and legislative election candidacies.
The elections continue to give rise to high expectations,
both among the Congolese people and the international
community, as they are of key significance to shoring
up stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and throughout the region.
Although significant progress has been achieved in
meeting the critical benchmarks set out in the timetable,
the electoral process remains a source of suspicion and
mistrust between the majority and the opposition and
between the opposition and the Independent National
Electoral Commission. The opposition’s grievances
relate, inter alia, to voting machines, the electoral
registry and the unresolved issue of the replacement
of the representative of the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès Social (UDPS) within the Independent
National Electoral Commission.
These grievances were recently reiterated by a
group of five political opposition parties and platforms,
including UDPS, Ensemble pour le changement, Union
pour la nation congolaise, Mouvement de libération du
Congo (MLC) and Dynamique de l’opposition, through
a joint statement published on July 23 in Kinshasa.
The statement also demands the return of high-profile
personalities and the release of political prisoners
within the framework of implementing the de-escalation
measures set out in the 31 December 2016 agreement.
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

On July 24, Jean-Pierre Bemba, President of the
MLC and the party’s nominee for the presidential
elections, held his first press conference in Brussels
to confirm his return to Kinshasa on 1 August to
declare his candidacy. The same day, Moïse Katumbi
also announced his upcoming return without however
specifying a date. In the meantime, the newly
established political platform — Front commun
pour le Congo — for which President Kabila was
designated the moral authority, has yet to nominate a
presidential candidate.
(spoke in English)
I am, however, encouraged to note that while
encountering the disagreements that I just mentioned
against the backdrop of immense logistical and
financial challenges, all major political parties were
able to successfully register candidates for provincial
legislative elections. In my travels last week to Kolwezi,
Lubumbashi and Kalemie, I heard first-hand the lengths
to which political parties have gone to ensure their
participation in upcoming elections. In some remote
areas, candidates travelled nearly 1,500 kilometres
by motorcycle to declare their candidature. I was also
glad to see the engagement between the Independent
National Electoral Commission and political parties,
which ultimately resulted in several deadline extensions
for provincial legislative candidate registration,
thereby contributing to ensuring that the process is
more inclusive and legitimate. Following a slow start,
more than 18,000 candidacies were ultimately enrolled
to compete for 715 seats. Although the final tally is
yet to be published, initial indications suggest that
women made up less than 12 per cent of all registered
candidates. I continue to use my good offices to urge
political parties to ensure greater female representation
and participation in the upcoming elections.
Although I am pleased to note such a level of political
engagement on the part of all parties, I remain concerned
by the poor implementation of confidence-building
measures. While the Minister of Justice announced the
release of 4,109 prisoners, only a few of them were part
of the confidence-building measures, and the release of
high-profile personalities was completely ruled out. As
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
continue to impact negatively on democratic space,
peaceful demonstrations are being suppressed. Civil
society actors and political opponents continue to be
arbitrarily arrested, and media workers threatened.
Conditions leading to a level playing field are therefore

S/PV. 8318

not yet in place, and without progress on those fronts,
the credibility and inclusivity of upcoming elections
could be at risk.
On the logistical side, Council members will recall
the Government’s stated intent — including in the
President’s state of the nation address — to manage
and finance elections without external support. The
logistical support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for elections, mandated by the
Security Council, was initially planned to begin today.
However, thus far, no request has been received from the
Independent National Electoral Commission. Although
we remain ready to provide support as requested, I
must note that, in the interest of responsibly managing
United Nations resources, we will soon require more
clarity from the Council in that regard, as the first
aircraft for MONUSCO’s logistical support was denied
landing clearance upon an attempted arrival yesterday.
On a positive note, we were pleased to hear the
Minister of Health announce the official end of the
Ebola virus disease outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this past Tuesday. In the face of
that challenge, MONUSCO, together with other United
Nations agencies, contributed to the Government’s
response by offering all available means to help contain
the disease and prevent its spread to major urban
centres. I commend the leadership demonstrated by
the Government in confronting that challenge. Such a
laudable achievement demonstrated what is possible
through effective cooperation among the authorities,
the United Nations and external partners.
While the country is focused on the important
upcoming elections, the security environment
continues to be volatile and is deteriorating in some
parts of the country. We are seeing an intensification of
inter-community violence and activities of local armed
group coalitions that sometimes espouse a politically
driven narrative. I remain particularly concerned about
the Kasais, where the activities of several dissident
militia factions continue; North Kivu where the
Allied Democratic Forces is increasingly active; and
South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika provinces. In
all those areas, the civilian population — especially
women and children — continue to pay the highest
price for conflict. They are enduring grave human
rights violations, displacement, challenges to their
livelihoods and the disruptions to their education. I
myself just returned from Tanganyika province a few

18-239943/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

days ago, and I witnessed the unbearable conditions
in which internally displaced persons are living and
heard about the suffering and continuing tensions
among communities.
In Ituri province, I am glad to report, tensions in
Djugu have recently abated. We undertook immense
efforts in support of local authorities, including
intensive dialogue at the local level to reconcile
communities, good-offices engagement with local and
national authorities to ease tensions, strong support
for judicial authorities to fight impunity, and the
deployment of three standing combat deployments
to the highest-risk areas. Those deployments are
a realization of our protection-through-projection
approach, thereby showing that results are possible
where logistical capability and the right troop mindset
exists. In Ituri, as elsewhere in the country, although
MONUSCO’s efforts can help protect civilians and
mitigate the risk of further deterioration, root causes
need to be addressed by Congolese authorities.
In that security context, I note with concern that
MONUSCO personnel are increasingly targeted. Our
troops in the Beni area have been attacked several
times, as the Council is aware. We have also recently
experienced a number of staff abductions, the most
recent of which was only this past week in Uvira. In
my visits to the eastern part of the country last week, I
listened to members of our staff voice their increasing
concerns about the security situation and their safety
resulting from their work with the United Nations.
While I am working to enhance our staff’s safety and
security, such events are a constant reminder of the
risks that staff and troops face every day in support
of MONUSCO’s mandate. In this volatile context, the
stakes for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the region’s future stability, are high. In the coming
months, MONUSCO will operate in an increasingly
tense environment, while faced with high expectations.
However, as Council members are aware, we will
navigate through that period with fewer resources.
The General Assembly recently approved a budget
reduced by $38.8 million compared to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal — a significant reduction that
further compounds the impact on our operational ability
following last year’s budget cuts. I do not mention that
to make a plea for more resources; we all know the new
financial reality facing all peacekeeping missions. I
highlight it because it is important that we collectively
understand that while MONUSCO’s resources continue
4/23

26/07/2018

to shrink, its mandate remains the same and expectations
only continue to grow. We will therefore be limited
in our ability to respond to all emerging protection
risks, particularly in densely populated urban areas or
in areas where we have no presence. As such, I must
emphasize the importance of our collective work, as
the United Nations and the international community, in
preventing electoral violence and ensuring the process
remains on track.
(spoke in French)
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
crossroads. That is why I call on all stakeholders to
seize this historic opportunity to enable the holding
of inclusive, transparent and credible elections on
23 December in order to offer a more stable future to
the country and its people.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing. I also convey to her, on behalf of every member
of the Security Council, our strong support for the work
she does and for the efforts of the men and women in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sometimes
under very difficult circumstances.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Alotaibi.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
a statement in my capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
my briefing this morning, it is my intention to provide
an overview of the work of the Committee since I
assumed the role of Chair in January. I also intend to set
out a number of possible activities that the Committee
may undertake over the course of the remainder of 2018.
Since assuming the role of Chair in January 2018, I
have sought to continue the work of the Committee and
to raise awareness of the situation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On 1 February, in continuation
of its work, the Committee approved the addition to
its sanctions list of the names of four individuals who
continue to pose a threat to the peace and security of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Over the course of the first six months of 2018,
I convened various meetings of the Committee.
The speakers at those meetings included Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo (MONUSCO); a representative of the Mission’s
Joint Mission Analysis Centre on MONUSCO’s arms
embargo monitoring mandate; a representative of the
United Nations Mine Action Service on weapons and
ammunition management in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; a representative of the Permanent
Mission of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
the United Nations on combating sexual violence
and child recruitment in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Committee also met with the members of the Group
of Experts, who presented an overview of the findings
and recommendations contained in the Group’s final
report (S/2018/531).
My delegation has also hosted, at the Permanent
Mission of Kuwait, four gatherings of Committee
members, including three informal informals on issues
related to the work of the Committee. In February and
April, for example, my delegation hosted informal
informals with the Senior Official of the United
Nations team, Mr. Robert Petit, in the course of his
periodic visits to New York. The Committee continues
to support Mr. Petit and his team of technical experts
as they provide support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its investigations
into the March 2017 murders of two late members of the
Group of Experts, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp.
Looking forward, the coming months will be a
critical period for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, the Committee will remain
vigilant and ensure that its work and that of the Group
of Experts contributes to peace and stability in the
country and the region. Towards that end, I intend to
continue collaboration with relevant interlocutors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as those in
the Great Lakes region with a view to obtaining updated
information on various aspects of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that are relevant
to the Committee’s mandate and promoting further
synergy in our work.
In terms of other activities that the Committee
is considering, I have announced the convening of
a briefing for all Member States in connection with
the final report of the Group of Experts on Friday,
27 July. Over the course of the second half of the
year, the Committee will likely convene a meeting

S/PV. 8318

to hear the Group of Experts, whose mandate was
extended pursuant to resolution 2424 (2018), present its
programme of work. I would also like to explore the
possibility of holding meetings on the arms embargo
along the lines of the workshop format that the Group
of Experts recommended in its final report. As part of
its continued consideration of natural resources issues,
the Committee could be updated on efforts by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Member States
to address issues of illegal exploitation and smuggling
of natural resources by armed groups, and on actions
taken by Member States to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the countries in the Great
Lakes region to develop a responsible minerals trade.
The President: I thank Ambassador Alotaibi for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bihamba.
Ms. Bihamba (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Swedish delegation, which invited me here to
speak on behalf of Congolese women, who are too often
the victims of sexual violence and excluded from public
affairs management and peace negotiations.
I am a woman human rights defender and the
President of the Board of Directors of the Synergy of
Women for Victims of Sexual Violence, a platform of
35 organizations working to improve, promote, defend,
respect and protect the rights of women, especially
women victims of sexual violence. We are also involved
in governance, advocacy, human rights protection and
sustainable peacebuilding in North Kivu in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Today I would like to address three themes: the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
the increase in sexual violence against women and girls;
and the tense political climate following the failure to
hold elections within the constitutional deadlines.
The decision to close some of MONUSCO’s
bases once again exposes the civilian population in
sensitive areas. Despite rapid deployment, help often
arrives too late, when the damage is already done. Due
to diminished financial resources, the Joint Human
Rights Office is no longer present on the ground, and
as a result is no longer able to effectively document
cases of serious human rights violations, which are
now reported by telephone. The population also fears

18-239945/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

disorder and spillover on election day and hopes that
MONUSCO will train Congolese police officers with a
view to maintaining order and securing polling stations.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
situation of women, particularly victims of sexual
violence, is deteriorating day by day due to the
proliferation of armed groups. These groups are at
the root of recurring wars leading to mass rape and
displacement, mostly of women and their children.
Cases of rape and violence have increased this year by
more than 60 per cent in North Kivu province.
The political climate in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is tense due to the failure to hold
elections within the constitutional deadlines. Various
demonstrations have been repressed by the security
forces, resulting in civilian deaths, much material
damage — especially to Catholic convents and
churches — and the arbitrary arrests of leaders of the
citizen movement, opposition politicians and human
rights defenders. With five months to go before the
planned elections, an improvement in the political
atmosphere is far from being a reality for the activists
still in prison.
In addition to this political instability and the brutal
repression of dissenting voices, several legal reform
projects initiated by the Congolese Government tend to
further reduce freedom of expression and the Congolese
civic space. Among them, one is aimed at modifying
the operating regime of national and international
non-governmental organizations and another is aimed
at combating terrorism. If these reforms are adopted in
their current terms, the key principles of the rule of law
will be undermined.
The electoral law promulgated on 24 December 2017
constitutes a serious obstacle to the rights and freedoms
of Congolese. Among other constraints, it requires
candidates to reach a threshold of representativeness of
at least 1 per cent of votes at the national level. As a
result, in some electoral districts, no candidacy papers
for provincial elections had been filed by the deadline.
Moreover, this law particularly discriminates against
women in electoral races by not taking into account their
socioeconomic situation. The law requires candidates
to pay a $1,000 deposit, which is an astronomical
amount for women and young people, most of whom
live on less than $1 a day. The Congolese Women’s
Forum on Resolution 1325, representing women from
all provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
6/23

26/07/2018

have urged the authorities of the Republic to abandon
this provision.
The use of the voting machine proposed by the
Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission has also been challenged by political
actors and the majority of the population for fear of
electoral fraud. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
currently has a population in which over 65 per cent of
the people are illiterate, most of them women and young
people, who will have enormous difficulty in using the
machine, which has been programmed in French.
Finally, in my capacity as a woman human rights
defender and Chair of the Board of Directors of
Synergy of Women for Victims of Sexual Violence,
and on behalf of all women victims of abuse, we
recommend the following to the Security Council and
to States Members of the United Nations: to pressure
the Congolese Government to implement a policy
that genuinely promotes women’s participation in
decision-making bodies and women’s candidacies for
appointments; to call on the Government to respect
freedom of expression, the right to demonstrate and the
civic space of the Congolese population; to demand that
the Government respect the New Year’s Eve agreement
and the Constitution, that is, to respect the rule of law;
to have MONUSCO restore bases in sensitive areas to
ensure the effective protection of civilians and support
the ongoing electoral process; to direct the Human
Rights Office to effectively document human rights
violations by going into the field; and to materially
support civil society organizations for the promotion
and defence of women’s rights so that they can provide
leadership training for women leaders with a view to
their gaining access to decision-making positions.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for honouring
me, as a woman human rights defender, with this
opportunity to make the voices of the voiceless heard.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Masika Bihamba for her briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her very enlightening
briefing and, more broadly, for her exemplary
commitment and action as well as that of her teams. I
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

also thank Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba, Coordinator
of Synergy of Women for Victims of Sexual Violence,
for her important and inspiring testimony. Finally, I
thank Ambassador Alotaibi, Permanent Representative
of Kuwait, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this crucial time for the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, our shared priority is clear.
The aim is to hold the elections on the scheduled
date in December, and to ensure that they are held
in good conditions. Indeed, only full respect for the
Constitution and democratic transition can guarantee
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the entire region. This is a challenge but also an historic
opportunity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
From there, our road map is to encourage the
authorities to take all steps in this direction and to call
on all stakeholders to respect the spirit of consensus that
prevailed when the political agreement of 31 December
2016 was signed. In this context, maintaining the
unity of international partners will be crucial to the
success of the process. Beyond the unity shown by the
Security Council, we must continue to work closely
with the African Union and the countries of the region,
which play an essential role. In this regard, I welcome
the adoption of the 19 July joint communiqué by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the Security Council, which perfectly illustrates
the convergence of views between the two Councils
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is an
essential point.

S/PV. 8318

the willingness of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to pay for the organization of the elections in
its entirety. However, I would like to reiterate what
Ms. Zerrougui has just said, that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is at the disposal
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
logistical support. The necessary resources have
been made available by the General Assembly. It
is essential that the relevant authorities transmit to
MONUSCO all necessary information to enable the
Mission to provide such support in a timely manner, as
appropriate. It is imperative that the timing and proper
conduct of the elections not be called into question for
logistical reasons.
With regard to voting machines, we call on the
Independent National Electoral Commission to be
transparent so that all citizens have access to the
machines and can become familiar with how they work.
There are a number of technical questions, which must
be answered in order to ensure everyone’s confidence
in the technical preparations for the elections.
The second element required for success is the
importance of ensuring the credibility of the political
process leading up to the elections. Above and beyond
respect for the various stages of the electoral calendar,
transparency in the process, along with the opening up
of the political and democratic space, are vital to the
holding of credible and peaceful elections. The political
meetings that took place without incident in Kinshasa
in recent weeks is a positive sign. We must continue
along that path.

In this regard, I would particularly like to stress two
elements that are essential to the success of the process
under way. The first element is the need to restore
Congolese confidence in the technical preparations for
the elections. Most of the deadlines have been met so
far, which is a positive point. The audit of the electoral
register by the International Organization of la
Francophonie showed that the register could be improved
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
undertook to make the necessary corrections. This is a
good thing, and we expect concrete action to be taken
quickly to that end.

We call in particular upon the Congolese
Government to lift the ban on demonstrations and take
tangible action to implement the 31 December 2016
agreement through de-escalation measures, the release
of political prisoners or prisoners of conscience, and
the end of politically motivated legal proceedings.
All candidates should be able to compete freely and
on equal footing, and voters should be able to make
their choice with full awareness and without being
coerced. In that regard, respect for human rights, and
in particular the commitments made by the authorities
to the Human Rights Council in Geneva, is obviously a
crucial element.

However, some uncertainties remain, particularly
regarding voting machines and election logistics.
With respect to logistics, we have taken note of

I will end my remarks with a word on the security
and humanitarian situation, which remains of concern.
New pockets of tension have emerged in the east of

18-239947/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the country, which have resulted in several civilian
casualties. Investigations of the situation in the Kasai,
conducted by the Group of Experts commissioned by
the Human Rights Council, have revealed that war
crimes and crimes against humanity may have been
committed in that region. MONUSCO took swift action
to respond to tensions, which proves the relevance
of its new operations concept of protection through
projection. I commend the Mission on its important
work and encourage it to continue its transformation in
order to achieve optimal efficiency.
The Security Council has sent a clear message to
the perpetrators of abuses by imposing new sanctions
against individuals responsible for committing serious
human rights violations. Impunity will not be tolerated.
France encourages the Congolese authorities to conduct
a prompt investigation into abuses reported by the
Human Rights Council so that those responsible can be
brought to justice.
France, together with its partners in the Security
Council, the African Union and the region, will remain
resolute and committed to supporting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so as to ensure that the elections
are conducted in the right conditions and that they
usher in a new era of stability and development for the
country and its people.
Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to
thank the representative of Kuwait, as Chair of the
Committee established, pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui for their briefings. We appreciate
their efforts to keep the Security Council informed of
progress towards elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

26/07/2018

not eligible under Congolese law to seek a third term.
The United States regrets the fact that President Kabila
did not use his 19 July address to Parliament to resolve
the uncertainty with regard to his intentions.
Turning now to elections preparations, 23 December
is rapidly approaching. The Council authorized the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
provide logistical support to the elections. We expect
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take advantage of the support that MONUSCO
has offered. It is absolutely critical that the Independent
National Electoral Commission make detailed requests
for logistical support from MONUSCO in a timely
fashion. We have not yet seen evidence of how the
Electoral Commission would organize elections without
MONUSCO’s assistance. The Mission cannot afford to
wait until the last moment to put a plan into action.
In addition, the Commission must take steps to
ensure that voters can cast their ballots via a mechanism
that is tested and trusted and guarantees the secrecy of
the vote, namely, paper ballots. Deploying more than
100,000 unfamiliar, untested and possibly unworkable
electronic voting machines for the first time during
a critical national election poses an enormous and
unnecessary risk. What do Congolese authorities plan
to do if those untested voting machines malfunction
on election day and jeopardize the credibility of the
results? Is there a back-up plan? If so, what is it?

We would especially like to thank Ms. Masika
Bihamba for her presence in the Council Chamber
today. We were all moved by her testimony regarding
the threats against women in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and inspired by her courage in seeking
protection, care and justice for the survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence. We thank her for
her leadership.

We must also not lose sight of the violence we have
witnessed recently in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The United States commends MONUSCO’s
quick response to clashes in Bijombo this month but
remains deeply concerned about reports of human rights
abuses, with tens of thousands of people fleeing the
violence. Ultimately, violence in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in other parts of the country
will not abate without genuine, credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections and without a commitment to holding
those responsible for such violence to account. We have
not forgotten the murders of United Nations experts
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, and we will not stop
pressing for those responsible to be held accountable.

Yesterday was an important day in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the opening of the
candidate registration period. As we have repeatedly
stated, we expect President Kabila to abide by the
Constitution and the December 2016 agreement. He is

The international community is united in those
concerns, as evidenced by last week’s joint communiqué
with the African Union Peace and Security Council. We
urge other members of the Security Council to push for
well-planned elections, including through members’

8/23

18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

bilateral conversations, and to consider the possibility
of targeted sanctions against those who threaten peace
and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Congolese people have been waiting nearly two
years for an opportunity to cast their votes and choose
new leaders, as outlined in their Constitution. President
Kabila has committed repeatedly to respecting the
Constitution and to implementing the December 2016
agreement. We are a mere five months away from
election day. The time for posturing is over.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui for her comprehensive briefing and
her dedicated efforts on the ground. We also thank
Ambassador Mansour for his briefing on the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Moreover, we thank Ms. Justine Masika
Bihamba for sharing her perspective.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
critical juncture, and it is important that the Council
have the opportunity to follow up developments with
regard to preparations for the December elections.
We welcome the progress made in preparing for the
elections with the support of subregional, regional and
international partners. The Government and all other
national stakeholders must continue their efforts to
create conditions that are conducive to holding credible
and peaceful elections, in line with the 31 December
2016 agreement.
We note that the independent auditing report issued
by the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF) on the voter register confirmed that it was
“inclusive, exhaustive and updated, but needed some
improvement. We hope that that will help reinforce
confidence-building measures. It is also encouraging
that the presidential majority welcomed the conclusion
of the OIF report. We hope the publishing of the voters’
list by the Independent National Electoral Commission
will help to overcome the doubts surrounding
voter participation.
The coming months will be of critical importance
for final preparations ahead of the 2018 elections. It is
absolutely necessary that all Congolese parties make
the necessary compromises with a view to preserving
continuous dialogue and the spirit of consensus as the
only way to conduct peaceful elections. In that regard,
it was necessary that the Council and the African Union

S/PV. 8318

Peace and Security Council send a clear and unified
message to the Congolese political actors last week
through the joint communiqué adopted at the end of
their annual consultation. We believethat the elements
of the communiqué provide a useful framework on
how we should continue to handle the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the months
leading up to elections in December.
Enhancing the coordination of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the Southern Africa
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners is necessary to ensure more coherent and
effective support to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially at this critical juncture. In that
context, although the planned visit by the SecretaryGeneral and the AU Commission Chairperson to
Kinshasa was delayed, we very much hope that it will
happen next month. The idea of having the Security
Council visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is now being proposed to happen in October, is
also very welcome. The participation of the AU Peace
and Security Council in that visit, in line with the
agreement reached last week, will send the right signals,
and we hope that all the necessary arrangements will be
made to make this happen.
We appreciate the considerable technical and
logistical support provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the preparation
of the elections in conformity with the electoral
calendar. The role of MONUSCO in support of the
electoral process continues to be very important, and we
fully support all the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the United
Nations team on the ground.
The deployment of the additional rapidly deployable
battalions, to be based in the troubled Kasai and
Tanganyika regions, will be important for strengthening
efforts aimed at containing violence in rural hotspots,
which may affect the process of elections. In that spirit,
we appreciate that the Secretary-General proposed the
option of deploying individual police officers, while
remaining within the authorized police strength of
MONUSCO, which can contribute to the early warning
efforts, prevention, mitigation and reduction of
potential tensions during the conduct of elections. Such
initiative will be effective if implemented together with
the national police and local communities.

18-239949/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, we would like to welcome the official
announcement of the end of the Ebola outbreak in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the World Health Organization guidelines, and
we echo the statement issued by the African Union
today commending the Congolese Government for its
swift and effective response allowing a coordinated
and efficient intervention of all concerned partners to
swiftly contain the outbreak.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
thanks Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for the
important briefing she has just delivered. We are also
grateful for the presence of Justine Masika Bihamba,
the Congolese civil society representative, and for her
statement. Lastly, we thank Ambassador Alotaibi for
his briefing.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
a decisive phase for its immediate future. Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress that has been made in
the political and technical process for the holding of
elections in December. This reflects the commitment
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to complying with the electoral calendar
established on 5 November 2017 and its commitments
with regard to the 31 December 2016 agreement.
The measures taken demonstrate the Government’s
determination to effectively organize inclusive,
fair and transparent elections on 23 December.
We believe that only through constructive
inter-Congolese dialogue will the formation of a
Government of national unity lead the country to
overcome the tensions we have seen and facilitate the
progress of the electoral process, strengthen confidence
in and the mechanisms for oversight and implementation
for a transparent and inclusive process that allows voter
participation under the principle of universal suffrage
and the best possible conditions.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore
welcomes the observations made in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/655) on the political and
technical processes under way for the holding of
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which show considerable progress with regard to
technical and legislative preparations for the holding
of elections.
Our Government commends all the measures
taken with regard to the organization of the elections,
10/23

26/07/2018

including the submission of candidates from different
political parties and the establishment and extension
of deadlines, which reflects the will and commitment
of the Government and political actors to carry out the
electoral process. We also believe that we must not lose
sight of or neglect the different possible post-electoral
scenarios, and we must adopt the necessary preventive
measures in the event of any eventuality.
With regard to technical aspects, it is important that
the Independent National Electoral Commission be able
to function normally and that any technical issue that
gives rise to a discrepancy can be resolved satisfactorily.
In that regard, we are referring specifically to the use
of the voting machines. We welcome the Government’s
efforts to fully fund the electoral process and encourage
it to continue to work and regularly strengthen its
cooperation with the Commission so that the funding
can be carried out and can effectively contribute to
satisfactory elections. We would also like to underscore
the support that can be provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We recognize the States members of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region,
the African Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the Southern Africa Development
Community, as well as neighbouring States, in particular
Angola, South Africa and the Congo, as facilitators of
the political dialogue in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and throughout the region. We also call for
their cooperation in investigating and combating the
criminal networks and armed groups involved in the
illegal exploitation of the country’s resources. Pressure,
monitoring and punishments must be brought to bear
on those criminal groups to put an end to their crimes.
Otherwise, the Security Council will still be dealing
with problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for many years to come, even after the transparent
elections of next December.
Allow me to commend MONUSCO for the work
it has carried out in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for many years and not always in the best of
circumstances. We urge all parties involved in this
process, including the Government and other political
actors, to stay the course of inclusive internal dialogue
and refrain from any violent action that could disrupt
the process.
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, we call on the international community
to continue to resolutely support the Government,
MONUSCO, the Independent National Electoral
Commission and all other parties involved in this
process to promote confidence-building measures to
guarantee a favourable environment for the holding of
peaceful elections and to fully comply with the road
map until power has been peacefully transferred in an
environment of peace and national harmony. A happy
conclusion to the political transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will have positive repercussions
for stability throughout the region.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for its efforts to eradicate the Ebola outbreak and all
actors who have contributed thereto. We also align
ourselves with the communiqué on this issue that was
issued by the African Union.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Zerrougui for her very
clear briefing. I would also like to thank the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for all
the important work it does in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I further thank the Ambassador of Kuwait
for her briefing. Sanctions remain an important tool
that the Council has at its disposal to address threats
to international peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I would particularly like to thank Ms. Bihamba
for her really clear and incisive briefing to the Council
and in particular for the very brave work that her
organization does on the ground to support and advocate
for women. I thought she made some really interesting
and clear recommendations at the end of her speech,
and I would like to try to respond to each of those five
recommendations in what I say today.
First, she spoke about the need for the Council to ask
the Government to respect human rights. We strongly
agree with her and we share the concerns that she has
expressed and that Special Representative Zerrougui
has expressed about human rights violations and abuses
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In particular with regard to the increase in sexual
exploitation and abuse, we call for all those allegations
to be swiftly investigated and for those responsible for
them to be brought swiftly to justice.

S/PV. 8318

The Secretary-General also made a recommendation
about the need for all parties to respect the 31 December
2016 political agreement and the rule of law. Again,
we strongly agree with that. We welcome the limited
progress so far and the steps taken by the Government
towards organizing the elections, especially when
it comes to voter registration. At the same time, we
continue to be very concerned over the lack of progress
in the implementation of the confidence-building
measures in the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
We call on all parties to remain committed to the
agreement, including by respecting fundamental rights
and the electoral timeline, not just with words but also
with actions.
In two of the recommendations, the SecretaryGeneral calls on us, as the Council, to do more to
promote women’s participation in politics and to
materially support the organizations that do so. Again,
we very much agree with those. As the Council, we all
made clear when we adopted resolution 1325 (2000)
that women needed to be encouraged to meaningfully
participate in all stages of the peace process, and that
youth also needed to be engaged. We are therefore very
concerned to hear of the increase in sexual violence.
I am concerned by the points raised about the impact
of the electoral law on women’s participation and also
by the point made by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui about the shortage of
women candidates that have so far been declared. We
are very concerned by all of that, and we all need to work
together to do more to encourage women’s participation.
Finally, the Secretary-General makes some very
specific points about the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We take those
concerns very seriously. I am not able to give a detailed
response to each of them right now, but we will
certainly take away those points and reflect on them.
We welcome the important role that MONUSCO is
playing in helping to prepare for the elections so far;
however, as with other speakers, we note that challenges
remain and we continue to call for cooperation between
the Independent National Electoral Commission
and MONUSCO as we prepare for those elections.
I thank the Secretary-General for those five very
clear recommendations.
In conclusion, we believe that it is vital that the
Council remain closely engaged on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the coming months in the

18-2399411/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

run-up to the elections. Like Ethiopia, we support plans
for a Council visit later this year. We must continue to
urge all parties to abide by the Constitution, to respect
the 31 December agreement and to take concrete steps
on the ground to create an environment for free and
fair elections.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin by
extending my thanks to Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui, Ambassador of Kuwait Mansour Ayyad
Alotaibi and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba for their
important and very informative briefings.
The upcoming months will be critical in preserving
all efforts made by international, regional and national
actors in stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Poland commends the progress made in the
technical preparations of the elections. However,
we are still deeply concerned by the distrust among
political actors over several crucial issues, mainly the
implementation of the confidence-building measures
and opening of the political space. A lack of genuine
commitment and goodwill on the part of all the political
actors might undermine the free and credible electoral
process. Poland calls upon the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the
elections are organized on time and with the requisite
conditions of transparency, inclusivity and security.
In that context, we emphasize the importance of the
timely invitation of international electoral observers.
The peaceful and timely transfer of power in January
2019, as set out in the electoral calendar and in accordance
with the Congolese Constitution, is a prerequisite for the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Poland welcomes the commitment by regional partners
to support the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
While praising the efforts taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
international actors to contain the Ebola virus outbreak,
we remain gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation, which is driven by the destabilizing actions
of foreign and domestic armed groups. Their activities,
including violence against civilians, illicit trafficking,
trade exploitation and smuggling of natural resources,
have a negative impact on the security, economy and
development of the country. We therefore call for
the full implementation of the arms embargo, travel
ban and assets freeze, as they are an integral part of
the fight against those type of crimes. Poland is also
12/23

26/07/2018

worried by the continuing increase in human rights
abuses, including sexual violations. We call upon
the Government to strengthen measures to improve
security, fight the impunity of the perpetrators of those
crimes and protect victims.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Poland’s support
for the recommendations proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2018/655). We praise the
important work carried out by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui. There is no doubt that in the wake of
the upcoming elections the role of the Mission is ever
more important.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for the
important briefings delivered by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi and Ms. Justine
Masika Bihamba.
Peru notes with concern the grave security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
in the east of the country, as well as the humanitarian
crisis affecting millions of Congolese. We deplore and
condemn the human rights violations, including sexual
violence, that are occurring in increasing numbers in
the country, as we have heard this morning.
In such a complex scenario, we would first like to
underscore the importance of creating an atmosphere
of trust, transparency, credibility and inclusion with a
view to ensuring a safe and mass turnout of citizens
and all political forces in the current electoral process,
as well as the peaceful recognition of its results. We
highlight the efforts made by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that regard,
which are focused on complying with the electoral
calendar and completing the audit of voter registration,
with the support of the International Organization of
la Francophonie. In addition, we consider it urgent to
deepen the following five main lines of action.
First, confidence-building must continue, in
accordance with the measures set forth in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 to guarantee the free
participation of all political forces and their candidates.
Secondly, the security of all political actors
and their supporters must be guaranteed, including
commitments among all forces and measures to prevent
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

acts of intimidation and neutralize divisive rhetoric and
incitement to violence.
Thirdly, verification of the functioning of the
voting machines is recommended, in order to ensure
that it is not possible to manipulate the results. That
should be done through due coordination with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the participation of the opposition and civil society.
Fourthly, adequate financing of the process must
be ensured, and the needs for support from MONUSCO
and eventually, the international community must be
identified in a timely manner.
Fifthly, it is important for the Government to
determine the role of the team of international experts
and regional and subregional organizations with
a view to ensuring their participation and issuing
appropriate invitations.
With regard to the security situation, we would like
to highlight the important role played by MONUSCO
and its joint action with the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, as well as the
Intervention Brigade. We appreciate the success
achieved in reducing intercommunal violence and
encouraging the return of displaced persons in Ituri
and Tanganyika. We note, however, that security is still
precarious in South and North Kivu.
Regarding the human rights situation, we consider it
necessary for MONUSCO to expand its monitoring role,
particularly with regard to the increase in complaints
against State agents registered in recent months. The
authorities must cooperate with the investigations and
punish those responsible.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, we
deem it essential to strengthen the cooperation of
the United Nations, the African Union and other
humanitarian agencies and cooperating sources, based
on an immediate support strategy. We highlight the
coordination with the World Health Organization to
control the Ebola outbreak. In addition to the electoral
process, it is essential to address the root causes of the
crisis. This means promoting sustainable development,
improving the governance of agriculture, generating
rural employment and preventing the exploitation
of natural resources, among other urgent measures
required to build sustainable peace.

S/PV. 8318

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I thank the three briefers for their statements
highlighting the many facets of the ongoing crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am especially
proud to see Ms. Jutsine Masika Bihamba among us
today. She was the first winner of our national human
rights champions prize. Her presence here highlights
yet again the gratitude of the international community
for her important work in the fight against sexual
violence and on behalf of the protection of civilians,
women and children in particular.
On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
I would like to address three points today: first, the
electoral process; secondly, the current humanitarian
and security situation; and thirdly, the crucial role of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in the coming months.
Concerning the electoral process, last week
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council urged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to guarantee the
holding of elections on 23 December. Progress is
certainly being made in legislative and technical
preparations, but the confidence of many stakeholders
in the process is low. A year and a half has passed
since the New Year’s Eve agreement. The Council
and the regional and international stakeholders have
repeatedly called for the full implementation of the
confidence-building measures.
There is a great deal of work left to do. More than 100
political prisoners remain imprisoned. The harassment,
intimidation and threats faced by many members of
civil society organizations and parties must stop. The
total ban on demonstrations has not been lifted. The
political space is shrinking. The participation of women
in elections is another aspects that requires our attention
and support. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot afford to hold elections that lack credibility.
The women and men of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo aspire to a credible transfer of power, in line
with the Constitution, the New Year’s Eve agreement
and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. We must see significant progress.
We take note of the fact that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has postponed the visit of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission that was scheduled for earlier this

18-2399413/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

month. We hope that a new date can be fixed quickly.
Cancellation could diminish the confidence of the
international community and the Congolese people in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s commitment
to the New Year’s Eve agreement. The Security Council
must continue to monitor the situation and remain
closely involved, including through a possible visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My second point concerns the current humanitarian
and security situation. Elections are just one piece
of the puzzle. The humanitarian situation remains
extremely worrying. Three months ago, the donor
community pledged $500 million for emergency
assistance. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
announced the creation of a humanitarian forum and
fund. Millions of Congolese, however, urgently need
humanitarian measures right. Hunger, massive internal
displacement and health risks are heightening the
threats to their security. It is a vicious circle. Armed
groups and their ravages are growing. They terrorize
vulnerable communities, attack units of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo, and
kill peacekeepers. While security has improved in Ituri
and Tanganyika provinces, it has further declined in
North and South Kivu provinces. The situation in some
parts of Kasai remains serious.
It is women and children who pay the highest
price, including due to systematic sexual violence,
the recruitment of child soldiers, sexual slavery and
impediments to humanitarian assistance. The Council
cannot remain a passive observer. It must act, including
through the sanctions regime, and put an end to the
impunity of those whose involvement in these practices
has been proven.
My third point concerns the role of MONUSCO.
The challenges are complex and numerous. The
Mission’s mandate is to protect civilians and to support
the implementation of the New Year’s Eve agreement
and the electoral process. These two priorities require
the full political commitment of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, clarity concerning
the demands and the expectations of MONUSCO, as
well as the full support of the Council. We are concerned
that a further deterioration in the security situation
would pose a real challenge to the implementation of
the mandate.
I congratulate the Special Representative and her
team for their ongoing adjustments and responses to
14/23

26/07/2018

multiple threats in the most difficult circumstances.
The protection through projection approach will require
continuous and enormous efforts if it is to bear fruit.
The Secretary-General’s letter on emergency planning
(S/2018/727) emphasizes that fact once again.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has many
partners willing to help, listen and contribute to
strengthening the country’s security and stability. The
situation deserves our full attention. There must be no
doubt about our commitment or our willingness to act.
Time is pressing.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for the quality of her briefing.
We also thank Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi,
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for his excellent work at the head
of that body, and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba, head
of the the non-governmental organization Synergy of
Women for Victims of Sexual Violence, whose briefing
painted a comprehensive picture of this issue.
Five months ahead of the presidential, legislative
and provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, my delegation welcomes the progress made
by the Independent National Electoral Commission in
the implementation of the electoral process, including
the finalization of the electoral lists and their audit
by the experts of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; the enactment of law on the
distribution of seats in the future Parliament and the
electoral law; the end of the regisatrion period for
provincial elections candidacies; and the opening of the
registration period for candidacies to the presidential
and legislative elections.
My country urges all Congolese political actors to
be part of this positive dynamic by creating conditions
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections, in
accordance with the recommendation of the joint
communiqué issued at the meeting of the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, held on 19 July in New
York. Côte d’Ivoire also notes the commitment of the
Congolese authorities to organizing the elections in due
time and to ensure their financing. It encourages them
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to take appropriate measures with a view to ensuring the
availability of the necessary resources in order to avoid
delays likely to jeopardize the proper implementation
of the electoral calendar.
Despite the positive momentum that has been
observed in the implementation of the electoral timetable,
my delegation remains alarmed by the socio-political
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On the socio-political front, given the opening
of the registration period for presidential election
candidacies, a key stage in the electoral process, my
delegation encourages the Congolese authorities to lift
the prohibition on public demonstrations and to create
political conditions conducive to the expression of
fundamental individual and collective freedoms. This
recommendation is justified by the fact that no incidents
were reported during the public demonstrations
organized by political groups.
Côte d’Ivoire notes also a persistent divergence of
views among the Congolese stakeholders, specifically
rejection of the use of voting machines and the
conclusions of the voter register audit by certain
political parties and civil-society organizations. In this
regard, Côte d’Ivoire strongly encourages the Congolese
authorities, all political actors and the relevant civilsociety organizations jointly to seek satisfactory
compromises so as to ensure the holding of credible and
peaceful elections on 23 December, as planned.
At the security level, the deterioration of the
situation as a consequence of the activities of armed
groups in North and South Kivu and their nefarious
effects on the civilian population, specifically the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, remain a
source of concern to my delegation. In this context, we
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Congolese armed
forces and MONUSCO to tackle the threat posed by
armed groups. We encourage its forces to further shore
up their joint operations to stabilize those provinces
experiencing insecurity. My delegation further notes
with satisfaction the commitment undertaken by
donors during the 13 April international humanitarian
conference held in Geneva to earmark $528 million in
support of humanitarian operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
My delegation welcomes the commitment of
MONUSCO, which, in cooperation with the country’s
authorities, has been lending technical support to the
Independent National Electoral Commission and has

S/PV. 8318

contributed, thanks to its good offices, to a reduction
in intercommunal tensions in violence-plagued areas.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire calls on subregional,
regional and international organizations, specifically
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Union, the European Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
United Nations to synergize their actions in support of
their support for the implementation of the 31 Decmber
2016 agreement.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui for her highly informative
update. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Ms. Bihamba, civil-society representative,
for their insightful briefings.
Regarding the political situation, the delegation
of Kazakhstan agrees on the importance of the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for
23 December being held in a timely, free and credible
manner. Although commendable efforts have been
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to reach key electoral milestones, challenges
remain to be addressed. We commend the International
Organization of la Francophonie (IOF) on having
conducting an independent audit of the voter register
and note the importance of the implementation by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
the relevant recommendations.
We must support all confidence-building measures
provided in the 31 December 2016 agreement among
all political actors. It is critical to ensure an inclusive
political transition of power that is based on respect
for fundamental rights, including the full participation
of women. We note the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the African
Union and IOF in supporting the vital electoral process.
The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is deteriorating in some parts of the
country owing to the increasing activities of armed
groups in North and South Kivu, which have resulted
in a high death toll among innocent civilians and

18-2399415/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

selfless peacekeepers. We support the reconfiguration
of MONUSCO so as to enable it to better address
security issues as well as ensure greater local
community outreach and expanded measures under
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, together with a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civilians.
We agree with previous speakers that the
increasing number of documented cases of conflictrelated sexual violence committed against women
and children requires immediate attention and action.
An increase in State authority and reliable security
and law-enforcement systems throughout the country
are crucial in order to reinforce the capabilities of
the Forces armées de la République Démocratique du
Congo and of MONUSCO.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
express concern at the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is cause
for alarm given that the number of people in need of
assistance and protection is the highest thus far. We
welcome the results of the donor conference held in
Geneva and call on donors to fulfil their pledges to
effectively address the dire humanitarian situation.
As the recent Ebola outbreak has exacerbated
the suffering of the people, we commend the swift
and coordinated response by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with support from
MONUSCO and the United Nations system, to save
lives and contain the spread of this lethal and highly
contagious virus.
Finally, we welcome the outcome of the twelfth
annual joint consultative meeting held in New York
on 19 July, at which the members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council stepped up cooperation between the two
sides. This fresh momentum for enhanced cooperation
must continue in order to collectively address existing
complexities together with regional and international
partners. This will enable us to consolidate the gains
achieved and move forward towards the key goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
AU’s Agenda 2063. We will therefore have many best
practices for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 strategy
that can be shared with others in the region.
Kazakhstan stands ready to work with others to
bring stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which will have a positive impact on the wider region.
16/23

26/07/2018

Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to express
our gratitude for the briefings that we heard from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi of Kuwait in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba.
We welcome the ongoing progress and commitment
demonstrated by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to meet the deadlines set out in the electoral calendar,
in particular with respect to the promulgation of the law
on the distribution of seats for the national, legislative,
provincial and local elections. We welcome also the
publication of the list of platforms and political parties.
We have taken note of the audit of voter register, which
took place in an inclusive atmosphere bringing together
members of the Majorité présidentielle, members of civil
society and regional and subregional organizations. We
therefore hope that all registered voters will be able to
cast their ballot in the elections.
We reiterate that to ensure the effective holding of
elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power, and in
order to ease tensions at the political level, the parties
must implement the confidence-building measures
enshrined in the 31 December 2016 agreement. We
deplore the fact that these measures had not been fully
implemented by the deadline, which has passed, and
therefore call once again for their full and effective
implementation. We believe that the Government
and the opposition must work together in order to
make headway in such implementation. Although the
Government must take the initiative and the leadership
role in such implementation, the measures will not be
practicable without the participation of the opposition.
We therefore appeal to all parties to cooperate in the
run-up to the holding of transparent, credible, peaceful
and inclusive elections.
We believe that the full and effective participation
of women at all stages of the elections, as well as that
of young people, is vital, in keeping with the joint
communiqué issued by the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council at their
twelfth annual joint consultative meeting, held on
19 July.
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

On another front, we support the initiatives and good
offices of the Special Representative. We welcome her
meetings with various stakeholders aimed at allowing
for an exchange of views and ensuring a coherent and
coordinated approach on the part of the United Nations
and regional actors. We also welcome the meetings held
with various authorities, political platforms and civilsociety groups to discuss the electoral process.
We also commend the support for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo provided by
regional organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the African Union, among
others. We encourage them to pursue their efforts, in
close cooperation with the Government, to meet the
political and security challenges that the country is
facing. Similarly, we support the work of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region in preparing the holding of
elections, and we encourage them to continue their
collaborative work with the Independent National
Electoral Commission.
We pay tribute to those who gave their lives for
the cause of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We commend MONUSCO’s work in connection
with measures taken for the protection of civilians. We
also welcome its work to reduce violence in areas of the
country by implementing projects to reduce community
violence, which have led to the return of 800 displaced
persons since April. We call for the pursuit of such
projects, in conjunction with MONUSCO’s efforts
aimed at reconciliation among communities and
within the framework of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy, focusing on stabilization
and the restoration of State authority in the country.
The challenges faced by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have increased exponentially, and their
solution lies not only in the holding of elections, but
also in addressing the root causes of the conflict. One
of those is the lack of control over natural resources,
which is helping to prolong the crisis, the fragmentation
of armed groups and the systematic exploitation of those
resources by multinational corporations that operate
unchecked and whose revenue can be used to fund
continuing instability in the country. Accordingly, we
believe that, in order to deal with that issue, achieving
control of areas rich in natural resources and their
sovereign administration must be an essential goal, in

S/PV. 8318

terms of both a cessation of hostilities and economic
development. When a country maintains effective
control of its resources and there is political will to
administer them for the benefit of the population, it
is possible to achieve a structural change leading to
stabilization and the strengthening of the rule of law.
In that regard, we commend the work of Kuwait,
in its capacity as chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we agree that
Committee members must be updated on the efforts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States
to address questions concerning the illegal exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources by armed groups
and on measures taken to help the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the countries of the region to
develop responsible commercial trade in minerals, with
the understanding that strategies must be developed
leading to the consolidation of peace in the postelectoral process.
We also express our solidarity with the victims
of the Ebola outbreak and commend the Congolese
authorities, the international community and the World
Health Organization for their prompt response to that
health crisis. We are concerned about the humanitarian
and security crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo caused by armed groups, as well as by increasing
intercommunal violence, particularly in the regions of
Ituri, Kasai, the Kivus and Tanganyika. We condemn
in the strongest terms the many abuses committed
against the population. We call on all armed groups
to immediately end all forms of violence, including
violations and abuses against children, and other
destabilizing activities, including the illicit exploitation
and trafficking of natural resources. Those groups must
immediately and permanently disband, lay down their
weapons, reject violence and release the children whom
they hold within their ranks.
Lastly, we welcome the cooperation of the
international community and other international
partners in raising funds to meet humanitarian needs
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on
them to pursue such efforts, in continued cooperation
with the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in strict respect of its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

18-2399417/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor to speak this
time in my national capacity.
First of all, I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
her briefing, and I thank Ms. Bihamba for her valuable
briefing at the beginning of this meeting.
My statement is a brief one. I will address three
key points.

26/07/2018

appropriate solutions to mitigate the suffering of those
in humanitarian need.
With regard to the Ebola virus, which several
colleagues have mentioned, there is fear that it will spread
in Equateur province. We welcome the announcement
by the Ministry for Health of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo on Tuesday that the spread of this epidemic
is now under control. We commend the tireless efforts
of the Government, together with the United Nations,
the World Health Organization and MONUSCO, to
eliminate this disease.

The first concerns the political issue. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
entered a decisive phase, governed by the upcoming
legislative and presidential elections. We hope that
those elections will be held in a free and impartial
way on the agreed date of 23 December, and that
all sectors of the Congolese people will be able to
participate and vote in accordance with Congolese
laws and the Congolese Constitution. The process of
rebuilding confidence should be considered among
all the Congolese political parties as stipulated in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016. We recall
here the joint communiqué of the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council issued
on 19 July, which calls on all political parties to work
together in that direction.

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui; Ambassador Alotaibi and Ms. Bihamba for
their briefings.

Second is the security situation. The ongoing
violence and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in the South Kivu and North
Kivu regions, which had seen military escalation
and attacks over the past few months, requires an
immediate and serious response, given that the armed
conflicts there directly affect unarmed civilians and
drain the natural and human resources of the country.
In that regard, we commend the significant efforts of
MONUSCO and its members to withstand and repel
those attacks. We call on all parties behind the conflict
and violence to end those clashes so as to spare the
lives of civilians and achieve the desired stability in the
security sector.

China maintains that a political solution is the only
way to resolve the issues of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and countries
of the region, are most familiar with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the surrounding
areas. The Security Council should continue to support
them in playing a leading role in mediation and
encourage organizations and countries of the region
to enhance communication and engagement with
Congolese parties through their respective channels. In
particular, we should focus on listening to the views
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and respecting its ownership of the political
process, as well as encouraging all the parties to take
concrete action in order to get back on a path to a
political settlement through dialogue and consultation,
with a view to effectively implementing the political
agreement of 31 December 2016. The international
community should work to address the root causes of the

Third is the humanitarian situation. The ongoing
humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a major concern. Nearly 13 million people,
including displaced persons and refugees, are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. The international
community should offer them significant assistance
in meeting their humanitarian needs and finding
18/23

The Democratic Republic of the Congo occupies
an important geographical location, and its peace,
stability and political process also attract the broad
attention of the international community, in particular
the countries of the region. Currently, the country is
facing security and political challenges. The Security
Council should therefore assess the impact of various
factors on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and help the Congolese Government to
strengthen its security capacity-building and provide
constructive assistance, with an emphasis on seeking
African solutions to African problems.

18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

conflict and help the country to deal with its social and
economic development issues, focusing on increased
investment in the areas of education, agriculture and
infrastructure construction.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
plays an important role in maintaining peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China commends the courage and dedication of the
peacekeepers, who are risking their lives as they
work to deliver on their mandate. The international
community should improve its peacekeeping capacitybuilding through bilateral and multilateral cooperation
in order to ensure peacekeepers’ safety and security.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her update
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as on the implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 and the country’s
preparations for elections.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the development of events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/655) and
we definitely share his opinion that ensuring that the
elections scheduled for 23 December are held on time
will help to reduce the tensions in Congolese society. In
that regard, we would like to draw attention to President
Kabila’s recent address to the National Assembly, in
which the leader of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo once again affirmed his determination to abide
by the Constitution, which we see as an appropriate and
timely sign. We would like to see the opposition forces
reject their negative agenda too.
We note the importance of working to ensure that
the Independent National Electoral Commission’s
electoral calendar and revised voting dates are
adhered to. That will require support for the electoral
process from the international community, including
by using the logistical capabilities of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We note the measures that Kinshasa has taken with
regard to the technical and legislative preparations
for voting, including the timely enactment of laws on
the distribution of seats in the provincial legislatures
and local councils and the publication of a definitive
list of the political parties and associations permitted

S/PV. 8318

to participate in the elections. It is important that the
process of auditing the voter register is being conducted
under the auspices of the International Organization of
la Francophonie, and in our view the fact that half of
the country’s political parties have signed the electoral
code of conduct is a positive development.
However, we would urge our colleagues on the
Security Council not to make an issue of the decision
taken by the National Electoral Commission to use
electronic voting machines. This is not about an
electronic vote count, as many have mistakenly said.
The equipment is to be used only to make preparing
and printing the ballot papers considerably easier,
while the vote count will still be done manually, as our
colleagues from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have assured us more than once. We agree that in order
to avoid problems, Kinshasa should provide stable
financing for the election preparations and strengthen
the coordination of its work with MONUSCO.
We do not deny the importance of ensuring that the
authorities mobilize to implement confidence-building
measures, including on the emblematic cases referred
to in the political agreement regarding political actors
who are outside the country. However, we urge all the
country’s opposition forces to cooperate with Kinshasa
and the Electoral Commission and to avoid any
demonstrations of violence. We also consider it crucial
to ensure respect for the sovereignty and legislature of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We believe that the role of the United Nations
Mission in the organization and conduct of elections
should not go beyond the framework of the mandate
outlined in resolution 2409 (2018). The protection
of civilians in the context of the elections should be
carried out with full respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping and without any interference in
Kinshasa’s internal affairs. In particular, under no
circumstances should MONUSCO take any action that
could be interpreted as support for a specific Congolese
party. We believe that the citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must decide their own destiny,
whie the international community’s job is to assist them
in areas where their help is genuinely solicited. It is also
important to remember that the elections themselves are
no panacea. It is vital not to lose sight of the importance
of resolving the underlying causes of the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18-2399419/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The President: I will now make a brief statement
in my capacity as the representative of Sweden.
I want to thank Ms. Zerrougui and Ambassador
Alotaibi for their briefings and, not least, to say a
special word of thanks to Ms. Bihamba, our civilsociety briefer today. Her remarks to the Council
highlight not only the challenges that the women of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo face but also
their resilience, and her reflection here of women’s
desire and determination to be agents of change in their
communities and their country. She also made some
very relevant and pertinent recommendations.
The elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo planned for 23 December represent an
essential step on the path to resolving the political
challenges facing the country. Last week in New York,
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council discussed the situation as part
of their twelfth annual joint consultative meeting.
The communiqué issued following that meeting
(SC/13430), as well as the most recent statement by
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the United Nations on the Peace
and Security Cooperation Framework, send a clear
signal and demonstrate the international consensus
on the need to hold credible and inclusive elections on
23 December in line with the Congolese Constitution
and the intra-Congolese agreement of 31 December
2016. The confidence-building measures are especially
important, given the importance of increasing trust and
confidence in the process among all the parties.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains dire and extremely
worrying. The outbreak of Ebola virus disease
in Equateur province on 8 May presented the
communities affected with an additional major
challenge. We commend the successful management
by the Government and its international partners of
the outbreak, which was declared at an end earlier
this week. We encourage the same commitment from
international partners with regard to their support for
humanitarian action in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the 2018 humanitarian response
plan. The needs are growing, while only 21 per cent
of the response plan’s requirements has been met. For
the country’s 7.7 million food-insecure people and
2.2 million acutely malnourished children, every dollar
counts. We encourage everyone to try to do more.
20/23

26/07/2018

With the already appalling levels of human rights
violations and abuse, we are deeply concerned about
the increasing number of violations being reported
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
an increased incidence of sexual and gender-based
violence, as Ms. Bihamba has already told us. The high
percentage of violations attributed to State agents is
particularly worrying. Accountability for such crimes
is essential, both to ensure justice for the survivors and
to promote change by ending impunity. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to continue to strengthen efforts in that regard.
Sixteen months after the fact, the murders of
Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp, two United Nations
experts reporting to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, remain unsolved.
We fully support the work of the United Nations and
the follow-on mechanism established by the SecretaryGeneral and led by Mr. Robert Petit. We reiterate the
need for the Congolese authorities to improve their
cooperation with him and his team. It is important that
the Sanctions Committee and the Security Council
continue to follow developments in the matter closely
until the truth has been established and the perpetrators
have been held accountable. We are grateful to the
Chair of the Committee for all his work, including the
recurring Sanctions Committee meetings on the followup mechanism.
The year 2018 is a crucial one for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Credible, transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections can contribute to lasting peace
and stability. It is essential that the Council and the
region continue to stand united and work with the
Government to support the people of the country in the
exercise of their democratic rights.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, as your
presidency of the Council is drawing to a close, and to
express my delegation’s esteem and appreciation for the
leadership, expertise and efficiency with which you have
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

conducted the work of the Security Council this month.
My delegation would also like to take this opportunity
to once again thank you and the other members of the
Council for your availability and the unfailing interest
you have always shown in my country’s situation.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/655) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) submitted for the Council’s
consideration and thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
introducing it. While we appreciate the value of the
report’s content, I would like to take this opportunity
to focus on three points that my delegation considers
particularly important to clarify for the Security
Council. I will therefore discuss the political, security
and humanitarian situations in turn.
As highlighted in paragraph 2 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the political situation in my country
continues to be dominated by preparations for the
elections, which are due to take place on 23 December.
In this respect, it should be stressed that the process
is coming along well. After the closing of the audit of
the voter register, the Independent National Electoral
Commission proceeded to clean it up by eliminating
duplicate registrations, reducing the number of voters on
the rolls to 40 million. It then made the electoral calendar
public before launching an awareness and education
campaign on technical and operational issues, with the
aim of building trust, removing doubts and maintaining
contact with the various stakeholders in the process for
credible, transparent and inclusive elections.
One of the issues in this campaign has revolved
around the machines that will be used to print the
ballot papers. It is important to point out here that the
machines will not be voting for the voters but will
simply print the ballots that the voters will put into
the ballot boxes themselves. The political parties and
groupings from both the opposition and the majority,
as well as civil society, have all participated in this
campaign. In the same context, Parliament has enacted
various complementary legal provisions associated
with the process, including one on the distribution of
seats. For its part, the International Organization of la
Francophonie audited the electoral register and made
recommendations for its improvement and reliability.
The process is now at the candidacy-filing stage.
Candidacy filings for the provincial elections were
submitted between 24 June and 8 July. So far, the

S/PV. 8318

Electoral Commission has received 19,437 applications.
For the parliamentary and presidential elections,
candidacy filings started yesterday, Wednesday,
25 July, and will continue until 8 August.
While under our Constitution it is the job of the
Independent National Electoral Commission to organize
the electoral process, the success of this undertaking
also depends on the proper handling of disputes by the
courts and tribunals. In order to ensure that the courts are
as well prepared as possible to handle the task properly,
the Superior Council of Magistrates and the Electoral
Commission organized, with the financial support of
the Government, the United Nations Development
Programme/Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo
and the American Bar Association, a capacity-building
workshop for training magistrates on the management
of electoral litigation. The workshop brought together
a significant sample of judges from courts across
the country.
It has always been my Government’s desire to
hold good elections in a peaceful atmosphere. That
presupposes the commitment of all political actors
from both the majority and the opposition, who must
refrain from comments and attitudes likely to create
a climate of tension and provoke disorder. Now that
the electoral process is sufficiently advanced and is
in the final stretch, my Government expects all the
country’s political actors, from every political wing, to
demonstrate the best possible attitude of constructive
support to the process through positive action. We
also expect the same from our international partners,
who are often conspicuous for their interference from
all sides.
In this regard, my Government appreciates the
support and assistance of such regional partners
as the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), whose Electoral Council has just made a
working visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This visit, a prelude to the SADC Heads of State and
Government meeting to be held in August, enabled the
Electoral Commission and SADC’s Electoral Council
to acknowledge the progress made in the electoral
process and discuss the implementation of the logistical
prerequisites for the success of the elections, regarding
which we informed the SADC delegation about our
acquisition and deployment of various materials from
China, South Korea and South Africa.

18-2399421/23

S/PV.8318

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to de-escalating the political situation,
we do not think that it would be useful to repeat
explanations that the Council has already heard many
times. What is important to note, in our humble opinion,
is that the Government has already taken a series of
steps to meet the requirements set out in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 regarding the release
of so-called political prisoners. Those who were in this
category have in fact been released. The only situation
that is still pending and under the courts’ jurisdiction
is that concerning the so-called emblematic cases. As
we have already pointed out in several statements to
the Council, it should be pointed out that the persons
concerned in these cases have all been charged with
offences under ordinary law. The Council will agree
that we cannot ask the public authorities, who are
supposed to promote the rule of law and the equality
of citizens before the law, to interfere in such situations
without violating the Constitution by creating a twotier justice system in the country.
Finally, I cannot close this chapter without pointing
out, with regard to the financing of the electoral process,
that for the Government of my country, as everywhere
else in the world, elections are a matter of national
sovereignty. As a result, they can be financed only by the
Government, which is why my country has decided to
finance them on its own. As the Electoral Commission
informed the SADC Electoral Council, those of our
partners who would like to help can do so by providing
logistical assistance to the Commission in the form of
aircraft, rolling stock and operational facilities.
With regard to the security situation, the report
under consideration brings up the situation in the
eastern part of the country and, more specifically, in
North and South Kivu, with the ongoing presence of the
Allied Democratic Forces and the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, as well as other emerging
armed groups. My Government is concerned about
the situation and has not stood idly by. We remain
committed to ending the insecurity in that part of the
country. My Government’s engagement has restored
calm in Tanganyika province, where there were clashes
between Bantus and Pygmies, and Ituri province, where
the violence that had forced people to flee to Uganda
have been defused. However, the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are
continuing their operations to eliminate the negative
forces that are still active in North and South Kivu.
22/23

26/07/2018

As we have always underscored in our various
statements to the Council, combating foreign and
national armed groups in that part of our country
demands the joint efforts of my Government and the
United Nations if we are to eliminate them completely.
In that regard, the Council has always stressed the
importance of cooperation between MONUSCO and the
FARDC. In the same vein, at the MONUSCO mandate
renewal in March (see S/PV.8216), my Government
requested that the Intervention Brigade become
operational. We regret to say that in the four months
since then, the situation has not improved. Besides that,
we all know that the armed groups’ get their income,
arms and ammunition primarily through the illicit
exploitation and plundering of natural resources, and we
also all know that those natural resources pass through
neighbouring countries or multinational corporations
based in those countries and elsewhere. Apart from the
measures taken by my Government, it is important that
the Council take appropriate steps not only to deter the
beneficiaries of this illicit trade but also to help break
up and eliminate the armed groups.
With regard to the issue of sexual violence,
without going into it to deeply, I would like to note
that my Government will continue its efforts to combat
that scourge.
Given the sporadic pockets of violence throughout
the country and the consequences of the displacement
of the population, along with the armed conflicts
in neighbouring countries that have brought a
flood of refugees into our country, it is perfectly
understandable that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is experiencing a difficult humanitarian
situation. However, it is not as acute as some have
been led to believe. During its session on 30 March,
the Government registered 231,346 internally displaced
persons in 79 sites spread throughout our country. In
order to address the situation, we have established
a national humanitarian solidarity fund and set up a
humanitarian response programme for rehabilitation
and development. It goes without saying that any
support that international partners would like to give us
to assist people in need is welcome. Also in connection
with the humanitarian situation, we should point out
that our country had to once again deal with an Ebola
epidemic, which has just ended. My Government was
grateful for the assistance provided by the World
Health Organization and non-governmental medical
organizations in responding to the epidemic.
18-23994

26/07/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I should not conclude without once again thanking
the Council on behalf of the people and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for its tireless
efforts to restore peace in my country. I would like
to reassure the Council of my country’s commitment
to holding elections in accordance with the electoral
calendar. Since the elections cannot be changed, my
Government calls on all stakeholders, in good faith, to
denounce any act, regardless of whether it is perpetrated
by Congolese or foreigners, that could derail the
process, and on those who are still doubters to have a
positive and constructive attitude to the process. The

S/PV. 8318

situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
often deliberately exaggerated by the media. It is up
to the Security Council to support us in following
through with the process, which is the only way we can
achieve the peace and stability that are the purpose of
consolidating democracy in my country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

18-2399423/23
