Reaolutiona adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2276 (XXII). Outflow of capital from developing
countries and measurement of the flow of
resources to developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1938 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 on the accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1088 B (XXXIX) of
30 July 1965 on the financing of economic development,
Recalling also its resolution 2169 (XXI) of 6 December 1966 on the external financing of economic development of developing countries and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1184 ( XLI) of 5 August 1966
on the measurement of the flow of assistance and longterm capital,
Noting the Secretary-General's progress report on
the outflow of capital from developing countries 6 and
the report of the group of experts on the methodological
problems related to the measurement of the flow of
resources to developing countries, 7
. Noting that each of the various forms of outflow of
capital from the developing countries has its particular
set of causes and consequences,
Concerned over the increasing rate of outflow of
capital from the developing countries, which substantially reduces the net volume of external resources
available to those countries,
Recognizing that it is in the interest of each developing country to be as fully informed as possible of the
inward and outward movement of resources relevant
to its own development effort,
Recognizing further that measurement of the volume
of resources provided by the donor countries and of
the adequacy of external resources received by the developing countries depends on the adoption of appropriate definitions of the various components of the
flow and on the availability of the necessary data,
1. Urges the developed countries:
(a) To ease the terms and conditions on which external resources are made available to developing countries, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1183 (XLI) of 5 August 1966, so as to
minimize the debt-servicing burden on the balance of
payments of the developing countries;
(b) To consider extending, ,whenever it is agreed
that the need arises, easy terms and conditions to
developing countries whose balance-of-payments problems and debt-servicing burden require the rescheduling or consolidation of debts ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To include, in the regular report on the international flow of long-term capital and official donations,
statistics-when these can be obtained-of reverse
flows, assessing their significance in relation to total
financial transfers and giving an analysis of factors a~fecting their flows both in the countries where they
originate and in the countries to which the funds are
sent;
( b) To take into account, in his annual report on
the international flow of long-term capital and official
donations, the unanimously adopted recommendations
II Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortythird Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, document E/4374.
7 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 67.II.D.17.

IS

of the group of experts on the methodological problems
related to the measurement of the flow of resources to
developing countries;
( c) To consult other international organizations concerned with statististics on the different forms of transfer of resources, with a view to arriving at a uniform
system of statistics for these transfers ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide. in co-operation with the organizations concerned
in the United Nations family, such assistance as developing countries may need to improve the recording
of the inflow and outflow of resources.
1618th plenary meeting,
4 December 1967.
2277 (XXD). United Nations Institute for Training
and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its past resolutions, particularly resolution
2187 (XXI) of 13 December 1966, and the resolutions
of the Economic and Social Council, particularly resolution 1249 (XLIII) of 27 July 1967, relating to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
Recognizing the importance of the role of the Institute, through its activities in training and research, in
assisting the developing countries and strengthening
the capabilities and procedures of the United Nations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research to the General Assembly ;8
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1249 (XLIII);
3. Welcomes the progress made by the Institute in
its various programmes and activities, including the
close co-operation that has been established with other
members of the United Nations family of organizations
and with regional and national institutions;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
private institutions and individuals that have made or
pledged financial contributions to the Institute.
1618th plenary meeting,
4 December 1967.
2278 (XXII). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Takes note of the reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
third and fourth sessions. 9
1618th plenary meeting,
4 December 1967.
2279 (XXII). Programming procedures for the
Technical Assistance component of the
United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on
B Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-secoltd
Session. Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/6875.
9 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortythird Session, Supplemrnt No. 6 (E/4297) and Supplement
Yn. 6A (E/4398)
