1934th

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL

(Opening meeting)

ASSE11BLY

Tuesday, 21 September 1971,
at3p.m.

TWENTY-8IXTH SESSION

NEW YORK

OlJicwl Records
CONTENTS

., ...
...

Address by Mr. Edvard Hambro, Temporary President,
Chairman of the delegation ofNorway

Page

Agenda item 1 :
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Norway
,
, .. ,
.

1

Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer 0. meditation

.

1

Address by Mr. Edvard Hl!.mbro, Temporary President,
Chairman of the delegation of Norway
.

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
.

2

Agenda item 80:
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee Oil
Contributions
.

2

Agenda item 4 :
Election of the President

3

Address by Mr. Adam Malik, President of the twenty-sixtll
session of the General Assembly .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Agenda item 25:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations .... . .

6

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: We have just terminated the fIrst year of the second quarter century of the life
of this Organization. We note with regret that there has
been little discernible progress dUring the last year with
regard to the situation in the Middle East and the prevailing
conditions of colonial suppression and racial discrimiriation
in southern Africa. But on the positive side an imrortant
development has taken place since we last met. The United
States of America and the People's Republic of China have
taken steps with a view to normalizing their relations. These
steps will undoubtedly have considerable significance also
for the United Nations, and may eventually lead to
increased possibilities for the Organization to perform its
functions under the Charter. Furthermore, the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlinl represents an ~portant
contribution to a continuation of detente between Eastern
and Western Europe.
4. Also on tht'1 positive side the Treaty on the Prohibition
of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other
Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof [resolution 2660 (XXV),
annex] was signed on 11 February this year by 67 States in
London, Moscow and Washington.

Temporary President: Mr. Edvard HAMBRO
(Norway).

5. However, the signature of that Trenty is only one oftlll~
many steps which must be taken in order to create a new
regime for the seas, what is in them, on them and under
them.

President: Mr. Adam MALIK (Indonesia).

6. The preservation of the marine environment is of
special importance not only because the oceans are a major
source of food and the main road of transportation among
nations but also because the oceans are a vital element in
our planetary life system and the continuous life cycle of
our globe.

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman
of the delegation of Norway

7. Consequently the time has long since passed when the
oceans could be used as a dumping place for ever-increasing
masses of harmful waste, and measures on the national level
will not suffice; we must fmd international solutions to
these problems.

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open the
twenty-sixth regular session of the General Assembly.

1 Signed at Berlin on 3 September 1971.

AGENDA ITEM 2
1-";-

The printed official records ofthe plenary meetings
of the General Assembly are published in fascicle
form, the record of each meeting being issued
separately. A prefactory fascicle is issued for each
session, containing a table of contents and the
agenda.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.

The representatives stood in silence.
1

A/PV.1934

Ir
L

2

I

r

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

8. The environment and the t111'~ai from pollution have
been recognized as important' isl>ues in both the United
Nations and the specialized agencies. Therefore, nations are
following with special attention the preparatory work bemg
performed for the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment to be held at Stockholm in June
1972. That Conference can-and must-become of crucial
importance for our world.

9. It would also be tight and proper at the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly to give the highest prior:ty
to the problems of disarmament. The ban on production
and possession or biological and toxin weapons, which is
now the subject of negotiation, should be followed up as
soon as possible by a ban on chemical weapons itl
accordance with the resolution of the General Assembly.
10.. Earlier this year one of the greatest tragedies in human
terms since the last world war erupted in the Asian
sub-continent. Millions of refugees suffer untold misery.
The internationai community has again generously responded to appeals for assistance in the humanitarian field.
But the money and supplies made available are still not
sufficient and prove the urgency of making further progress
in the field of international disaster relief. This event has
also shown how very tenuous is tl'1e li...'1e of demarcation
between humanitarian relief and political action. May I
express the fervent hope that such cmlditions will soon be
established that the flow of refugees can be stopped and the
refugees return home.

strong enough to avoid the fmancial bankmptcy of the
Organization, and I am glad to be able to tell you that
negotiations are still actively going on.
17. We should show a greater sense of proportion and a
keener understanding of priorities if we redressed the
glaring and tragic imbalance between what the nations
spend on armaments and what they are willing to spend for
peace and constructive purposes.
18. This session of the General Assembly will also be
called upon to take important decisions in the economic
and social field, particularly with regard tt !he evaluation
machinery to be set up for review and lr\)Vaisal of the
progress achieved in the implementation of the measures
and attainment of objectives embodied in the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)}. The Economic and Social Council has presented to the Assembly a
comprehensive recommendation on these matters, a recommendation that \vill, it is hoped, serve as a useful basis for
the Assembly's deliberations of the issues involved.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

12. It would be a small but still important step in the right
direction if we could take serious measures to solve the
fmancial crisis of the United Nations.

20. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the rules
of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the
beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of
the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine
members. Accordingly I propose that, for the twenty-sixth
session, the Credentials Committee should consist of the
following Member States: Australia, Colombia, France,
Ireland, Liberia, Mongolia, Somalia, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that those countries are
herehy appointed. members of the Credentials Committee.

14. As members will know, responding to a request from
the Secretary-General at the end of the last session of the
Assembly, I undertook to join him in his efforts to search
for ways and means by which solutions to these difficulties
might be found so that the Organization could be put on a
sound and working footing.
15. I have the distinct impression that the seriousness of
the situation-and I do not hesitate to call it the desperate
seriousness of the situation-was, in some cases for the first
time, brought home to many delegations. However, we are
still looking for a significant break-through that could give
us some realistic hope of saving the United Nations
machinery from grinding to a halt in the not very distant
future.
16. I still hope that the common interest in saving the
prestige and capabilities of the United Nations will be

...

19. The problems in front of us are great indeed and will
call for all our strength, inlagination and dedication and,
above all, the political will of Governments to solve these
problems.

11. Moreover, it is of urgent importance that in the years
ahead our Organization should be strengthened in all
possible ways.

13. One dominant impression which I gathered as President of the twenty-fifth session was that all delegations,
without exception, have a strong interest not only in
preserving but also in strengthening the United Nations. I
wonder, however, if all Members fully realize that this will
not be possible unless a solution is found to the fmancial
difficulties of the Organization.

,0,.

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 80
Scale of a!lSessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the Unit.ed Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions
21. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite the attention of the members of the General Assembly to the
addendum to the report of the Committee on Contributions [A/8411/Add.l]. I also invite attention to document
A/8397, which contains a letter addressed to me by the
Secretary-General informing the Assembly that "one Member State, namely, Yemen, is in arrears in the payment of
its contribution to the United Nations regular budget
within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter".

···1·

,$

ut ;

R

"~~,C:~,~_~:c;,~:·f~!tf~~~:~Z::~~ci77,~-#.:,.t:~;,-~t=··~-i:- _ r-fS-}t;:'~.~\·,jt!,~~~;;A~;.~;;<;~_:~;g'_;:~¥J~~~~-.;l" ~~• • • • •
IiI.~• • • • • • • • • • • •

----- --- --- --- _.: --_ --. ;;.. -22. Docum ent A/8397 also

1934th meeting - 21 Septem ber 1971

contains a letter from the
Perman ent Representative of Yemen, in which he informs
the Secretary-General that a remitta nce in the necessary
amount is on its way and requerts. that his State be
permitt ed to vote. He refers to certain circumstances which
have caused the delay in this remittance.

e

t

23. In this connexion, I invite the attentio n of Members of
the Assembly to the second sentence of A,rticle 19 of the
Charter, which states:
"The General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such
a Member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is
due to conditions beyond the control of the Member."
1>-

•

24. On the basis of the letter in docume nt A/8397
explaining the delay in the remitta nce as being due to
conditions beyond the control . of the Member concerned,
the Assembly may wish to permit that Member to vote
under the second sentence of Article 19 for the brief period
that will be required for the rerrJttance to reach the
Secretary-General. The Secretary-General will naturally
report to the Assembly as soon as the money is recei-;ed,
and I believe he should be requested to do so in any event
by 27 September at the latest. If I hear no objections from
any delegation, it will be so decided.

It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

'\lI

25. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite the
Members of the General Assembly to proceed to the
election of the Preside.at of the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. In accordance with rule 94 of the rules
of procedure, the election will be held by secret ballot.

At the invitation of the Temporary President,
Mr. Smirnov (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) and
Mr. Odero-Jowi (Kenya) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Numbe r ofballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Numbe r ofvalid ballots:
Abstentions:
Numbe r ofmembers voting:
Required majority:

125

o

125

3
1::'2
62

Numbe r ofv..otes obtained:
Mr. Malik (Indonesia)
119
Mr. Aidit
1
Mr. Eban (Israel)
1
Mr. Rossides (Cyprus) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

.•.
/r;

;

,.

• • • • • • • •-

3
Presidency of the twenty- sixth session of the General
Assembly.

Mr. Malik took the Chair.
Address by Mr. Adam Malik, President of the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly

r
/,

27. The PRESIDENT: It is with gratitud e and humilit y
that I accept the Assembly's decision by which I have been
elected to preside over this twenty- sixth session of the
General Assembly. The distinction and trust you have thus
accorded me is an honour for my country and my region. I
shall endeavour to my utmost to fulfIl in the true spirit of
the Charter your mandat e and the duties incumb ent upon
me in this high office.
28. I am privileged, fIrst of all, to convey our sincere
appreciation to my predecessor, Mr. Edvard Hambro of
Norway, who has just comple ted his tenn of office as our
President. The compet ence and expertise he applied to the
discharge of his functions and, above all, his wisdom and
clarity of vision no doubt contrib uted decisively to the
twenty- fifth anniversary session. The high standards he set
are indeed a worthy example for me to emulate. To that
end I shall solicit the co-operation and support of all
representatives a.'ld shall, of course, gratefully avail myself
of the wise guidance and COUnSel of our highly esteemed
Secretary-General, .as well as of his able and experienced
associates in the Secretariat.
29. Last year we comme morated a landrriark in the life of
our Organization, the passing of the fIrst quarter -centur y of
its existence. It was a time for celebration, as well as for
sober reflection. Under the motto of "Peace, justice and
progress", we solemnly reaffinned the high priJlciples of the
Charter of the United Nations and adopted unanimously
the Declaration on Principles of Interna tional Law concerning Friendl y Relations and Co-operation among States
[i'esolution 2625 (XXV)] , the Declaration on the Strengthening of Interna tional Security {resolution 2734 (XXV)] ,
and the Interna tional Development Strateg y for the Second
United Nations Development Decade [resolution
2626 (XXV) ], as well as a Programme of Action for the fuii
implem entation of the Declaration on the Grantin g of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 2621 (XXV)] : That session was also a time to remind
ourselves of the next milestone in the life of humani ty on
this globe: th'} approaching fmal quarter of the twen.tieth
century. It is in the coming few years that we must lay the
ground work for getting us safely through the' closing years
of this century .

Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Adam Malik
(Indonesia) was elected President of the twenty-sixth
session of the General A~sembly.

30. Most of us, I am sure, are aware of the £lradual
transfo nnation of the internat ional order from the rigid;
bipolar constel lation of contending forces of the early
post-war decades to the new, multice ntred power configuration taking shape today. We take heart in sel3ing signs of a
growing inclination towards detente among the major
Powers of the world, shifting away from i.deological
intolerance towards new forms of coexistence and global
accommodation.

26. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I extend my sincere
congratulations to Mr. Malik anc invite him to assume the

31. We all know that this process has not been set in
motion by any single factor or event. It is rather the

,i
r·~

,\ .
I'
j'

t·

I'

~.

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings
cumulative influence of various and often interlocking
developments. The emergence and growing assertiveness of
an increasing number of new nation-States as a result of
decolonization is one ef them. The spectacular resurgence
of older nations, previously Qevastated by the Second
World War, is another. The fragmentation of monolithic
power blocs, both in the West and in the East, and the
attainm ent of nuclear parity between the super-Powers are
perhaps the most importa nt of them all.

37. Then there is the population problem. The likelihood
that 30 years from now the world population may have
doubled is bound to further magnify the scale and intensit y
of the problem mentio ned earlier. The question that arises
is: Will mankin d be able to organize itself adequa trly to
meet this challenge? Will mankind be able to provide a
decent life for these multitudes? Will we be able in that
way to secure at least a tolerable level of ciy.Jized life for all
before the century is over?

32. Yet, however vital these transformations may be in the
context of international politics, they are, I believe, but
partial manifestations of a much more profoun d shift in
man's perception of the world and of world conditions
today.

38. The popula tion explosion, national and international
poverty, the harnessing of a runaway technology> the
destruction of human ecology are in my view some of the
major problems which will determine man's capacity to
survive in the quarter century to come. Unless we accord
the necessary priority to their solution, on a sc31e commen·
surate with their magnitude and urgency, the transito ry
world order of today may well end in collapse.

33. It was perhaps man's flight into space which first made
us realize the fragility of human life as a phenom enon in
the universe and the relativity of many of the political
problems we have been absorbed in for so long. This new
awareness has sharpened our percept ion of other problems,
of far greater and decisive signiftcance-problems which
transce nd national boundaries and ideological divisions,
problems that confron t the world commu nity as a whole.
3~!,. Many of these problem s are consequences of
modem
technology.. Our concern here is not limited to the
development of nuclear weapons alone; it includes the
peaceful uses of technology as well. From the outset, man
has used technology to alter his environment in quest of
greater convenience and happiness, and we do not minimize
its positive achievements in this respect. Technology has
helped \0 combat disease and famine, relieve misery and
prevent natural disasters; it has opened unprecedented
opportunities for progress in mahY countries of the world.
We mould continue to use technology, ensuring that the
whole world. shares in its benefits. However, technology has
also produc ed the terrifying arsenal of warfare and has
often served the interests of oppression, intimidation and
ecnnOJl1ic exploitation. Now a stage is being reached where
a runaway technology threaten s to degrade the very quality
of human life and even to alter the biological nature of man
himself.

35. The central problem, therefo re, is not in the nature of
technology itself but rather in its control , and in the
purposes and direction of its further development. For the
ecological cost of modem , unbridled technology and
insensible exhaustion of resources has brought home to us
the fmiteness of the life support systems on our globe.
36. An even more distressing trend is that the tremendous
advances of modern technology continue to widen rather
than narrow the gap betwee n rich and poor, between
developed and developing, both within nations and between
nations. This widening disparity in growth and income
betwee n the developed and the developing countries, the
persistent maldistribution of resources, and the growing
mass unemployment in the poor countfies do not merely
threate n international stability and security; they conjure
up the frightening spectre of a world again polarized into
two opposing camps. But this time it is betwee n the rich
and the poor, the haves and the have·nots, between north
und south.

39. In this context , and in the light of recent events in the
Middle East, I feel constrained as President of the General
Assembly to appeal most urgently to all the parties
concerned to do their utmost to prevent renewed hostilities
and to continue their peace efforts.
40. Our capacity to organize ourselves to these ends,
however, is seriously impzired by some persistent political
problems. It is impossible to hope for the establishment of
a world order capable of addressing itself to these crucial
problems as long as a substantial number of peoples cre
denied their right to self·determination, as long as the utter
immorality of apartheid and racialism continues to be
condoned, and as long as too many nations remain
undeterred in their interference in the domestic affairs of
other countries going through internal upheaval and civil
strife. The United Nations has adopted many resolutions on
all these problems. However, unless much more serious
efforts are made to translate them into action, and to
overcome narrow notions of national interest and national
sovereignty that hamper their implementation, we will not
be able to rise to the challenges I have mentioned.
41. It must be clear by now that none of these problems
can be regarded as the exclusive concern of a single nation
or a particular group of nations; nor can any single nation,
however powerful or affluent, hope to solve them on its
own. Until we succeed in developing a collective capacity to
deal with these world problems, the rich will become richer
and the poor poorer, the strong more insensitive and the
weak more vulnerable, and world peace is bound to suffer.
42. You know that the role of prophe t of doom hardly
fits my personality, and I do not intend to b~come one at
this late stage of life. Still, I strongly feel that a note of
wanting should be sounded emphatically. Coming from
Asia and from a counhy with a very low per capita income,
it is with a sense of special urgency that I speak on these
issues. For I strongly believe that there can be no separate
future for the rich and the poor; there must be a common
future for all of us or there will be no future for any of us;
there r;an be no lasting international peace, except in
conjunction with generalized and just international development; there can be no workable international order unless It
sensi'",le balance is struck between world poplilatior:. criC

,

.

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
world resources, and unless developmental goals are linked
with environmental objectives.

o

•

•

43. A new universal interdependence is beginning to
manifest itself, which may perhaps be called the interdepen.
dence ror survival. What we need, first of all, is a new and
broader vision to accompany it, a vision that would enable
us to recast fundamentally our perception of problems and
U)ake possible new approaches as well as the redirection of
resources that will be required for their solution; a new
global awareness, rooted in the heightened !!ense of human
solidarity and going beyond the self-centred precepts of
nation-States and the ideological reflexes that have guided
our actions during the pa&t decades; a vision that does not
speak to the fears under which we live, but rather to the
hopes of mankind for a brighter future that technologically
could, ~md morally should, be within our grasp.
44. It is in this light that we should search for solutions to
those problems that have persistently preoccupied our
minds and efforts, here in this hall as well as outside it:
problems of intermittent war and disarmament, of poverty
and economic development, of decolonization, and of racial
and other forms of di~crimination.

\"

45. The progress we have made on the road to halt the
arms race has been IlIo\\' and arduous. Yet the present
strategic parity between the major nuclear Powers provides
us with perhaps a last chance to effect a decisive breakthrough towards disarmament, before we face a drift
towards a new spiralling arms race. All nations, and
especially all nuclear Powers, none excluded, should actively participate in removing this basic threat endangering
world peae,;e, as well as ir' effectively solving all other
pressing problems. For unles~ we can create an international
order whi(;h will make it possible to reallocate the hundreds
of billions of dollars now expended on annaments to a
concert~d attack on the ; :mdamental problems of population" unemployment and poverty, peace on this globe will
remain an empty pursuit. The creation of such an international order should l-e nct only the privilege of the big
Powers, but equally the responsibility of the smaller
nations. Therefore, let us hope that in moving towards new
arrangements regarding international security and disarmament, this principle will be given due weight.
46. We have proclaimed the 1970s to be the Second
United Nations Development Decade. We have adopted the
International Development Strategy to gUide us in securing
its objectives. No one, no nation in the world, can have any
quarrel with the lofty goals embodied in this resolve, and
indeed we have all given it our strong support. But here
again, unless our efforts are rooted in a new awarenees of
the inter-conilexion of all the major problems I have been
speaking of, and infused with a much greater sense of
urgency, the Second Development Decade is doomed to
become just another highly inspiring yet unrelated United
Nations endeavour, '1"lite laudable in itself but in effect
relegated to the archives of history.
47. The present international monetary crisis only further
underlines the interdependence between the rich and the
poor countries. If a new international fllvI1etary system is
te, br. worke~ DJ~~., 'by the dei;. countries together-and I
repeat, together-with the poor, it should be geared to a

5

more dynamic concept of world trade, based on a new
international division of labour between the developing and
the developed countries. Seen in this light, it becomes
obvious that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development should be forged into one of the important
instruments for such a reordering of the relationship
between the poor and the rich countries.
48. For the Second Development Decade to succeed, the
United Nations must acknowledge the crucial link between
international peace and intemational social justice. We must
reduce the many imbalances between the rich and the poor
countries, in the distribution of wealth and power, ill the
use of the earth's limited raw materials. and in the a~cess to
and the creation of new scientific and teihnological
knowledge. Development and environmental protection
should not be competing endeavours; rather, we must
reconcile the needs for development wi'th those for the
continued viability of man's environment. Only then can
we cGnfidentIy proceed to prepare for the future exploitation of r,ew resources, of the continental shelf, and of the
sea-bed and ocean floor for the common benefit of all and
with justice for all.

'c

49. It is in this connexion, therefore, that we should look
to the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, to. be held in Stockholm in June
1972, as a timely and important effort to' prOVide us with
the greater insights and balanced concepts needed to guide
our future actions on this score.
50. There is r-o doubt in my mind that the nations of the
world have little time to lose in articulating such a global
vision and in fashioning the organizational tools needed for
a rational and concerted attack on world problems. Our
experience so far may prove insufficient for this task. Our
institutions are stjll far fwm adequate, ;md imaginative
innovation will certainly be required. A start in this
direction should be made, consciously, purposefully and
?romptIy. I can see no btltter place to begin than light here.
51. The United Nations, initially conceived principally to
ensure mternational security in the world, has gradually
evolved, with considerable success, into the international
forum for the formulation and launching of deveiopment
programmes. It would be only logical now for this world
as~;embly to evolve into a focal point of all the efforts of
mankind to secure its own survival and into an instrument
with wpjch to nurture and structure at least the minimum
Ctlnditions for civilized life for all in tile kind of world in
which we will have to live.
52. Here I am not in the first place thinking of specific
orgcnizational structures, although they will of ~ourse have
to materialize at some stage. I am speaking rather of a new
orientation, a new ethos.
53. This orientation, this new ethos, should also relate to
C:lr new constituency-that of the younger genenuions of
the world. We must realize that, unless the Ud+.ed Natim•.>
makes sen>:K~ and is merdingful to the youth of today, the
Drganizlttion is doomed to atrophy or irrelevance. It is,
after all, their future even more than it is ours, the older
generations that we are speaking of.

',
I
• 1]

0

1

1
,1
I

i
>

•

~ .i '

_

'.'~ii. i, i.tfPBkA~~~,:~<l4l§44r~~~4i~:\iI·\t~~li1~~~~{f~!-qr~~~'t:~,;~,>,htA&\,}a;lii,/t{~;1#:rL,~;'}~"!"F~~4~;i-"j\~\-:--'~i'c)tF~"~~"

::;\\

General Assembly _ Twenty-sixth Session _ Plenary Meetings

54. Throughout history each gentration has brought with
it its own ideals and aspirations. In the new generations
eme~ging ~oday, the chan?es in .values and life stYle~ .are
mamfestatlOns of the rapId SOCIal, cultural and pohtical
c' '''ges through which the whole world is passing.
55. The new perceptions of the fragility of human life, the
new awareness of the fIniteness of the globe's life-sustaining
systems, the heightened sense of moral indignation at
continued injustice, but especially the uncertainty of their
own future-these are the factors that have determined the
changes in orientation, values and life styles among the
young. These are the factors that underlie their despair and
their militancy, as well as their hope.
56. In the developing countries, the lack of educational
opportunities and the spectre of unemployment mixed with
their hope and commitment in the efforts of nationbuilding give a special cast to the mood of the young.
57. Thus, the world's younger generations reflect not only
the uncertainties and agonies of the present but also the
promise of the future. To my mind, there is no doubt that
for all the confusion and contradictions that mark their
emergence, these younger generations are the carriers of a
new idealism; they ~e the vehicles of a new sense of global
human solidllLity, cutting across national boundaries.
58. The problems of this Assembly are also their problems-not simply in intellectual terms. It should be realized
that these problems and our inability to solve them have
left thel~ indelible mark on our youth.
59. It is in this light, too, that we must understand their
impatient insistence on new departures, new solutions. The
need for us to redefIne our aspirations in terms which make
sense to the youth of today is therefore crucial. We have to
harness their idealism and give it concrete international
purpose by relating it to the accumulated experience and
knowledge within the United Nations. Let us, the old and
the new generations, work together within the framework
of the United Nations for the solution of problems
affecting our collective survival. This may well give an
added impetus to the United Nations to rise above the
conflicts of the world today and to come to grips with the
great problems of our future existence.
60. Whether this can happen will of course depend on
what its Member States, and especially the major Powers,
want to make of the United Nations. An essential condition
will be not only to strengthen the United Nations moral
right to speak on behalf of all, but also to ensure its
operational continuity. It is a sad reflection of the present
state· of affairs, therefore, to fmd our Organization, after 25
years of life, still engulfed in the gravest crisis yet affecting
its solvency.
61.· We all know that last year my predecessor, Mr. Hambi-o, graciously made his good offIces available to join the
Secretary.Generalin searching for avenues .that could lead
us . • out•. of·our long-standing fmancial difficulties. Now the
UnitedNations has for all practical purposes reached a state
ofbankruptcy. None ofus Can run away from this grim
reality.

62. This Assembly may therefore be the last opportunity
to take the actions that can no longer be deferred. For this
we need the co·operation of all; we can no longer afford to
shirk the unavoidable political and legal decisions necessary
not only to solve these long-neglected problems, but, even
more so, to assure t.lte future solvency and viability of the
United Nations.
63. We must come to the realization that at some point
every nation, big or small, strong or weak, will need the
United Nations. Those among us who at one time or
another thought that they could afford to do without the
United Nations or that they could exclude it from certain
problems have come to regret such a view. In this context, I
speak from the perspective of a country which at one point
vacated its United Nations seat-and returned to it.
64. In this era of universal interdependence, therefore, let
this Assembly resolve to become, and to be remembered as,
- An Assembly of universality that has begun the
conscious effort to build a new international order in which
the diversity of nations is set in the essential unity of
mankind. We Indonesians have a phrase for it: Bhinneka
Tunggal !ka, meaning unity in diversity;
- An Assembly forging a true universality of membership
to encompass all nations of the world, including the divided
nations, without prejudice as "":0 political ideology, social
system or legal recognition;
- An Assembly working towards a universality of peace,
one and indivisible, throughout the entire globe; a peace
not shaped only by the powerful but resulting from just
relations between all nations; a peace that can bring an end
to L'le agony of war in Indo-China and the Middle East and
to the anguish of refugees and victims of political and social
disruptions everywhere;
- An Assembly offering a universality of hope, for the
rich and the poor alike; a hope that reflects the universal
capacity of man to reassert himself ant: "is humanit} ;n the
face of the challenging problems of tomorrow; a hope for a
new world order where there is peace, freedom and justice,
and a materially suffIcient, !is well as a meaningful, life for
all;

- Finally, an Assembly giving proof of the United
Nations capacity to respond constructively to the demands
of our time.
AGENDA ITEM 2S
Admission of new Members to the Uilited Nations
65. Thll PRESIDENT: In accordance with the procedure
followed in the past, I should now like to invite the General
Assembly to examine item 25 of its agenda entitled,
"Admission of new Members to the United Nations". This
special procedure has been'applied previously in order to
give newly
States which have been recomCouncil for membership in our
mended by the
oPI:)Ortun~ty if the General Assembly acts
favoul:abl,y"on jh.ek .·re'qul~st, of participating from the

t

..

t
t

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
outset in the work of this session. If there is no objection,
we shall proceed in that manner.
It was so decided.

66. The PRESIDENT: The "ecunty COl.:ncil has unanimously recoII'.mended the aChmssion of Bhutan [A /82 "78J•
Bahrain [A/8359] and Qatar [A/8381] to membership in
the United Nations.

..

67. I suggest that we consider first draft resolution
A/L.627 and Add.l, on the admission of Bhutan. May I
take it that the General Assembly accepts the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts the draft resolution?
The draft resolution
2751 (XXVI)}.

was

adopted

[resolution

68. The PRESIDENT: I declare Bhutan admitted to
membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of Bhutan was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly hall.

69. The PRESIDENT: We shall now consider the draft
resolution in document A/L.628 recommending the admission of Bahrain.
70. I call on the representative of the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen, who wishes to speak in explanation of
his vote.
71. Mr. ISMAIL (people's Democratic RepUblic of
Yemen): Mr. President, it is my great pleasure to convey to
you my heartfelt congratulatkms on your election to the
esteemed office of President of the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly. We share in the unanimous conviction that you are most worthy of the great task you are
undertaking, and we take this opportunity to greet in your
person the friendly people of Indonesia, with whom my
Government and people enjoy the most cordial and
brotherly relationship.
72.. I should also like to take this opportunity to greet our
outgoing President and congratulate him on the efficient
and orderly manner in which the delegations to the
twenty-fifth sessioIi of the General Assembly were guided
under his wise leadership.
73. My delegation will vote against the membership of
Bahrain and Qatar in the United Nations. In voting against
the draft resolutions contained in documents A/L.628 and
A/L.629, my delegation will be voting not against the
representation of the people of the Arabian Gulf in this
world Organization, but rather against their misrepresentation by puppet rulers. We will be voting not against the
independence of Bahrain and Qatar, but against pseudoindependence which perpetuates indirect colonial influence
and internal suppression.
74. My country suffered under colonialism for 130 years.
The colonial Power imposed upon it a number of puppet
sultans and emirs against the will of the people. But they
were all defeated by our National Liberation Front. We

7

therefore understand the motives behind the contracts
concluded between British colonialism and its proteges.
75. Mr. President, let me assure you, the General Assembly and the Security Council of my Government's high
esteem and respect. However, we feel that it is our duty as a
Member State of this world Organization to apprise other
Members of the facts.
76. With your permission, Mr. President, I should like now
to reiterate the position of my Government as previously
stated at the 1578th meeting of the Security Council, held
on 15 September 1971:
"First, my delegation maintains that the declarations of
independence of Qatar and the other sultanates and
emirates do not change the colonial relationship between
those entities and their colonial patron and are therefore
fakes. Disregarding the wishes of the people for real
independence and self-rule is not conducive to peace and
stability in the area.
"Secondly, it is apparent that the declarations of
independence which have been concluded between the
Governments of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the respective rulers are aimed at
perpetuating the colonial hegemony and exploiting the
resources of the area with the complicity of the puppet
rulers.
"Thirdly, 'the British-appointed Sultans and Emirs are
totally alien to the best interests of the people of the area
and they are not qualified to conclude agreements in the
name of the people."2
77. In conclusion, we salute the people of the Arabian
Gulf anu associate ourselves with their aspirations for a
genuine independence and popular self-rule.
78. I reaffirm again that we are against the admission of
Bahrain and Qatar for the reasons which I have just
mentioned.
79. The PRESIDENT: We shall now vote on the draft
resolution in document A/L.628 on the admission of
Bahrain. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Costa Rica, Cuba,Cy;
prus, CzechoslOVakia, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Ivory ~oast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,Khmer
Republic, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty~sixth

Year, 1578th meeting, paras. 13-15.

l

r

8

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

Arab Republic, Luxembourg. Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius. Mongolia. Morocco,
Ntlpal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicara&ua. Niger, Nigeria, Nonvay, Panama, Paraguay, People's Republic of the
Congo, Plillippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia. South Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, YugoslaVia,
Zambia.

Against: None.

The draft resolution l\US adopted by 119 votes to none
[resolution 2752 (XXVI)]. 3,4
80. The PRESIDENT: I declare Bahrain admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

The delegation of Bahrain was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly hall.
81. The PRESIDENT: We shall now consider the draft
resolution on the admission of Qatar to membership in the
United Nations [AIL. 629J. A recorded vote has been
requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
III favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bunna, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Khmer Republic, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Republic, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
People's Republic of Cungo, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of

..· .
I
,,

.•

3 The delegations of Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Singapore, Swaziland
and Thailand subsequently informed the Secretariat that they
wished to have their votes recorded as having been in favour of the
draft resolution.
4 Thedelegation of the People's Democratic RepUblic of Yemen
SUbsequ.ently informed the Secretariat that it wished to have its vote
recorded as having been against the (:lIaft resolution.

I ·.,.,.\x....,',.
_~i.'~,\,~::.~_
.~;-:::::·I',::' ,:~ "'"
.• :.- ,';;"

America, Upper Volta, Uruguay. Venezuela. Yemen, Yugoslavia. Zambia.

Against: People·s Democratic Republic of Yemen.
The draft resolution was adopted by 126 votes to 1
[resolution 2753 (XXVI)).
82. The PRESIDENT: I declare Qatar admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

The delegation of Qatar was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly hall.
83. The PRESIDENT: As President of the General Assembly I take pleasure in welcoming the delegations of Bhutan,
Bharain and Qatar. I am sure that they will make valuable
contributions to the work of the Organization. May I
extend to the Governments and the peoples of these new
Members my sincere congratulations on their admission to
the United Nations and my pe~onal wishes for their
happiness and prosperity.
84. Mr. Bahadur SINGH (India): Mr. President, may I
offer you my delegation's warmest congratulations on your
election as President of this session. Your unanimous
election to this high office is not only a recognition of your
own contributions to world peace and international cooperation but also an honour to your great country and
indeed to the whole of Asia. Our full tributes will of course
be paid to you and to your distinguished predecessor when
my colleague the Foreign Minister of India addresses the
Assembly on 27 September.

85. On behalf of the delegation of India and of the
co-sponsors of the draft resolutions I am very happy to
welcome Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar as new Members of our
family of nations.
86. My country's relations with Bhutan date back many
centuries and have always been close and friendly. It is,
therefore, a matter of particular gratification to us in India
that Bhutan has entered this Organization.
87. His Majesty the King of Bhutan is perhaps the only
monarch in history who has of his own accord handed over
full powers to his people. The people of Bhutan are most
peace-loving and friendly and they are justly proud of their
own traditions and culture. They are also forging ahead
along the path of modern development. It has been India's
privilege to participate in co-operative efforts with the
Government and the people of Bhutan in this task under
the wise and able leadership of His Majesty King Jigme
Dorji Wangchuk. Bhutan has chosen for itself the path of
peace and non-alignment. We are confident that, under the
continued leadership and inspiration of His Majesty the
King, Bhutan will make rapid strides in its development
plans.
88. Our relations with the Arabian Peninsula and the
adjoining Gulf are also very close. For centuries we have
been partners in trade and have developed ties of friendship. We welcome Bahrain and Qatar as Members of this
great family of nations. We hope that with their membership not only will the universality of this Organization be

"

.
•

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
further strengthened but also peace wiU be strengthened
and tensions reduced in that region.
89. Mr. KHALATBARI (Iran): I shall, in the course of my
general statement, express our full. sentiments to you,
Mr. President, lipon your election as President of the
twenty-sixth session· of the General Assembly. NeverJIeless,
I cannot allow this opportunity to pass without expressing
my heartfelt congratulations.

"

..
•

90. It is with grea\: pleasure that my delegation welcomes
the decision of the General Assembly to admit the States of
Bahrain, Qatar and Bhutan to membership in the United
Nations.
91. The emergence of peoples from non-self-governing
status to that of independent and free nations and their
subsequent admission to the United Nations are always
memorable and happy events. The admission of Bahrain
and Qatar is, however, - for us all the more memorable
because of their historical ties with Iran.
92. As is well known, Bahrain has a special place in the
hearts and minds of the Iranian people.
93. We have for many centuries shared the same history,
culture and religion. The parting of the ways has not been
easy, but it has nevertheless been peaceful. In fact, it
started with the historical statement of my August Sovereign in New Delhi on 4 January 1969, which set into
motion a peaceful and democratic process leading ultimately to this auspicious occasion which we whole-heartedly
welcome here today.
94. The peaceful process attending Bahrain's birth as a
separate and independent nation will also characterize its
relations as a peace-loving State with other countries.
Bahrain has, from the very first days of its independence,
announced its firm adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter, and we are confident that that country
will fulftl its obligations as a responsible Member of the
United Nations.
95. It is with no less emotion that my delegation
congratulates Qatar on its admission to the United Nations.
Given the close and long-standing relations between Iran
and Qatar, linked by bonds of culture and religion, we
rejoice in seeing Qatar taking its rightful place as an
independent State in the community of nations.
96. Dedicated to the promotion of progress and prosperity
for their peoples, and to peace and stability in the world,
Bahrain and Qatar will make impprtant and valuable
contributions to the work of this Organization. Under the
enlightened leadership of His Highness Shaikh rsa, the Amir
of Bahrain, and His Highness Shaikh Ahmad, the Amir of
Qatar, both countries have already embarked upon important progressive economic plans which will bring not only
greater economic well-being but also better education and
health care for theLr peoples.
97. At this stage I can only express regret at the fact that
some Members of this Organization change well-known
geographical names.

9

98. The admission of Bhutan to membership in the United
Nations is likewise a source of great pleasure to us. Because
of its geographical position, Bhutan has served as a bridge
between two great ancient civilizations. We are confident
that Bhutan will also make valuable contributions to the
work of this Organization.
99. I wish to extend my heartfelt greetings to the
representatives of Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar and assure
them of our sincere co-operation in the United Nations.
100. Mr. AI.-JABER (Kuwait):5 .Mr. President, at the
outset, r should like to extend to you my congratulations
on your election to your high office.
101. It gives me great pleasure, on behalf of the Amir,
Government and people of Kuwait, to welcome most
warmly the sister States of Bahrain and Qatar on the
occasion of their admission to the United Nations.
102. Our rejoicing over this happy event is derived from
our conviction that the two Arab Members will work
?'1alously and effectively to promote the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and to uphold the precepts
of international co-operation.
103. While we welcome today the admission of the two
Members Bahrain and Qatar in confonnity with Article 4 of
the Charter, we should emphasize that the admission of
those two States is the culmination of a natural process
stemming from their status as two independent and fully
sovereign Arab States. We firmly believe that Bahrain and
Qatar will work within the framework of the United
Nations to strengthen the international Organization and to
fulfil the lofty principles and ideals of the Charter.
104. Kuwait, which has the closest ties and the strongest
brotherly relations with the States of Bahrain and Qatar,
pledges its full co-operation with the two sister- States in
order to make a living reality of our glorious history and to
ensure the realization of our common destiny and the
fulftlment of our aspirations. Kuwait will strive, together
with the two sister Member States, to develop the United
Nations, enhance its prestige and strengthen international
peace and security.
105. r should like to express from the rostrum of this
body my heartfelt congratulations to His Highness the Amir
of the State of Bahrain, the Amir of the State of Qatar and
their Governments and peoples 011 this historic occasion.
106. I should also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the new State of Bhutan, which has an ancient
history and civilization, and to express my congratulations
to its Government and people. I wish the three States which
have joined the international Organization today success
and prosperity.
107. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom):.Mr. President,
fIrst of all r should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you upon your election to the presidency. r
know that under your wise and able guidance our delibera5 Mr. Al-Jaber spoke in Arabic. The English version of his
statement was supplied by the delegation.

f

l

I

. {. ,

t

I

)1' _..

10

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

tions will go forward fruitfully and will prosper. I assure
you of the full co·operation of my delegation. I should like
also to take this opportunity to congratulate our outgoing
President. Mr. Hambro, on his wise, prompt and efficient
conduct of our affairs during the past year. It is difficult to
find sufficient words of praise for him, but he has set a
standard which we all admire and which will be hard to
aqual.

I,

,
J

t
f

I

!~

!
f,
f

I

I,t
f.

I'
t'
I

i

_

108. Nowadays it is a remarkable occasion for this
Assembly to admit as many as three new Members in a
single day. For my own delegation the occasion is made all
the more special by the fact that my Government has long
had particularly close and friendly ties with each of our
new Members. That is L1.e first reason why I have asked to
be allowed to say a brief word of welcome to each of them.
I am, however, speaking in two capacities. I have also been
asked by Mr. Hambro and my colleagues of Western
European and other States to speak on their behalf, and it
gives me much pleasure to do so.
109. The first of our new Members, in order of admission,
is Bhutan. On 10 February this year I was able, at the
1566th meeting of the Security Council, to express the
particular pleasure of my Government at the proposal that
Bhutan :ihould be admitted to membership of the United
Nations. For several centuries my country has enjoyed close
relations with Bhutan, and my countrymen have formed
valued and lasting friendships with its people. I do not need
to repeat here what I said in the Security Council, except to
add, on behalf of the Western European and Others Group,
several of whom have geographic as well as friendly
affinities with Bhutan, how glad we are that Bhutan is now
a Member. We welcome among us their representatives,
headed by His Royal Highness Namgyal Wangchuk. They
are no strangers in this place, since they have individually
visited us as friends and observers of our proceedings in the
past. We look forward to the contribution that I am sure
they will make to the work of this Organization.
110. Next, I should like to say a few words about Bahrain
and Qatar, whose admission has been so overwhelmingly
voted by us-a vote which is sufficient answer to the
aspersions made by one delegation.

111. The Close and friendly ties between my Government
and the rulers and people of Bahrain, going back over 150
years, make it a matter of special pleasure for me to
congratulate the Bahrain Government on its admission to
membership of our Organization here today. Bahrain's
successful application for membership is also a cause of
particular satisfaction to my delegation because of the way
in which it was possible for the machinery of the United
Nations to be used to settle last year a long-standing
problem between my Government and the Government of
Iran-to settle it peacefully and amicably in a way which
should be an example for us all to follow in the future.
Therefore we welcome with particular warmth and satisfaction Ballfail1'S representatives headed' by His Excellency
Sllaikh Mohamed bin Mubarak AJ-Khalifah, Foreign Minister of the State of Bahrain.
.
112. I,ikewise, it is with great pleasure that my delegation
wi?lcomes the State of Qatar to membership of the United
Nations. As in the case of Bahrain, the ties between Qatar

and my Government are long standing, and I am confident
that Qatar, no less than Bahrain, will play an active and
constructive part in the work of our Organization through
its representative, Mr. Hassan Kame], who is with us today.
113. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, I shall pay the
well-deserved tribute of my delegation to you on your
election to the high office of President of this session of the
General Assembly at a later date. My purpose now is on
behll1f of His Majesty's Government and the people of
Nepal, to extend the hand of welcome to three new
Member States of the United Nations: Bhutan, Bahrain and
Qatar.
114. The admission of new Member States is always a
joyous occasion. It is with the most sincere felicitations and
the greatest goodwill to the peoples and Governments of
Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar that we welcome their admission to membership in the United Nations today. The
circumstances which have brought these three sovereign
States to the United Nations reflect credit on all sides. The
delegation of Nepal believes that the decision of the
Governments of the three counti.ies to apply for membership represents a sincere and profound determination on
their part to join in the common endeavour in the interest
of world peace. The admission of these countries signifies
an important step towards international co-operation. My
delegation is certain that the new Member States will play
their rightful role in the affairs of the international
community and that they will bring added vigour and
wisdom into the world Organization.
115. If we rejoice at the increase in the membership of the
United Nations and the further step thus taken towards the
universality of the Organization, the delegation of Nepal
fmds particular reason to be gratified at the admission of
the Kingdom of Bhutan, a country of incomparable natural
beauty with which my country shares many common
features of geography, a neighbOUring country to which my
country is bound by strong historical ties of social, ethnic
and cultural afftnities. In recent years the personality of the
land and its people has developed from strength to strength
under the enlightened leadership of a beloved monarch, His
Majesty King Wangchuk of Bhutan. We wish the people of
Bhutan contimed prosperity and happiness in the years
ahead.
116. We have similar feelings of friendship and good
wishes for the peoples of Bahrain and Qatar.
117. Allow me, in conclusion, to take this occasion to
express the sincere hope of my delegation for a warm,.
productive lUld rewarding relationship and mutual co·
operation with the delegations of Bhutan, Bahrain and
Qatar at the United Nation&.
118. Mr. TOUKAN (Jordan): Mr. President, I should like
today to ~wail myself of this unique opportunity to extend,
on behalf of the Asian States and of my delegation, our
warmest ap.d sincerest congratulations to you on your
election to the presidency of the twenty-sixth session of the
United Nations General Assembly. Your record of superb
performance, fine qualities of statesmanship, hard work and
renowned contribution to this great OrganiZation are well
known to all of us. Your assl;lmpti(~m of this high office

•

i

j.

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
reinforces our determination to work towards the fulmment of the principles contained in the Charter of this great
Organization.

I:,

..

•

119. As Chairman of the Asian group of States, and on
behalf of my delegation, I feel honoured and privileged
today to have the opportunity to congratulate and welcome
to our midst the new sister States of Bhutan, Bahrain and
Qatar. Their presence today strengthens our belief in the
principles of this great Organization. The continual admission of new States to the United Nations will no doubt
enhance the chances for better understanding; and, when
that is reached, one can envisage a brighter future for
achieving stability, peace and prosperity throughout the
world.
120. My delegation believes that thi& great forum should
be open to all States without exception because it provides
us with the proper ingredients for a safer, happier and more
peaceful world.
121. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, before
speaking on the agenda item before us, I should like to avail
myself of this opportunity to congratulate you most
sincerely on your electitm to the high and esteemed office
of President of the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly. We are fortunate that we have such an eminent
and able statesman to guide our proceedings during this
crucial session.

1

."

9 ' ,

122. I should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the outgoing President of the twenty-fifth
session, Mr. Edvard Hambro, who presided so ably over our
proceedings during the last session.
123. On behalf of the Government and people of Kenya
and on behalf of my delegation, it gives me great pleasure
to congratulate the new Member States being admitted to
the United Nations today. I am referring to Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar. The Government of Kenya has always
supported the principles of self-determination, accession to
independence and realization of national dignity. It is
therefore particularly gratifying to my delegation to welcome the new Members to this august body.
124. As we celebrate and welcome these new Member
States, I feel obliged to remind this supreme body of the
world of the fact that many countries and peoples are still
under the yoke of foreign colonial domination. I am
obliged to point out further that those people have been
denied the opportunity to exercise their basic right to
determine their own future in the way they think fit. In
view of this, the United Nations still has an unfmished task:
the task of decolonization. It is the hope of my delegation
that, under your able leadership, Sir, the Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session will apply itself once more to the task
of putting an end to the colonial system, especially in
southern Africa.
125. With those observations I should like to repeat that
my delegation is most gratified that the friendly countries
of Bhutan, Qatar and Bahrain have been admitted to this
august body, and we congratulate them.
126. Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, please

11

accept my congratulations on your election to the responsible post of President of the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations. Allow me, on
behalf of the delegations of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria, the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mongoli9.n
People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, and also on behalf of my
own delegation, the delegation of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, to congratulate the peoples and Governments of Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar on the proclamation of
the independence of those countries and on their admission
to memberiliip in the United Nations.
127. The attainment ,of independence by the peoples of
Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar after many centuries of the
colonial yoke is further proof of the fact that no forces can
stop the struggle of the peoples for freedom and independence and that all attempts by the colonial and imperialist
Powers to continue their exploitation and oppression of the
peoples are doomed to failure. The admission of Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar to the United Nations, which is
supported by the socialist States, is further confirmation of
the triumph of the Leninist idea of drawi.ng into active
participation in international organs, conferences and
meetings representatives of the countries of the East, of the
countries of Asia and Africa, which as a result of the
imperialist policy of the colonial Powers have been forcibly
prevented from participating in international life. The
socialist countries actively support the national liberation
movement of colonial countries and peoples. In 1960, on
the initiative of the Soviet Union, the General Assembly of
the United Nations adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence t'o Colonial Countries and Peoples
{resolution 1514 (XV)}, which has played an important
role in the liberation of such countries from alien dom.ination. While noting with satisfaction that dozens of countries
have in the past decade gained their independence and have
been admitted to membership in the United Nations, we at
the same time realize quite clearly and distinctly that the
struggle for the liberation and independence of colonial
countries and peoples is not yet concluded. Although the
United Nations now consists of 130 Members, questions
relating to its universality have still not been solved.
128. The United Nations is called upon to do everything
in its power to strengthen intemationai security, and t()
guarantee the right to self-determination and independence
to those peoples which are still under the domination of
colonialism and racism. The socialist countries are in favour
of the full and unconditional implementation of. the
decisions of the United Nations concerning the eliminatioji'
of the remaining colonial reginles and in favour of· the
universal condemnation and boycott of any manifestations
of racism and apartheid. The socialist countries believe that
Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar, which have just been admitted
to the United Nations, will pursue a peaceful-foreign policy
directed towards strengthening international security and
establishing friendly relations with all countries. The
delegations of the socialist States wish the peoples of
Bhutan, Bahrain. and Qatar prosperity and progress 0I11Ae

:dt~~~t~:~~::~~~l~~~~~::=:cJ

12

t

,:!

'

G.eneral Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

success in solving their economic and social problems in the
interests of their peoples.

vote in regard to the admission of Bahrain was not
recorded, owing to a mechanical error.

129. We welcome the delegations of Bhutan, Bahrain and
Qatar and wish them fruitful participation in the common
efforts of peace-loving States in the various organs of the
United Nations to achieve the goals of peace and progress.
We express our readiness to co-operate closely with the new
States Members of the United Nations to achieve the noble
goals set out in the Charter of the United Nations.

136. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): The twenty-sixth session
of our Assembly is to be most sincerely congratulated, Sir,
on unanimously electing you as its President. You are a
most esteemed and worthy successor to the distinguished
and able President of the twenty-fifth session, Edvard
Hambro of Norway.

130. Mr. ALl (pakistan): Mr. President, may I take this
opportunity to extend to you the warmest felicitations of
the Pakistan delegation on your election as President of this
august Assembly. In elevating you to this high office the
Member States have conferred on you an honour which, if I
may say so, you richly deserve. We in Asia feel particularly
proud to see one of Asia's illustrious sons so recognized. I
pledge to you the whole-hearted support and co-operation
of my delegation.
131. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our thanks and admiration to your predecessor for the
distinguished manner in which he performed his functions.
132. The representative of Jordan, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Asian group of States for the month of
September, has already, with his usual erudition, expressed
our sentiments in welcoming three new Members to this
Organization. Having listened to the eloquent and most
comprehensive remarks of my brother from Jordan, I
frankly do not need to say very much. However, because of
our close and cordial ties with Bhutan generated by
geographical proximity and because of the special cultural
affinities that exist between my country and Qatar and
Bahrain, I should like to take the liberty of adding some
brief remarks.
133. It is gratifying to fmd that we shall be joined by
three more States which have recently reached full independence and self-determination. We, who suffered for about
200 years und:er colonial rule and were subjected to
extensive exploitation, know the importance and joy of
securing independence in spirit as well as in law. It gives us
great pleasure to see Bhutan, a neighbour, obtain recognition of its legitimate rights and occupy its rightful place in
the comity of nations as a sovereign and independent State.
The people and Government of Pakistan rejoice at this
happy and auspicious development and warmly welcom~ its
joining us as an equal Member. My country also llloks
forward to working in close co-operation with the Bhu:an
delegation.
134. I am very happy to have the privilege on behalf of
my country, to extend a hearty welcome to Qatar and
Bahrain. With equal warmth we welcome them in our midst
and look forward to a close and mutually beneficial
association with them. The constitutional developments in
the Gulf are bringing into existence a number of independent States in that area, which is to be welcomed. It is
sincerely hoped that there will be no outside interference in
the developments which are currently taking place.
135. I should like to make it clear that Pakistan voted in
favour. of all three new Member States. It appears.that our

137. With the eyes of the peoples of the world, especially
the peoples of Asia and Africa, fixed upon this Assembly
with anxiety, expectation and hope, it is most fitting to
have a distingUished son of Asia presiding over what you,
Mr. President, have just designated as "the Assembly of
universality".
138. As I happen to be the Chairman of the African group
of States for this month, it is my privilege, in the name of
the African Member States, to welcome the three new
Asian nations just admitted to our Organization-Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar. The African representatives are, moreover, happy to welcome their new colleagues joining them
in the hall. They are confident of future fruitful and close
co-operation.
139. In welcoming these three new Asian Members, the
African group is especially mindtul of two basic Charter
principles, namely, the inalienable right to freedom and
self-determination and the universality of this world Organization. We ,vish the nations of Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar
every success-first, success in realizing the aspirations of
their peoples in their challenging effort of nation-building
and of making real and meaningful their sovereignty and
independence and, secondly, success in sharing the international responsibilities of which you, Mr. President, have
just spoken in your most eloquent statement, in our
common struggle to attain freedom and justice leading to
progress in peace.

. ..
!J

•

140. Mr. JOHNSON (Jamaica): Mr. President, may I take
this opportunity in the name of the Latin American group
of States, which I have the honour to represent as
Chairman, to congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of fIe twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly and to assure you of our fullest co-operation in
the endeavour to make it a fruitful and successful session.
141. May I also express the warm and sincere appreciation
of the Latin American group of States for the excellent
manner in which Mr. Hambro guided our deliberations
throughout the historic commemorative session during the
twenty-fifth session of the Assembly and also throughout
the twenty-fifth session itself.
142. It gives me great pleasure on behalf of the Latin
American group to welcome the new States of Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar to membership in the United Nations.
143. The State of Bhutan, lying high in the Himalayas, has
a romantic and heroic history. As a landlocked country, it
has encountered many problems of communication with
t.lle oUf!lide world. It has maintained its integrity and its
cultural distinctiveness through the years. Its contribution
to the work of the United Nations and to mutual

..

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
understanding and co-operation is welcomed by those of us
who look forward to an era of universality.
144. Bahrain and Qatar have a history no less romantic.
Situated as they are in the Persian Gulf, they have played a
role in world history since civilization dawned in the valley
of the Tigris and the Euphrates. In recent times their
mineral wealth has made them centres of communication
and commerce in the Indian Ocean. Their contribution to
our work will be welcome, for they bring with them the
wisdom of ages and attitudes born of a culture that has long
enriched others in the world.
145. The Latin American group will make every effort to
co-operate with these new States in their quest for world
peace and in promoting the ideals that will ensure the
dignity of man.

.

146. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): Mr. President, even if it means
preceding my Foreign Minister, I cannot let this occasion
pass without expressing a few words of good wishes. It is a
source of great pleasure and pride for the Iraqi delegation
to express to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations upon
your election to the presidency of the twenty-sixth session
of the General Assembly. The fact that you are a true
patriot of Indonesia, a real son of the great continent of
Asia and a tireless fighter for the cause of justice and
freedom the world over, makes your election to this lofty
post all the more fitting. Iraq, which shares numerous
bonds with the great people of Indonesia, takes a special
pride in your assumption of the presidency.
~

s ..

147. I cannot let this occasion pass without expressing our
admiration for Mr. Hambro on the distinguished and able
manner in which he discharged his duties as President of the
twenty-fifth session of the Assembly.

13

150. The League of Arab States has recently admitted to
membership both Qatar and Bahrain and I wish, on behalf
of the Arab group of States, to convey our best wis..'1es to
the three States. Perhaps Qatar, Bahrain and Bhutan are
small countries in terms of population and area; but their
great cultural heritage and their dedication to the cause of
peace and harmony among nations will surely enable them
to make an important contribution to the work of this
Assembly.
151. Mr_ BUSH (United States of America): Mr. President,
may I join with others in congratulating you most wamuy
on your election as President of this session of the General
Assembly.
152. I should like to add the voice ofthe United States in
welcoming Bhutan, Bahrain ~d Qatar to membership in
the United Nations. We are happy to have voted in the
Security Council for their admission. TheIr entry into this
Organization as the result of an amicable accommodation
to the realities of this changing world is specially b.eartening. We welcome them and we look forward to co-operating
with them in achieving the aims of the Charter.
153. Mr. BAROODY (SaUdi Arabia): Mr. President, I shall
refrain from congratulating you personally, for indeed that
would be like praising a brother. Rather we tb.e Members
must congratulate ourselves on having elected you as our
President of the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly-mindful that we are all grateful to your predecessor, Mr. Hambro, who distinguished himself in the same
Chair during the last session.
154. You are not to be envied for being President, for
indeed you are going to be the arbiter of our decisions in
the sense that you will have to ensure that we do not get
out of hand when any subject or item which may not be so
easily resolved is discussed. However, since you hail from an
Asian country noted for its long history and rich culture,
we have full confidence that under your guidance the most
intractable problems will be dealt with in an orderly and
peaceful manner. I think I should not say anything else in
praise of you lest it be embarrassing.

148. This day has seen more than one auspicious event,
for we have just voted to admit three new Member States to
the United Nations, namely, Bahrain, Bhutan and Qatar.
May I be allowed to congratulate them on this happy
occasion and wish them all prosperity and success in their
new role within the community of nations? Iraq takes a
special pride in seeing two sister Arab States attain their
independence and enjoy their full rights as new Members of
the United Nations. We have always believed that the
freedom and independence of the Arab nation is indivisible,
that none of the Arab countries can feel truly free and
secure until every inch of Arah territory is free from foreign
hegemony and exploitation. We have always rendered every
support and assistance to our Arab brethren whenever
necessary in the struggle against foreign occupation and
exploitation.

155. We must also congratulate ourselves on haVing
elected three-new Asian States as Members of this Organization. The more the Organization prolifen~tes, the more
universal it becomes. 'file common adage, I think, applies:
there is safety in numbers. Instead of the world community
being dominated by a few Powers, its mosaic will be such
that no one Power, no matter how strong, will be able to do
what it has done in the last few decades or in past centuries.

149. It gives us, therefore, great pride to see two new Arab
States attain sovereignty and independence. Both Qatar and
Bahrain are situated in an area which is very close to my
countiy and is vital to its national interests. With the people
of Qatar and Bahrain, the people of Iraq share the strongest
bonds of history, culture, language and religion. But
perhaps most important of all is the sense of belonging, and
the community of faith and fate that our peoples share is
the essential manifestation of their Arab belonging and
awareness. It is, therefore, my pleasant duty to express
these few words of congratulation and welcome to our new
colleagues in this assembly of nations.

156. I seize this occasion to thank God that the health-Of
our beloved Secretary-General is more than adequate as
otherwise he would not be sitting at your right, Mr. Presi·
dent. We have drawn sustenance from his ideas and from his
wisdom-all the more so whenever we have found ourselves
beset by confusion. Health is a peculiar tJ:~g. A few, years
ago I thought I would fade out of the picture. For a couple
of months I directed my permanent mission from hospital
beds. But he}."e I am, still going strong by God's grace, and I
hope that U Thant's dizzy spell was merely a passing phase.
He did 110t have to go to a hospital bed as I did. We hope
we shall have the benefit of his services until the inter-

I

II
,
l

I

I
I

I

14

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

national community comes to an agreement on his
successor.

the delegations of Bahrain and Qatar of our close cooperation.

157. Mr. GARCIA ROBLES (Mexico) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, may I, on behalf of my

162. The PRESIDENT: I take pleasure in inviting His
Royal Highness Prince Namgyal Wangchuk of Bhutan to
address the Assembly.

delegation, tender you our congratulations on your wellearned election to the high office of President of the
present session of the General Assembly. If I have asked for
the floor it was not to welcome the new Member States on
behalf of Mexico, since my delegation, together with the
other delegations in the Latin American group of States,
agreed that the representative of Jamaica would speak in
our name, and as Chainnan of our Group, he fulfilled his
duties with outstanding eloquence and soberness. Therefore, anything that I might wish to add would be
redundant. I asked for the floor merely to clarify, and to
have noted in the record, that the Mexican delegation voted
in favour of the three draft resolutions on the admission of
Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar respectively. Unfortunately, and
probably through a mechanical error, despite the fact that I
pressed the green button in time, and again and again, in
the case of Bahrain our affirmative vote was not registered
on the voting sheet.
158. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, Sir
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
will be addressing the General Assembly during the genertil
debate at the twenty-sixth session. I have no doubt that he
will then express to you, Sir, his own felicitations and those
of the Government and people of Mauritius. In the
meantime, may I express to you my personal, very sincere
congratulations on your election as President of the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly of our world
Organization.
159. Mauritius was a co-sponsor of the draft resolution in
document A/L.627 regarding the admission of Bhutan to
membership in the United Nations, which has just been
adopted. I must confess that, when I first asked to come to
this rostrum, I was tempted to praise at length the sovereign
independent State of Bhutan and to sing the glory of His
Majesty King Jigme Dorji Wangchuk and His Majesty's
Government and people. Mauritius has much in common
with Bhutan and we are both fortunate to enjoy the
friendship of India and the United Kingdom.
160. However, I have decided to resist this pleasant
temptation and I shall today confme myself to saying,
simply but from the very depth of my heart, that the
Government of Mauritius very sincerely welcomes the
membership of Bhutan to the United Nations. My delegation looks forward to working closely with the delegation
of Bhutan, which can rest assured of our co-operation. We
extend to the independent sovereign State of Bhutan and to
His Majesty the King of Bhutan and his people, our very
sincere wishes for success, peace cnd progress.
161. Mauritius was also a co-sponsor of draft resolution
A/L.628 regarding the admission of Bahrain, and also of
draft resolution A/L.629 regarding the admission of Qatar.
Now that both these draft resolutions have been adopted, I
wish to express, very briefly but very sincerely, our good
wishes and welcome to the two Arab States and our
congratulations to the Amir of Bahrain and the Amir of
Qatar andtheii respective peoples. We would like to assure

163. Prince Namgyal WANGCHUK. (Bhutan): Mr. President, it gives me the greatest sense of pleasure to address
the Assembly today on the occasion of the admission of the
Kingdom of Bhutan to the United Nations. This is a historic
occasion for us and marks the realization of one of our
most cherished dreams. On behalf of His Majesty King
Jigme Dorji Wangchuk, the Government and the people of
Bhutan, I should like, therefore, to take this opportunity to
express our deepest gratitude to all t..~e Members of this
Organization assembled here today, and in particular to the
Republic of India, which has spared no effort to secure our
admission to this free association of sovereign countries.
164. May I, Mr. President, also take this opportunity to
congratulate you on your election to the high office of
President of the General Assembly. We have no doubt that
you will guide the deliberations of this session with wisdom
and dignity.
165. It is only a decade or so since we ended our age-old
policy of national isolation and opened our country to the
outside world. The policy of national isolation was motivated in the past by self-interest due to geo-political
considerations rather than to any lack of desire or capacity
to play an active role in the international community. The
policy served its purpose and was instrumental in preserving
our country's sovereignty and independence. With the
changing circumstances in the world and our desire to
participate actively in the functioning of the international
cOlmnunity, the policy lost its relevance when we joined
the Colombo Plan for Co-operative Economic Development
in South and South-East Asia in 1962.
166. Our Government and people are fully committed to a
policy of modernization, although we are at the same time
aware of the importance of preserving our national identity
by retaining the best in our ancient culture and traditions.
None of us imagine that this will be an easy thing to do-to
achieve this fine balance and synthesis-but with all our
mind and effort directed towards this goal, we are
confident of our success.
167. As we present before this Assembly a short outline of
present developments in our country, it is important to
emphasize the fact that all the radical changes in the
country have been initiated by the King himself. In the
field of government and administration, it has been our aim
to reform our traditional institutions to meet the needs of
the present age. Representative institutions like the
National Assembly, Council of Ministers and the Royal
Advisory Council have been established. The sovereign
powers of the Monarch have been voluntarily surrendered
to the National Assembly. The judiciary is separated from
the executive and a uniform legal code based on custom
and present necessity has been introduced.
168. With technical and fmancial assistance provided by
the Government of India, we have successfully completed

;

."

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
two five-year plans and have recently launched a third. The
social and economic infrastructure of our country is being
built up through these plans. In implementing all these
developmental projects, it has been our constant endeavour
to preclude any conflict with the tlxisting values of our
society, the peace and purity of our natural environment
and the right of the individual to pursue his private life
without interference.

.

-,'

169. That we should today have succeeded in gaining
admission to this Organization whose aim represents the
highest aspirations of mankind, whose, contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security has been
substantial, and whose work in nation-building has done so
much for the progress of mankind, is an occasion of great
happiness and rejoicing in my country. I should like to take
this opportunity now to express our Government's fullest
confidence in its ability to participate as an active and
useful Member of this Organization and also its firm
resolution to abide by the basic obligations required of
Members under the Charter.
170. My Government is extremely happy that Bahrain and
Qatar are being admitted as Members of the United Nations
along with my country. I should like to extend our wannest
felicitations to the delegations of Bahrain and Qatar on this
auspicious occasion.
171. Before I conclude, may I, Mr. President, convey the
greetings of His Majesty the King of Bhutan to you and,
through you, to all the delegations assembled here today.

;

."

172. The PRESIDENT: I have the pleasure of inviting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain, His Excellency
Mohamed bin Mubarak Al-Khalifah, address the Assembly.
173. Mr. AL·KHALIFAH (Bahrain): Mr. President, I wish
to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation on your
election to the high office of President of the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly. As a new Member, my
delegation has confidence that you, through your wisdom
and experience, will guide the proceedings of tilis session to
successful results. I have the honour ori this august occasion
to extend the heartfelt thanks of the Government and
people of Bahrain to all ilia members of the Security
Council which approved the application of the State of
Bahrain for admission to the United Nations and unanimously recommended to the General Assembly, in Security
Council resolution 296 (1971), that Bahrain be admitted to
membersllip in the United Nations. I should also like to
express my thanks to you, Mr. President, and to all the
Members of this Assembly for the confidence which you
have shown in my country by your decision to accept and
receive Bahrain as one of the full-fledged Members of the
United Nations. In particular, thanks are also due to all
those Member States of the Afro-Asian group which so
kindly co-sponsored the resolution welcoming the admission of Bahrain to membership in the United Nations.
174. I should like also to offer my sincere congratulations
to Bhutan and the sister Arab State of Qatar on their
admission to membership in the United Nations. On this
occasion in the history of Bahrain, it is indeed a moment of
great happiness and pride to my Government and the
Bahraini people that Bahrain, as a sovereign independent

15

State, has been admitted to membership in the United
Nations. Now that Bahrain has been received in the fold of
the world Organization, I should like to assure this
Assembly that Bahrain will adhere fully to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and will support
whole-heartedly all the aims and objectives of the United
Nations which are directed towards the establishment and
the maintenance of peace in the world. So far as Balu'ain is
concerned, the essential aims of the Charter are the
preservation of peace through collective security, the
promotion of economic development and the safeguarding
of the rights of nations to establish thr'r own forms of
government in accordance with the wishes of their own
peoples. We in Bahra"· are fully. conscious of the importance of these aims JS they affect the realization of the
economic development, well-being and security of our own
country. As a small State, Bahrain staunchly believes that
the promotion of world peace and the preservation of
security and stability in the Gulf region are essential for the
political and the economic development of the people of
Bahrain, as well as the peoples of the neighbouring
countries.
175. I do not wish to let this occasion pass without
recalling to the attention ofthe General AssemHy Security
Council resolution 278 (1970) as a specific example of
Bahrain's staunch belief in the objectives and principles of
the UpJted Nations Charter, especially those relating to the
reqUirement for the settlement of international disputes by
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter. It is my Government's confmned belief that the
solution of the Bahrain:_can question on the basis of the
above-mentioned resolution, arrived at through the good
offices of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, has
clearly demonstrated to the world how the machinery of
the United Nations can be used for the pacific settlement of
differences among nations which are determined to live and
coexist in peace ana security. In this connexion, I wish to
reiterate that Bahrain-both its Government and its
people-desires to live in peace and security with its
neighbOUring countries, as well as with other friendly and
peace-loving nations of the world.
176. Bahrain considers itself an integral part of the Arab
nation. Realizing the great historic~ and cultural ties which
bind it to the rest of the Arab world, Bahrain will exert all
its efforts to develop and strengthen its political and
cultural ties and co-operation with all its sister Arab States
on the basis of the provisions of the Charter of the League
of Arab States.
177. Pursuant to its respect for the principle of equal
rights and the self-determination of peoples, Bahrain is
greatly concerned and conscious about the destiny_~of
peoples who are still struggling for self-determination and
independence. It therefore lends its full support to the
rightful demand for freedom and full independence of the
peoples of such territories still suffering from colonial rule.
In this context, and with the same breath, Bahrain entirely
supports the legitimate and inalienable rights pf the people
of Palestine to recover its usurped land and to live in peace
and security in its own homeland. Furthermore, my
Government fully supports the demands of the front-line
Arab States; namely, Egypt, Syria and Jordan, for the
restoration of their Israeli-occupied territories and supports

I'

f,

I'

~.

.
,

'

I

16
'II

'·1

d
i

t.'1
;1

'I

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

the current efforts aimed at achieving a just and equitable
settlement. Bahrain thus appeals to the conscience of all
peace-loving nations of this world Organization to view this
chronic problem of Palestine in the light of humanity and
justice and to seek a satisfactory solution for it on the basis
of the highly revered principles of the United Nations
Charter.
178. Although Bahrain is now one of t..he newest and
youngest States Members of this Organization, my country
can at the same time point with pride to the fact that its
history and culture can be traced not only through the
civilizations of the Arabian Peninsula and other Arab
countries but also to remotest historical times. As one
distingUished author stated on the basis of archaeological
finds recently unearthed in Bahrain:
"Bahrain, known by ancient Sumerians as Dilmun, first
emerged into history between 3000 and 2000 RC. when
it was the hOlne of a distinctive civilization and its
merchants and ships dominated the trade routes between
the civilizations of the Indus Valley and Mesopotamia."
179. Thereafter, through the decades of history, Bahrain
evolved its international personality and special characteristic as an Arab State. Today, the independent Arab State
of Bab..rain is endeavouring with all its energies to build up
its economy on a sound basis and to increase its resources
through diversification and economic and industrial planning. The Government of Bahrain has achieved great success
in the advancement and progress of its people in all walks
of life, particularly in education and health services. The
Bahraini- people is proud of its heritage, culture and
education; it is particularly proud of the fact that a quarter
of the Bahraini population is at present receiving education
at various levels. The Bahrain Government has for many
years provided free education, health and social services to
the people.
180. In conclusion I wish, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Bahrain, to express again to you,
Mr. President, and to the Members of the United Nations
my sincere thanks and deepest appreciation for the kind
congratulations and friendly feelings expressed in this
august Assembly in connexion with the admission of my
country to membership in the United Nations.
181. The PRESIDENT: I now have the pleasure of inviting
the Minister of State and Adviser to the Government of
Qatar, His Exce1!;;ncy Mr. Hassan Kamel, to address the
Assembly.
182. Mr. KAMEL (Qatar) (interpretation [rom French): It
is a very great honour for me to come to the rostrum of this
august Assembly to express, on behalf of the Arnir, the
people and the Government of Qatar, our deep gratitude
for having been admitted to this highest international
Organization. I am all the more happy, proud and grateful
because, through your unanimous vote today, you have
solemnly consecrated our accession to independence and
sovereignty, thus enabling us to occupy our lawful place
among the Members of the United Nations, to enjoy the
same rights and to assume the same obligations.
183. On this occasion I should like to begin by expressing
to you, Mr. President, our respectful congratulations on

your unanimous and brilliant election to this very high
post. I should also like to thank you and the other members
of the General Assembly for the courteous and generous
welcome which all of you were kind enough to extend to
the new Member of the Organization which I have the
honour of representing here. May I also thank our eminent
Secretary-General for the assistance he extended to us in all
the steps we took to be admitted to the United Nations.
184. Finally, I should like wannly to congratulate the two
new States, the brother State of Bahrain and the State of
Bhutan, on their admission to the United Nations. For both
of them, as for ourselves, this event has a capital, historical
importance.
185. Qatar, an Arab State whose people is an integral part
of the Arab nation, is a State entirely devoted to the noble
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Its constitution, promulgated before its independence, expresses its formal undertaking loyally to respect
them. It is therefore natural that, having become a Member
of the United Nations, Qatar should deem it an imperative
duty to spare no effort with a view to making its
devoted-albeit humble-contribution to the attainment of
these purposes and principles.
186. I am. aware that Qatar is what is traditionally known
as a small State. But in that name I see nothing derogatory.
Indeed, on the one hand one of the greatest merits of the
Cha.'1:er of the United Nations is that it is pr0dicated upon
the sovereign equality of its Member States as stated in
Article 2, paragraph 1. This is a fundamental principle of
our Organization, according to which, under the law which
it expresses, there is absolutely no difference between the
small and the great, the weak and the powerful. On the
other hand, one may think that those among the small
States which are imbued with the principles of the Charter
and therefore devoted to peace can, through their disinterestedness and lack of any material ambition, contribute to
bringing to the settlement of international disputes some
qualities of impartiality and objectivity.
187. Qatar will not experience any difficulty in respecting
the principles of the Charter, because the Charter provisions
are exactly in keeping with our aspirations and concerns.
Generally speaking, more than others, small States know
tbp meaning of economic imbalance, social difficulties and
political tensions-not to mention the worst of all scourges
which can threaten the very existence of a nation: war.
188. That is why we attach a fundamental and special
importance to the key provision of the Charter-Article 2,
paragraph 4-which debars Members of our Organization
from resorting in their international relations to the use of
force against the territorial integrity or the political
independence of any State. For us this provision is not an
abstract principle spelled out in general and impersonal
terms by our Charter. On the contrary, we fmnly believe
that it gives rise to a fundamental, concrete and positive
obligation. I would even venture to say that this obligation
is the most urgent of all and that the first duty of our
Organization is to ensure absolute respect for it and to see
to it that it is in no way infringed upon. It is well known
that this duty is enshrined i""1 Chapter VII of the Charter,
which, in Article 39, obliges the Security Council to decide

.
j

17

1934th meeting - 21 September 1971
on the necessary steps "to maintain or restore international
peace and security".
189. As representative of an Arab State which naturally
shares the preoccupations and concerns of its Ar:ab brethren, whose f1\te it shares and whose causes it unreservedly
supports, as these causes are our own, I cannot but give
some thought to these concerns at this extremely critical
moment when the destiny of mankind runs the risk of
being deeply disturbed by the continuous tension prevailing
in the Middle East. It is quite obvious that this tension is
due to two reasons. The first is the persistent violation of
the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine and the
refusal of the violator to heed the resolutions of this
Organization urging it to recognize the rights it usurped
through armed force. The second reason is the policy of
that violator, which, being fully premeditated, aims at
aggression and expansion to the detriment of the Arab
States and consists in taking over their territories through
armed force and refusing to evacuate them, in contempt of
the resolutions of this Organization and its purposes and
principles.

.

190. There is no doubt that such a challenge is the gravest
infringement that could be committed by a Member State
against the authority of this international Organization and,
therefore, the gravest offence that could be committed
against it. It goes without saying that to condone such an
infringement with persistence in such an offence fatally
results in encouraging its repetition, and this encouragement and condonation can only lead in the tInal analysis to
ruining the autlIority of this Organization and therefore
causing the disappearance of the greatest hope of the whole
of mankind.
191. The people of Qatar highly values the possibility,
which it has awaited for so long and which is now offered
to it, of taking part in the work of the world Organization
whose supreme objective is to preserve the peace and
progress, moral and material, of the whole of mankind.
With all the peoples that believe in this Organization, we
pay tribute to the invaluable services rendered by this
Organization to the international community, whose con-

Litho in United Nations, New York

science and aspirations it represents. In particular we have
the highest esteem for the great and fruitful activities
deployed by it to harmonize the efforts of nations for
businesslike aild effective co-operation to settle international problems of an economic, social, cuitural and
humanitarian nature. But, on t.he other hllnd, we know that
there is still much inequality among peoples and men, that
there are still peoples that have not yet been liberated from
the yoke of colonialism and particularly that violence
continues to ravage certain parts of the world.
192. Under our Charter, peace is inseparable fmmjustice.
That is why we are determined in all modesty to associate
cur efforts with those of the United Nations so that they
may be devoted to carrying out its true ta3k, that of using
all means at its disposal, in conformity with the Charter, \to
put an end to aggression, to redress unjust situations and to
ensure, ihrough the restoration of international legality,
respect for the principles which are the very foundation of
the United Nations and without which there could be no
conceivable 111ternational order.
193. Before being admitted to this h~ghest international
Organization, we were most eager to be able to have our
voice heard. Now that we have the privilege of being one of
its Members, we wish to flay how deeply we believe in it and
what great hopes we found upon it.
194. In renewing to you, Mr. President, the expression of
my deepest gratitude, I should like to give you the
assurance that Qatar, within the framework of its area, will
bend every effort to co·op~rate, to the widest anCi most
appropriate extent, with each of its neighbours, brethren
and friends, in order to ensure the progress and security
which all of us wish to see established in our common
interest. On the international plane, Qatar will derive, in its
fundamental devotion to this Organization, the necessary
strength to take part, to the extent allowed by its modest
means, in the activities of the United Nations and in the
defence and preservation of its fundamental ideals: peace,
security and intemational co-operation.

1he meetinb rose at 6.20 p.m.

77001-November 1973· -2,200
