92

Gellft'lll Anembly-Twenty-ninth Seaaion

5. Requests that the report of the Group of Experts be submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a proposal as to when such a conference could
be convened, together with an assessment of the costs
involved.

23/ 1th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3273 (X."XJX), National experience in achieving
far-reacbing social and eeonomic changes for
the purpose of social progre88

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1581 A (L) of 21 May 1971 and 1667 (LII) of
l June 1972, in which the Council attached great importance to appropriate fundamental structural socioeconomic changes in countries for the purpose of
achieving social progress and development and, to this
end, considered it appropriate to study' the experience
of various countries of the world in this field,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1746 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the
Council pointed out that the strengthening of national
independence and the achievement of the ultimate goals
of social progress depend fundamentally on interna!
basic social changes, for purposes of strengthening
national índependence, achieving the d~mocratization
of society and improving social and economic structures, and on the reaffirmation of the principie of the
inadmissibífüy of externa! interference in any form,
including interference by transnational corporations,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General113 prepared on the basis of replies by Governments to bis
questionnaire on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of social progress,
Convinced that peaceful cocxistence and friendly cooperation among States should promote conditions for
economic and social progress,
Taking into consideration the importance of the implementation. of the principies, aims and methods of
achieving social progress recommended in the Declaration on Social Progrcss and Development,114
Recalling that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development recommends that countries should
promete democratically based social and structural reforms and changes,
Sharing the concem of many countrks over the insufficient rates of their economic and social deveiopment,
1. Real]irms that each State has the sovereign right
to adopt the economic and social system which it
regards appropriate for its own development;
2. Stresses the importance of interna! democratic
social and economic changes designed to safeguard
national independence and to ensure a speedy improvement of the well-being of the population;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the right of every
State to exercise its permanent sovereignty over ali its
riches, natural resources and economic activities for
the purpose of achieving economic and sociai progress;
li3 E/CN.5/478 and Add.l and Add.1/Corr.l ar.d 2, Add.2
and Add.2/Corr.l, Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1, Add.4.
54 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

4. Further real]irms the right of every State to carry
out social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress, including nationalization, as well as
the right to take ali appropriate mc;asures in connexion
with the activities of transnational corporations which
it considers detrimental to the achievement of economíe and social progress;
5. Recommends that measures should be taken at
ali levels to ensure more active participation by the
entire population in .the preparation and execution of
economic and social development policies and programmes designed to achieve social and economic
progress, taking into account the experience of all countries in this field;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Development Programme to hold, within the
programme of advisory services, interregional and regionaI seminars to study the national experience of
déveloping and developed countries in carrying out farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of. social progress without prejudicing the operational
programmes prepared for the developing countries;
1. Recommends that the regional commissions
should consider this problem at their sessions;
8. Endorses the action taken by the Economic apd
Social Council requesting the Commission for Social
Development to continue the study of national experience in carrying out far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress;116
9. kequests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on national experience in achieving
far-reaching saciar and economic changes for the porpose of social progress to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session and to give appropriate attention to this
question in his reports on the world social situation;
1O. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974
3274 (XXIX). Question of the establishment, in
accordanee with the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of a body to wbich
persons clalming the benefit of the Convention may apply

The General Assembly,
Considering the Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness of 28 August 1961 56 and, in particular,
its articles 11 and 20 requiring the establishment of
a body to which a person claiming the benefit of the
Convention may apply for the examination of bis claim
and for assistance in presenting it to the appropriate
authority,
Noting that the Convention will come into force on
13 December 1975,
Having considered the note and the explanatory
memorandum of the Secretary-General,117
55 Economic and Social Council resolution 1746 (LIV) of
16 May 1973.
5HA/CONF.9/l.5, 1961.
57 O/Jicial Records of the Genua/ Assemhly, Twe11ty-11intl,
Session, Annexes, agenda item 99, document A/969 l.
