, i "

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
‘E“PC;‘;>,!
1)i$;.jiv,?W

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

NN 1 9 Xi@5
:, $
j.:

MEETING:

28 JULY

, /
:;.,

,
,.

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
.. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... ... .. .. .. ... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent
Mission of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12147) . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $. . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l945)

S/PV. 1945

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Oflkial Recortls of the .Swority Colrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resol~rtiom ~rnd
Deci.riom of the Security Coum-il. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1945th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 28 July 1976, at 3 p.m.,
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI (Italy).

PWWZ~: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received
letters from the representatives of Cuba, Egypt, Liberia
and Zaire in which they also request to be invited to
participate in the debate. I therefore propose that the
Council agree, in accordance with the usual practice,
to invite the afore mentioned
representatives
to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,

agenda (S/Agenda/l945)

of the agenda
4. I invite those representatives
to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding
that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when they wish to
address the Council.

2. Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12147)

Adoption of the agenda
5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like also to inform the
members. of the Council that I have received a letter
dated 28 July 1976 from Mr. Abdirizak Haji Hussen,
representative of Somalia, on behalf of the Special
Committee against Apurtlwitl.
That letter reads as
follows:

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires,
a-i., of the Permanent Mission of ,Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)

“On

behalf of the Special Committee against
I have the honour to request that I be
allowed to make a statement before the Security
Council on the item at present on its agenda.”

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision taken at the 1944th meeting, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Zambia, South Africa and Mauritania to participate in
the Council’s discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Aptrrthcid,

On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of relevant
United Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration, of matters on its agenda. Accordingly, if there
is no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation,
pursuant to rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Hussen, as representative
of the Special Committee
against Apwtlwid.
At the appropriate moment I shall
invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to address the Council.

2. In accordance with the Council’s further decision,
1 shall also renew the Council’s invitation,
under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the
Acting President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
that Council.

6. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter,
dated 28 July 1976, from the representative of Benin,
containing a request that the Security Council extend
I

an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. 0. T. Emvula, Deputy Chief Representative of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) [S/12154].
7. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Emvula,
as requested. At the appropriate moment I shall invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to address
the Council.

8. The PRESIDENT:
Before the Council resumes its
consideration of the item on its agenda, I should like
to, take a moment of the Council’s time to say a few
words about the latest news of the major earthquake
which occurred in the early hours of today in northern
China. I am sure that I can speak on behalf of all my
colleagues in expressing our profound
shock and
sorrow at the occurrence of a calamity of apparently
unprecedented size and dimensions. I would request
the representative of China, Mr. Lai Ya-Ii, to convey
to his Government the feelings of sincere and profound
grief and solidarity expressed here today. For myself
I offer my condolences with particular
sympathy,
owing to the occurrence of a similar disaster in my
own country only a few months ago. It is, I am sure,
the earnest hope of all the members of the Council,
that in spite of the scale of the earthquake, the loss
to the Chinese people in terms of human beings and
material destruction will be less than feared and less
than other countries have had to suffer from the same
natural causes.

12. The People’s Republic of Benin is deeply convinced that neither the repeated use of the antidemocratic weapon of the veto, nor blackmail, nor all
the immoral
political manoeuvres of international
imperialism
will succeed in hiding the truth and
preventing
justice
from being done wherever
necessary.
13. Having made this brief clarification,
Mr. President, my delegation shall be relying heavily on your
eminent human qualities, to direct our debates on this
important question now before the Council: the act
of aggression perpetrated on 11 July 1976 in Sialola,
30 kilometers within Zambian territory, by the racist
minority rCgime of South Africa against the Republic
of Zambia, which resulted in 24 dead, 45 seriously
injured and more than 16 missing, quite apart from1
the destruction of the neighbouring
fields and the:
belongings of the villagers. This incident is part of a
series of daily acts of subversion of which Zambia and
the African countries of southern Africa are the
victims. These repeated and senseless acts of aggression constitute a very serious threat to international
peace and security.
14. The racist rCgime of the Vorster clique is in a
situation of two-fold juridical illegality: in violating the
sovereignty of Zambia, it is using the international
Territory of Namibia, a Territory which it is occupying
illegally and in contravention
of all the resolutions
and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council requiring the unconditional
and immediate
withdrawal from that Territory.
15. The question before the Council is thereforte
clearly defined. My delegation denounces in advanc’e
all the manoeuvres of the shameless protectors of
Vorster and of all those who for reasons of pure moral
convenience condemn trptrrthclid, which is the most
abject form of racism of our age, but act weakly and
hypocritically
when there is a clear need to take
concrete actions aimed at the systematic elimination
of this rCgime of exploitation
and oppression of the
people of South Africa.

9. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (irtlcrp,‘clario,? fionl F~n<-k):
Mr. President, here for the second time under your
presidency during this month of July, we have an
African complaint concerning a serious act of aggression. My delegation would hope that this, time the
Council,
under your perspicacious
and impartial
presidency, will do useful work and examine with
objectivity
the act of aggression committed
by the
racist minority rCgime of South Africa against the
Republic of Zambia.

16. All the repeated acts of aggression committed
by the racists of South Africa, yesterday against thle
People’s Republic of Angola, today against thle
Republic of Zambia and perhaps tomorrow againist
another African State, under the pretext of a racist
law of “hot pursuit”, are an eloquent demonstration
of the fact that the situation is becoming more and
more complicated for the minority racist rCgimes of
southern Africa because of the ever-increasing
determination of the oppressed peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa to hasten their liberation
and put an end to this ignominious oppression which
is unworthy of man.

10. My delegation is very disappointed
that selfinterest was able to triumph when we were dealing with
the question of the Israeli act of aggression against
Uganda; the conclusion of that debate creates a
precedent which is dangerous and of concern because
it encourages the strongest countries
to impose
themselves on others.
Il.
We are convinced that some members of the
Council that are directly responsible for this regrettable
situation, where the independence, sovereignty and
territorial
integrity of an African State have been
blatantly disregarded in order to protect and encourage
the Israeli Zionists, are well aware of the significance
of such actions.

17. It is becoming increasingly clear that the threat
which the minority racist rigimes of southern AfricR
pose to international peace and security will become
2

greater day by day as the danger faced by the regimes
themselves increases.

better appreciate the extent of their misdeed and the
harm they do to the spirit of international
sport.

18. Here I should like, without comment, to bring to
the attention of the Council two dispatches of the
Associated Press from Cape Town published in Lc
Mom/r on 23 July. The first dispatch reads as
follows:

20. As far as the People’s Republic of Benin is concerned, there can be neither dialogue nor detente with
the Vorster-Smith
clique, which has imposed violence
on the oppressed peoples of that region. Benin will
co.ntinue to denounce, condemn and combat, wherever
necessary, the new strategy which imperialism is now
trying to elaborate in order to overcome the freedom
fighters who have already made so many sacrifices
for national liberation. Any strategy based on so-called
peaceful negotiation,
a clever imperialist
device, is
suspected of having a neo-colonialist
taint, and is
therefore absolutely contrary to the basic interests
of the oppressed masses of the region.

“Rhodesia. Many former foreign servicemen are
enrolling in Mr. Smith’s army, Cape Town. The
explosion of grenades on Tuesday, 20 July, in
Salisbury marks the opening of a new front in
Rhodesia, according Lo those responsible for security
in South Africa. One of them stated to us: ‘We
were expecting these actions, as were our Rhodesian
counterparts. This is the opening of a fourth front,
that of urban terrorism, in addition to guerrilla
warfare on the frontiers of Zambia, Botswana and
Mozambique.’

21. South Africa’s aggression against Zambia is well
within the context of this strategy, which is nothing
more than blackmail designed to dissuade countries
in the area from entering into confrontation
with the
racist rkgimes of southern Africa or from giving the
brotherly assistance provided for by OAU for the total
liberation of Africa from all oppression, both internal
and external. That is why Benin, like all other African
countries, from north to south and east to west, must
feel directly concerned.

“In the Rhodesian capital this new escalation
seems to have been received stoically by the
population of European origin. Since young policemen are required to guard the frontiers, patrols in
the towns are being carried out by older men; urban
defence will therefore have to be strengthened by
calling up the police reservists. Because of the
present tension, an .average of 1,000 Rhodesians
are leaving their country each month. In order to
stem this exodus, Mr. Smith’s cabinet has adopted
restrictive
measures and the South
African
authorities have limited the number of visas granted
to Rhodesians. However, the majority of whites
seem to have decided to stay. Furthermore,
many
foreigners are arriving in Rhodesia. They are mainly
former servicemen who have come to fight against
the black nationalists. According to an informed
source, the new recruits of the Rhodesian army are
approximately 80 per cent American, South African
and British.”

22. It must now be clear to everyone that “dialogue”
or “peaceful negotiation to put an end to the existence
of the minority racist rCgimes of southern Africa”
are mere words or soporifics to lull one to sleep and
that they ultimately help to maintain and strengthen
the positions of Vorster and his clique.
23. The complaint brought before the Council, as has
been emphasized by a number of preceding speakers,
is an African complaint-a
complaint brought by the
entire OAU.
24. My delegation vigorously condemns the aggression committed
by the racist Vorster regime against
the Republic of Zambia. From now on, the Council
will have no excuse if effective measures are not taken
to prevent futher such acts of international gangsterism
which endanger international
peace and security.

The second dispatch reads as follows:
“About 100 New Zealanders have volunteered to
serve in Rhodesia and some 20 of these are said to
have arrived about six months ago, a leader of the
Rhodesian-New
Zealand
Friendship
Society
reported on Wednesday 21 July. These recruits
were reportedly offered a monthly wage of $1,000
and an airline ticket.”

25. In conclusion, we wish to say that those who’
support the Vorster rkgime because they are blinded
by their selfish interests should know that times have
changed. We simply want the Vorster racist rCgime
to know that it will not always be able to commit
aggression with impunity against Angola and Zambia,
because the peoples of southern Africa are awakening;
the peoples of Azania, Namibia
and Zimbabwe are
mobilizing
and intensifying
their struggle against the
ignominious
racist and colonialist regimes.

I9. As the Organization of African Unity (OAU) has
recognized and repeatedly proclaimed, there can be no
compromise on the principle
of the systematic
elimination of racist and colonialist regimes in southern
Africa. The Governments which continue to violate
the arms embargo and the multinational
corporations
which help the racists survive are the enemies of the
struggle for the liberation of Africa. The sports organizations of certain countries which maintain close
relations with racist sports organizations should now

26.

Mr.

DATCU

(Romania)
(inrcrprercrtion
.fi’om
I should like, first of all, to
associate myself with the words spoken by you ‘in
conveying
to the -representative
of the People’s

French): Mr. President,

3

33. We believe that the Council should not remain
silent in the face of the acts committed on 11 July.
To act otherwise would be tantamount to encouraging
the Pretoria racists. We must not therefore wait until1
South Africa endorses these acts, or until such time
as isolated acts of aggression turn into a general
conflagration in southern Africa. The Security Council
must now take the measures necessary to prevent
such a possibility, In so doing, the Council would be
exercising one of the principal functions of the United
Nations-namely,
that of taking effective collective
measures to prevent and remove threats to international peace.

Republic of China, Mr, Lai Ya-Ii, the expression of
our sincerest sympathy for the victims of, and the
material losses incurred by, the recent earthquake.
27. The Security Council is meeting to consider the
repeated acts of aggression committed by South Africa
against the Republic of Zambia.
28. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia,
Mr. Siteke G. Mwale, in his clear and comprehensive
statement [1944rh mmting],
presented some most
enlightening
facts and information
concerning the
scope of the acts of aggression committed by South
Africa against Zambia. He described how this year
South Africa has on a number of occasions violated
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia,
thus trampling under foot the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the elementary rules of
international law.

34. Acts involving the use of force by South Africa
against Zambia have been committed from the Territory of Namibia. The use of that Territory, which has
international status, as a base for attacks against neighbouring countries shows once again that the maintenance of the vestiges of colonialism and the policies
of racism and oprrrtheid constitutes a permanent source
of tension, of aggression and of conflict and seriously
endangers international peace and security.

29. In this connexion, it should be noted that this is
not the first time that South Africa has violated the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia, nor is
it the first time that the Security Council has had to
deal with acts of aggression committed by the racist
Pretoria regime against independent States of southern
Africa. In this regard, it is to be recalled that in its
resolution 300 (1971), the Council called upon South
Africa to respect fully the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia. On that occasion the Council
warned South Africa that, should it violate the
sovereignty or territorial integrity of Zambia, the
Council would meet anew to consider the situation in
greater detail in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter.

35. The Security Council, the General Assembly and
the International Court of Justice long ago noted the
illegal nature of the occupation of Namibia by South
Africa. The Council and the Assembly called upon
South Africa immediately to withdraw from Namibia
its administration and its armed forces. It is undeniable
that the fllegal presence of South Africa in Namibia
flagrantly disregards the will of the Namibian people
and its sacred right to decide for itself its own cour:se
of political and social development.
36. The United Nations, and the Security Council
itself in its resolution 269 (1969), have recognized the
legitimacy of the struggle of the Namibian people
against the illegal presence of the South African
authorities in Namibia and requested all States to
intensify the moral and material assistance renderled
by them to the Namibian people in its struggle against
foreign occupation. Up to this date, South Africa has
defied the United Nations and refused to abide by the
resolutions of both the Genera1 Assembly and the
Security Council calling for the immediate withdrawal
of its entire occupation administration
in Namibia,
We therefore consider that on this occasion, too, lwe
should condemn the racist South African regime for
its stubborn refusal to leave Namibia.

30. The fact that the Council should have been
compelled to meet again to deal with the acts of
aggression of South Africa proves, on the one hand,
that South Africa does not have the least intention of
abiding by the injunctions of the Council, and, on the
other, that the measures adopted to date by the
Council have proved ineffective in curbing the racist
authorities of Pretoria.
31. The Council cannot remain impassive when the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Member
of the United Nations are violated by another State.
We believe that it is all the more imperative for the
Council to fulfil its duties, since the victim of these
acts of aggression is a young African State which does
not have the means to defend itself, We also believe
that the lvrisotr d’Ptre of the Organization is precisely
to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States which are the victims of acts of
aggression.

37. The Romanian delegation considers that the
complaint made by Zambia against South Africa is
well founded. We likewise believe that the acts of
aggression committed by South Africa against Zambia
are a threat to the peace and security of the peoples
of southern Africa and of the whole world. Consequently, the Council should resolutely condemn the
acts involving the use of force committed by South
Africa against Zambia. We are convinced that the
Council has the duty to take all necessary steps to put
an end to the acts of provocation
against African

32. True, acts involving the use of force by South
Africa against Zambia are not overt acts, as was the
case with the acts of aggression against Angola.
Furthermore, South Africa has not yet dared to attack
Zambia openly, but we do not believe that the Council
should wait until that happens.
4

countries committed by South Africa, and to its policy
of replacing law by force.

rhgime against the Republic of Zambia. This is one
more in a long series of crimes committed by that
rCgime, and it will not be the last unless the Council
takes decisive action against that rt+gime.

38. It is the duty of the United Nations and of all
its Member States to take an unequivocal stand in
favour of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia and to give their support in order
to repel the acts of violence committed by the racist
rCgime of Pretoria.

45. We are aware of the denial by the Pretoria rkgime,
which was repeated by its spokesman here yesterday,
but we submit that such denials’ by that regime deserve
no credence. It was not so long ago that the Pretoria
rCgime repeatedly denied its aggression against Angola
until its soldiers were captured and brought before
the press and television in Luanda.

39. At the same time, we must be aware of the fact
that, until southern Africa is entirely freed from
colonial and racist domination, it will not be possible
to establish lasting peace there. For this reason, we
believe that it is the duty of the Council to take all
necessary measures to ensure the exercise by the
peoples of southern Africa of their sacred right to selfdetermination, independence and national sovereignty.

46.

The International
Seminar on the Eradication of
and in Support of the Struggle for Liberation
in South Africa, organized by the .Special Committee
against Aptrrtlzcid at Havana last May, recognized that
the independent African States in southern Africa had
faced threats and attacks by colonial and racist rigimes
because of their important contribution to the struggle
for liberation in southern Africa. The Seminar declared
that “any attack on the countries which assist the
liberation movements constitutes an attack against the
international community”
[S//2092, ~IITIIPS I. ptr/-rr. II].
It urged African and other States to develop the
machinery of international
co-operation that would
allow speedy response to any aggression.
Aptrrtkeid

40. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm once again
at this time the solidarity of my country with the
African countries that are waging a brave struggle to
defend their inalienable
right to an independent
existence, and the firm support of the Romanian people
for the legitimate struggle of the peoplCs of southern
Africa to free themselves from colonial and racist
domination and to organize in full freedom their own
lives as fully fledged members of the international
community.

47. On 7 July, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization
of African Unity,
at its thirteenth session held at Port Louis, Mauritius,
adopted resolution AHG/Res.80
(XIII), proposed by
Zambia to the effect that any attack perpetrated by
the minority rCgimes of southern Africa against frontline States would be considered an attack against the
whole of the African continent. Moreover, I should
like to draw attention to General Assembly resolution 3411 C (XXX), which proclaims that the United
Nations and the international
community have a
special responsibility towards the oppressed people of
South Africa and their liberation movements. If the
front-line countries are hosting the South African
liberation movements and supporting the legitimate
struggle for liberation of that country, they are doing
so not only because they are African nations but also,
and more importantly,
because they are fulfilling that
special responsibility.
The South African aggression
against Zambia took place within days after the aforementioned resotution of OAU was adopted. This
aggression is clearly an arrogant challenge by the
racist rigime
to OAU and to the international
community.

41. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia, Mr. Hussen. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make a statement
on behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid.
43,. Mr. HUSSEN (Special Committee against Aptrrthcjitl): May I first of all express, on behalf of the
Special Committee against Apurtheid and on behalf of
my own country, our deep feeling of sympathy fol
the people and Government of the People’s Republic
of China in connexion with the natural disaster that
has caused great loss of human life and material
destruction in that country. May I ask the representative of China to be kind enough to convey the
assurance of our solidarity with the people and the
Government of China.
43. Mr. President, I would first of all wish to thank
you, and through you the members of the Security
Council, for giving me an opportunity
to make a
statement on behalf of the Special Committee against
Apor.f/r~ic/.
In the absence of the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee from Headquarters, the members of the Special Committee
have requested me to participate in this debate on
behalf of the Special Committee and to convey its
s@rious concern over the continued acts of aggression by the r/l>tr/*t/lcic/ rCgime.

48. We do hope that the Security Council will
endorse the recommendation
of the International
Seminar and the resolution of OAU and warn the
racist rkgimes in southern Africa that any aggression
by them against independent *African States is an
aggression against the United Nations, which is totally
committed to liberation in southern Africa, and that
any such aggression would be repulsed and severely
punished.

44. I need hardly inform the Security Council that
the Special Committee
categorically condemns the
Qgression committed
by the South African racist
5

I
,’
I

49. The Special Committee has constantly warned
against the enormous military buildup in South Africa
and the consequent danger it constitutes not only
to the African continent but also to international
peace and security.
50. It is relevant to recall that the South African
military budget has increased from a mere 40 million
Rand in 1959-1960, the year of the Sharpeville massacre, .to no less than 1,350 million Rand in 19761977, the year of the Soweto massacre. This year’s
military budget is 36 per cent greater than that of last
year and almost double that of the year before last.
51. This rapid militarization,
facilitated by serious
breaches of the arms embargo, has made the Pretoria
regime dizzy with arrogance. A Government member
of the South African Parliament,
Mr. T. Langley,
boasted that-and
I am reading from the verbatim
record of the House of Assembly debate on 2 February 1976:
“the greatest change for South Africa in the era
after its withdrawal from the Commonwealth
and
in the post-colonial era is that it is the only power in
southern Africa today which in any way possesses
an appreciable defence force... here in southern
Africa, South Africa is a military giant.”
52. With this military power, amassed while the
independent African States were devoting their scarce
resources to education, health and other development
needs, the rulers in Pretoria have been dreaming of
establishing hegemony over all so-called Africa south
of the Sahara. It may be recalled that the Pretoria
regime early this year moved an amendment to the
Defence Act defining South Africa as “Africa south
of the Sahara” for the purposes of action by its
Defence Force. After condemnations by African States
and the Special Committee
against Apclrthc~id, the
amendment was revised and camouflaged to authorize
the regime to send its military forces anywhere in the
world to suppress any armed conflict and any terrorism
which that regime considered a threat to South Africa.
1 am referring to the Defence Amendment Act enacted
in March of this year.
53. Since the defeat of its aggression in Angola, the
arrogance of the South African regime has been
reinforced to even greater proportions. It has greatly
increased military operations inside Namibia and on
the borders of Namibia and has also launched attacks
against the black people of South Africa which
culminated in the massacre at Soweto and those which
followed it. The Special Committee
is therefore not
surprised at the acts of aggression committed against
Zambia.
54. May I recall that the Special Committee
has
repeatedly pointed out that the South African propaganda about its desire for detente and dialogue
with African States is a cover for repression at home

and aggression abroad. It is now clear for everyone
to see in its true colours.
55. I would recall that the Security Council has been
obliged repeatedly to consider flagrant violations of
the Charter and acts of aggression by the racist
regime in South Africa. The Special Committee has
constantly stressed the imperative need for mandatory
action under Chapter VII of the Charter. In thle
absence of such action, the South African regime has
consistently scorned and defied the resolutions elf
the Council. It has challenged the authority of the
Council and the principles of the Charter with impunity,
in the firm assurance that no further action would be
taken by the Council. I need refer only to the resolution adopted by the Security Council in March [r-es&rtim 387 (1976)] on the South African aggressi0.n
against Angola and the resolution adopted on 19 June
on the Soweto massacre [resolution 392 (1976)], both
of which were immediately
rejected by the South
African regime.
56. If this pattern continues, and the Pretoria regime
is protected from any sanctions, there is a danger that
it will intensify racist oppression at home and aggression abroad. The aggression against Zambia is a
pointer in this connexion.
57. The Special Committee against Apdwid
hopes
that the Council will, in the words of Zambia’s Foreign
Minister [I944rh n7eeting],
“live up to its responsibilities”. We believe that the appropriate action that
could force Pretoria to come to reason would be the
application of the mandatory measures set forth under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is our firm conviction
that any action short of the mandatory measures will
be tantamount to fruitlessness.
58. It is our hope that the Council will not on:ly
condemn South African aggression against Zambia but
will also impose a mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa, as requested by the General Assembly
[wsolrrtion
3411 G (XXX)]. In our opinion, that is the
least the Security Council should do at this stage of the
development of the situation in southern Africa.
59. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. AHMED (Egypt): I should like to express
on behalf of my delegation our sincere thanks to YOU,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Security
Council for the opportunity afforded to us to participate
in this debate. I should like also to extend to you.
our sincere congratulations not only on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, which has almost ended, but also on the clever,
diplomatic
and elegant way in which you have
conducted the Council’s proceedings during one of its
most delicate and difficult periods.

the so-called long-armed
reprisals of Israel,’ South
Africa’s staunchest friend and ally, against Israel’s
neighbours, near and not so near. Nor does the
similarity end there: it extends to encompass both
countries’ abhorrent laws and practices.

61. May I take this opportunity also to welcome the
presence among us today of the Foreign Ministers of
Zambia and the United Republic of Tanzania.
62. I should like also to associate myself and my
delegation with the words of solidarity and sympathy
addressed by the President of the Council to the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China in
connexion with the losses in life and property sustained
yesterday as a result of the damaging earthquake.

68. South Africa indeed has built up a long record of
acts.of aggression and incursions even against Zambia
itself. Need the members of the Council be reminded
of their admonition
to South Africa concerning its
aggression against Zambia in October 1971? In fact,
the Security Council decided in 1971 to remain seized
of the complaint by Zambia of South Africa’s incursions and aggressions and to take up the matter anew
should such attacks be repeated [resolution 300 (1971) J.
That is the situation now before us.

63. The subject under discussion is the complaint
by Zambia of repeated incursions and aggressions by
South Africa against Zambian villages and citizens,
and hence the violation by South Africa of Zambian
sovereignty and territorial
integrity.
Egypt feels
impelled to participate in this debate in support of
Zambia’s complaint because, as an African country,
Egypt considers such a violation to be an aggression
not only against Zambia but also against the African
continent as a whole. Egypt and indeed all other
African and, for that matter, non-African countries
cannot allow this infringement of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a law-abiding sister African
country to go unchecked-the
more so since the
aggressor is certainly not a newcomer to this dock.
South Africa is one of the rare examples of international recividism; during the past 30 years it has given
ample evidence of its, incorrigible
and obstinate
determination to trample underfoot the principles of
the Charter, the decisions of the Security Council,
the authority of the United Nations, and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

69. South Africa has done it again, and the Security
Council finds itself confronted with the same culprit,
its very same cynical attitude, and the same victim.
70. South Africa, with its long list of defiances of and
challenges to the authority of the United Nations and
the Security Council’s
decisions, as well as the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice
now adds insult to injury by resorting
on Namibia,’
-exactly
as it did in October 1971-to the cynical
and alarming subterfuge of denying any knowledge
of or any responsibility for the incursions and reprisals
which have given rise to Zambia’s latest complaint.
71. Those members of the Council who objected to
the expulsion of the racist rhgime of South Africd
from the United Nations advanced the argument that
expulsion was not the most effective course to be
taken then in dealing with such a culprit, and that the
United Nations ought to continue to build its persuasive
pressure upon South Africa, moving step by step
until right had triumphed and equality and justice had
been achieved. That was in October 1974. Yet South
Africa’s pronouncements
and actions have frustrated
the hopes and desires even of its well-wishers.

64. Egypt’s policy, as was just reiterated by President
Sadat on 23 July 1976, has always been and remains
one of complete commitment
to the cause of African
solidarity and the completion of the process of African
decolonization, especially the earliest possible attainment of independence by the peoples of Namibia and
Zimbabwe, and indeed all other African peoples under
domination. It is also a policy of complete commitment to the liquidation of the practices of apartheid
and racial discrimination,
wherever they may exist.

72. All the calls of the General Assembly and the
decisions of the Security Council and of various other
United Nations organs and bodies with regard to
granting independence to Namibia and ending rrparrlzeicl and discriminatory
practices, as well as ending
South Africa’s incursions, aggressions and strong-arm
methods against its neighbdurs,
have heretofore
fallen on deaf ears. That is why Mr. Botha’s words
yesterday before the Council had a hollow and a
cynical ring to them.

65. The case before the Council today is very
disturbing in more than one respect. Take, for instance,
South Africa’s record. The South African Government’s violations of human rights have been an item
continuously before the United Nations ever since the
Organization’s inception.
66. South Africa is the rkgime which holds the
shameful record of having been condemned in more
than 50 reso1ution.s of the General Assembly and a
score of resolutions of the Council, including one
imposing an arms embargo [resolutiorz 181 (1963)].
In fact, South Afri’ca is second only to Israel-its
ally
and supporter-in
this game or hobby of collecting
United Nations condemnations.

73. The overwhelming majority of the United Nations
membership
was impelled-after
a long period of
patient endeavours- to decide that such a Government
was not worthy of the honour of membership in the
Organization.
Thus the General Assembly, in its
resolution 3207 (XXIX),
called upon the Security
Council to review the relationship between the United
Nations and South Africa. The Council was not able

67. Indeed, the South African Government’s
acts
Of aggression against its neighbours are reminiscent of
7

paying heed to the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on Namibia’ and to the repeated calls
of the United Nations for setting an early date fot
South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia. We wodd
certainly welcome and hope for South Africa’s
mitigation of its most abhorrent and cruel laws and
practices of rrpcr/‘fheitl and racial discrimination
with
a view to the emergence of a more harmonious, more
egalitarian and more healthy and humanitarian society
in South Africa where both the black majority and the
white minority could live in harmony and justice.
We would certainly welcome the abandonment by
South Africa of the racist and bankrupt minority
rigime in Rhodesia by way of bringitig the necessary
pressure to bear on this white racist minority to enable
it to see the light and to heed the calls of sanity and
the dictates of justice. We would welcome all this, if
it were possible, in order to obviate the need for
and the resort to the only alternative left for the
oppressed, the downtrodden and the desperate to take.
But is this possible?

to adopt a resolution on this matter because of the
veto cast by three of its permanent members, and the
Council is accordingly still seized of the matter.
74. Yet the South African Government has become
so isolated and so brazenly defiant of the authority
of the United Nations that the General Assembly,
at its twenty-ninth
ses.sion, found it necessary not to
recognize.the credentials of the South African Government as truly representative
of the people of South
Africa.z How could it be otherwise when the South
Africa rkgime is still imposing ~pcr&eid
and racial
discrimination
by brute force over the majority of the
population,
resorting to massive killings of the black
African population,
so that the Windhoek and Sharpeville slaughters have been reproduced
and even
multiplied
in Soweto as recently as June 1976?
75. This is the unique and alarming record of the
country which today stands accused by Zambia-and
by Africa-of
repeated aggressions against Zambia’s
population and villages and against its sovereignty and
which, to top it all, now pretends to be unaware of
any wrong-doing.
The record of South Africa speaks
for itself; and so does the record of Zambia, which we
all know to be a wise, moderate and peace-loving
Member of the United Nations as well as a member
of OAU.

79. Soon after Mr. Vorster’s rounds of diplomatic
talks in Germany in June 1976, on 11 July, a platoon
of troops from South Africa, with air support, attacked
and bombed the village of Sialola in the Western
Province of Zambia, about 30 kilometers
inside
Zambia’s territory. We are informed by Zambia that
24 persons were killed and 4.5 seriously injured.

76. Even the Western European
Powers which,
traditionally,
have had strong economic or political
ties with the rCgime in South Africa, have been
compelled to recognize the failures and the illegality
of South Africa’s policies, be it vis-d-vis Namibia or
its opcrrtheid
practices or its support to the racist
rCgime of Rhodesia. Recently, the European Economic
Community
(EEC) issued two declarations:
the
Luxembourg
Declaration
of 23 February and the
Declaration
of the European Council of 2 April, in
which the 9 members of EEC advocated the right to
self-determination
and independence of the peoples of
Namibia and Rhodesia.

80. How should we take the South African Government’s protestations of good will and peaceful intentions which we heard from the representative of
South Africa yesterday before the Council? How can
we take them seriously? How can we take seriously
South Africa’s pretence to seek peaceful solutions
through dialogue with its neighbours when we see that,
barely two weeks after the much touted diplomatic
rounds of meetings in Germany, barely a few months
after EEC’s appeals and urgings to South Africa to
‘mend its ways, all those efforts have led nowhere and
that South Africa still resorts to the same old reprisals
and strong-arm techniques for the same reasons and
with the same flimsy, denials?

77. The press recently reported
that diplomatic
endeavours
were afoot to try to impress upon
Mr. Vorster the urgent need for South Africa to stop
supporting the Smith minority Government in Rhodesia
directly or indirectly
and to put more pressure on
Mr. Smith
to reach a negotiated
constitutional
settlement with the country’s black majority. On the
question of Namibia, the same endeavours envisaged
that South Africa should set an early date for its
withdrawal
from the Territory
and allow political
activists-notably
of SWAPO-a
hand in formulating
a constitution.
Apparently, all this has led nowhere.

81: Zambia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs has told
the Council [1944th Jneeting] that the Sialola incident,
in which South African aircraft participated, was the
latest of 14 wanton acts of aggression against his
country by South Africa this year alone. Yet the South
African rCgime’s representative had the audacity to
tell the Council-exactly
as he told it in October
1971-that they were not aware of any South African
attack on Zambia on 11 July and had not authorized
any such attack.

78. The Organization
oF African Unity is not engaged
in a political fight against the South Africa rtgime just
for the sake of fighting. Certainly nothing would please
the African States more than to see a peaceful
solution to South Africa’s problems with the members
of OAU. We would certainly welcome South Africa’s

82. In October 1971, when Zambia was subjected to
a similar wanton aggression by the Pretoria rkgime,
the Security Council adopted resolution 300 (1971).
which called upon South Africa “to respect fully the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia;” and
declared that in the event of South Africa violating
8

the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Zambia, the
Security Council [would] meet again to examine the
situation further in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter.” After the adoption of that
resolution the representative of Zambia at that time
stated before the Council:
“I must state that the Council has done us a
lot of injustice by giving South Africa such a mild
reprimand
6‘ . . .
“It is our understanding that the resolution which
has just been adopted, and particularly paragraph 3,
is an indication that in the event of any further
violation by South Africa of our territorial integrity,
our airspace and our sovereignty,
the Security
Council will meet again to consider further measures,
not excluding measures under Chapter VII of the
United
Nations
Charter.”
[1592nd meeting,
pnras. 40 Nlld 45.1.
83. South Africa gives no excuse for ,its latest acts
of aggression against Zambia other than its worn-out
pretence of ignorance of any such incidents. Indeed,
the South African representative went on yesterday
to impute those incursions and air raids against Zambia
to irresponsible African subversive elements and to
“the unsettled nature of the situation in southern
Africa”. [1944th meeting, pcrrcr. 631 Why is it unsettled?
The representative
of South Africa conveniently
disregards the responsibility of his own Government.
He further made an emotional appeal for “trust” and
“conciliation”
in order to achieve and preserve peace.
Peace on what basis? Peace and oppressive and
inhuman trptrrtheid laws and practices can hardly
coexist. Trust and conciliation can barely germinate
and flourish under the South African police’s heavyhanded exploits against the population of Soweto and
other townships in South Africa or under South African
incursions against its neighbours.
84. The South African representative’s intervention
of yesterday ,is in contradiction with the acts of his
own Government, and was indeed a brilliant display
of South Africa’s mockery of Zambia, of Africa, and
indeed of this Council. The wolf tries to don the skin
of a lamb; but can the leopard change its spots?
Hardly ever.
85. I would submit that, before the Council, before
the United Nations and the Charter, Zambia stands as
a law-abiding and peace-loving Member of the United
Nations and a member of OAU, whose only guilt in
the eyes of South Africa may be that it is sympathetic
to the cause of the freedom of the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia-a
guilt shared by the great majority of
United Nations Members, which is also in harmony
with the various United Nations resolutions and
decisions.

86. Zambia is a young African country that has
bravely incurred many economic
sacrifices
arId
difficulties
to help implement
a United
Nations
boycott against the racist minority regime in Rhodesia,
yet another ally of South Africa. Under no circumstances, and under no pretext or subterfuge, can it be
allowed that South Africa or Rhodesia should be
permitted to conduct reprisa1 raids deep into Zambia’s
territory and go unpunished or uncondemned because
Zambia’s sympathies lie with the intents and purposes
of the Security Council decisions and the General
Assembly
resolutions on Namibia,
npn/~hcid
or
Rhodesia.
87. On the other hand, in the dock, before the
Council, the minority Government .of South Africa, a
lawless yet self-righteous, ruthless yet cynical rkgime.
stands accused of subterfuge, of diversionary
tactics
and of defiance of the authority and resolutions of the
United Nations. South Africa stands accused of
repeated acts of aggression, against its neighbours
as well as against the black majority of its citizenry
because they dare hope to find a way out of the
hateful, oppressive and inhuman laws and practices
of the white minority racist Government of Pretoria.
88. And so long as the actions and performance
of
the South African Government
against its neighbours and black population speak louder and ring truer
than the words of their representative yesterday before
the Council, South Africa cannot be given the benefit
of any doubt.
89. There is no doubt that the Council should have
a free hand to condemn aggression, especially when it
is a case of repeated acts of callous premeditated
raids, air strikes and reprisals-even
though cynically
denied-not
only against a small neighbour, but against
the very authority of the Council, and against the
authority of the Charter of the United Nations.
No
flimsy pretext, no subterfuge and no cynical and
hollow protestations of peaceful intentions should be
used this time by South Africa or its friends to
protect it from a well-deserved condemnation;
for it
can be done only at the expense of the authority
and the respectability of the United Nations and its
Charter.
90. The PRESIDENT
(intP~pr(~trrtiorl ji*olll F~*rncl~):
The next speaker is the representative of Zaire, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
(Zaire) (irrtc/prcttrtjn,l
.r”* Mr. UMBA di LUTETE
/YJ/J~F/YJ/~c-,/I):Mr. President ~ I am a newcomer in this
great family of diplomats of the United Nations,
but
might I nevertheless, since I have not yet had a chance
to do so, extend to you, on behalf of my delegation
and on my own behalf, my warm congratulations
on
your assumption of the presidency of one of the most
important United Nations bodies. My country,
the
Republic of Zaire, maintains with your country, Italy,

99. I need not dwell on the facts themselves; they
were stated yesterday quite clearly, precisely and
concisely by the Zambian Minister for Foreign Affairs

ties of fruitful co-operation which might serve as an
example for the world. 1 am therefore pleased to see
a worthy and true son of that country presiding over
the work of the Council. Many preceding speakers
have had occasion to emphasize the delicacy and,
above all, the difficult nature of your task, but all took
pleasure in recalling the natural abilities and qualities
of Italian diplomats; and I note that everybody made
particular reference to your personal abilities, which
are certainly ‘an important guarantee of the success of
your work. May I therefore convey to you, even
though your term of office is approaching its end, my
best wishes for the successful conduct of our deliberations under your enlightened guidance.

[1944th weering].

100. Faced with these grave accusations, the representative of South Africa was obviously ill at ease and
upset yesterday [ihid.]; he did not deny the facts but
merely pleaded ignorance of them. But, as was
emphasized yesterday by the representative of Mauritania, there is nothing surprising or new about this
tactic, which consists either in denying the facts or
in distracting the attention of the Security Council
in order to prevent it from fully assuming its legitimate
responsibilities.

92. I wish now to perform the sad duty of associating
myself with the message of solidarity
that you
addressed to the people of China in connexion with
the loss of human life as well as the considerable
material damage suffered by the People’s Republic of
China as a result of the recent earthquakes affecting
an extensive area of that country.

101. Hence, what trust should we really place in the
statements of the representative of South Africa? Only
a few months ago, South Africa attacked Angola, and,
until some of its soldiers were captured, it consistently
denied any South African presence in Angola. We
now know that there was a South African presence in
Angola, and, as in the case of his previous statements,
I do not think that we should have any faith in his
recent statements.

93. I am speaking in this debate on the issue now
before the Council for four reasons.

102. Everybody knows what happened thereafter.
South African army aircraft were clearly observed in
that SWAP0 camp. Where, then, as the representative
of Mauritania asked [ibid.], could these phantoms,
have come from? In any event, they must certainly
have been the phantoms of Vorster and his execum
tioners. And now, what would have been the result
of this inquiry that South Africa proposed? I wonder,
and I believe everyone here in the Council must be
wondering as well.

94. First, my country, Zaire, is firmly opposed to all
forms of aggression. It so happens that a sister country,
Zambia, has been attacked and, as we know, has
suffered losses of human life as a result.
95. Secondly, Zambia is a country with which my
country enjoys fraternal, privileged relations. We have
a common border, and in certain parts of the country
we speak the same language. Our people on both sides
of the border are of the same stock. Thus, for more
than one reason, what is of interest to Zambia is of
concern to my country, Zaire.

103. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia has
cited an impressive list of acts, provocations and
incidents for which South Africa is responsible.
South Africa does not deny this, and yet it ha:s
continued to attack and commit aggression against
Zambia.

96. Thirdly, Zambia belongs to the group of thirdworld nations, to the non-aligned group, as well as
to the African continent, of which my country is a
part.

104. Yesterday those who were in this chamber heard
the obscure and nebulous statement of the representative of South Africa. Judging by his words, his good
will cannot be doubted. His country is full of good faith.
Just leave it to South Africa and everything will turn
out all right. I believe that the speakers who have
preceded me have demonstrated,
brilliantly
and at
great length, that such statements are not even worth
considering. So let us forget about that statement.
There is nothing in it to. discuss, and nothing in it to
refute.

97. Fourthly, this is a question that concerns freedom
fighters and, therefore, decolonization.
For a long time
now, we had believed that these decolonization
problems were coming to an end. However, we have
been disappointed. My country considers this problem
of the freedom fighters as a sacred cause, and
therefore it is of personal concern to us.
98. Scarcely a fortnight ago, under your presidency,
Mr. President, the Council had before it a complaint
submitted by Africa and the Republic of Uganda in
connexion with Israel’s violation of Uganda’s territorial sovereignty. Less than a week after that Israeli
airborne operation, the Council was called upon to
consider incidents of a similar nature and equal gravity,
since Zambia, another State Member, has complained
of aggression by South Africa.

105. But I also wonder whether the representative of
South Africa genuinely believed what he was saying.
What is this gesture of good will? What gesture of
good faith has South Africa ever made to the intermational community’? The only things the Pretoria rlgime
knows are contempt, arrogance, the strong-arm polic’y,
the policy of bravado and of repression.
10

106. There is another symptomatic fact that I should
also like to point out and that was also pointed out
by the preceding speaker. Which are the countries
that have most often been summoned before the
Council’? Which countries have most often been
called before the Council to answer complaints that
they are violating the principles of the Charter and
are not respecting the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, or the advisory
opinions International
Court of Justice? I do not
think I need name them. Concerning the answer there
can be not the slightest shadow of a doubt, for, as my
colleague, the representative of Egypt, has emphasized, South Africa holds the record, having been
condemned 50 times in the various bodies of the
United Nations. This is no idle reflection. It illustrates
clearly, in any case, the attitude and behaviour of
certain States, such as South Africa, which specialize
in the systematic violation of the principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of United Nations
bodies.
107. I really wonder why South Africa continues to
be a Member of the United Nations. I also wonder
how the other Member States can continue to endure
the presence of a State which does nothing but mock
and scoff at the Organization.
And yet, on thinking
it over, among the underlying causes of this state of
affairs is one that was. mentioned during the debate
devoted to the Israeli aggression against Uganda. In
this very Council, the representative of Israel said that
he was accusing the Council, the United Nations and
the international community of flabbiness, of opportunism and of collusion, This is a servious accusations
and certain members of the Council had occasion to
stress this. Yet I am bound to say that the representative of Israel was right on this point, and I am going
to show why.
108. How, if this is not so, can we explain why the
Council, when dealing with the matter of the violation
of the territorial integrity of Uganda by Israel, saw
fit simply to adjourn without even pronouncing a
condemnation as a matter of principle? At the time of
this debate, certain speakers-and
I am thinking now
of the representative of Guinea [194&/2 meeting]were shocked and expressed the fear that unless the
international community, and particularly#,the United
Nations, voiced universal disapproval of such acts,
an extremely dangerous precedent could be set. The
representative of Guinea even added that, given the
fact of Israel’s dealings with South Africa, we should
expect that one of these days South Africa will fall
into step with Israel. And I think that the representative of Guinea had a good point there, since the
Israeli intervention took place during the night of
3 July and one week later South Africa committed
aggression against Zambia when its airborne troops
attacked a peaceful village in Zambia. This, then, is
the outcome of the conspiracy, complicity and indifference, to say the least, of certain Members of
the Organization.

109. But even more serious for the Council is the
fact that, as far as South Africa is concerned, this is
not the first time. South Africa is an unrepentant
recidivist. It is in the habit of committing
aggression
and murdering shamelessly. It casts scorn on the
United Nations. And yet, the mass media, which
usually lash out when someone touches a single hair
of the head of persons from certain countries, say
almost nothing. You yourselves saw a short while ago
when the Council was considering the complaint of
Uganda, this chamber was filled with people. There
was even applause. Why? Because they were
celebrating the Israeli exploit. But now that 24 Zartibians have been killed, 45 have been wounded and
16 are missing, the press hardly says a word. Look
at this room: it is almost empty. Even certain Members of the United Nations are fed up. Is it for shame
at what South Africa is doing? No, it is because’ of
indifference. What do they care if the United Nations
is being mocked? What does it matter if so much
blood is being shed? It is only the blood of poor
people, the blood of Africans, the blood of black men,
so what does it matter?
110. But the time has come, I think, to ask and to
keep asking a question that has already been asked
several times. Would South Africa have dared to
attack a village or a town of that group of countries
we all know? And if South Africa actually did so,
what would have happened? When such serious
matters and incidents have been brought to out
attention in the Council, what have we found? Very
often the accused countries have a pretext, namely
that it was a matter of self-defence, of the right of
pursuit, of a state of emergency. For the first time,
thank God, South Africa has not even dared to invoke
the so-called right of pursuit or the right of selfdefence. Perhaps it has finally realized that ultimately
it is the freedom fighters and the countries which give
aid to the freedom fighters that are really acting in
self-defence. Because basically what South Africa is
doing is committing aggression against these countries,
for anyone who puts himself in the wrong can never
claim to be acting in self-defence. We know that the
United Nations,
the General Assembly,
and the
International
Court of Justice have declared the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia to be
unlawful. South Africa therefore has no right or claim
to remain in Namibia. The same applies to the minority
r6gime in Salisbury, which continues
to rule over
our brothers in Zimbabwe.
111. It was with joy and pride that I listened
yesterday [/9&h
meefirfg] to the profession of faith
of the Foreign Minister of Zambia. In substance, he
said: that when South Africa destroyed our villages,
when it attacked us, when it killed the freedom
fighters, it believed it could intimidate us, but no, that
on the contrary, all it was doing was strengthening
our courage because we knew that we were defending
a sacred cause. He said that the cause of freedom
was not negotiable and that all Africans said this, and

not only Africans, but all men who loved justice
and freedom had the imperative
duty to support
those fighting for liberty. He said that Zambia
would always do its duty whatever happened and
whatever it might cost. Those were fine words to hear,
and they must be encouraging to all freedom fighters.
They honour their author; they honour Zambia; they
honour Africa; and, finally, they honour the international community.

them at the side of the Council chamber on the understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.

112. As regards the Security Council,. the body
responsible for the maintenance of peace, this affair
must convince it that as long as there are illegal
minority racist regimes in southern Africa there will
be no possibility of peace. Yesterday it was Zambia
and Angola; tomorrow it will perhaps be the United
Republic of Tanzania. It may be Botswana; it may
perhaps be Lesotho., And why not Zaire? Why not
Benin or any other African country?

117. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Liberia. I invite her to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
(Liberia):
BROOKS-RANDOLPH
118. Mrs.
Mr. President, may I take this opportunity
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July.
119. On behalf of the Government
and people of
Liberia, I should like to convey to the representative
of China ,and, through him, to the Government and
people of China, our deepest sympathy and condolences on the losses they have sustained because
of the recent earthquake.

113. All this must stop. South Africa has caused
sufficient trouble for United Nations bodies. As the
Zambian Foreign Minister said yesterday, the Council
must at least show its solidarity with Zambia and with
the freedom fighters by unequivocally
condemning
the South African aggression. When the Zambian
Foreign Minister goes home he.should at least be able
to take to his people a message of hope that the
sacrifices of that people are not in vain and that they
are supported in their struggle by the international
community.
The Security Council would thus simply
show the continuity of its progressive policy in the
field of decolonization.

120. Mr, William R. Tolbert Jr., President of the
Republic of Liberia, has instructed me to intervene in
this debate in support of the Government
of Zambia
and strongly to condemn the constant violation of the
territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia by the
racist Government of South Africa. We also condemn
any violation by South Africa of the territorial integrity
of other independent countries in southern Africa.

114. As I said just now, ahd as many other speakers
have said, the United Nations has already declared
illegal the South African presence in Namibia and
recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of the freedom
fighters. That is the least the Council can do-not to
mention reparations for damage caused by the aggression. I am convinced the Council will act accordingly,
and that it will take all the necessary measures’ to
give true effect to the many resolutions of the United
Nations on Namibia and Zimbabwe. That, then, is the
. desire I express from the bottom of my heart, and
I am sure that all men who love justice and peace
share that desire.

121. In his statement to the Council yesterday [ihid.J,
Mr. Siteke G. Mwale, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Zambia, made a comprehensive
analysis of the diabolical acts and designs of the white
minority racist regime of South Africa in its aggression
against his Government,
in particular
the aggression of 11 July 1976.
122. In his reply to the statement of the Foreign
Minister of Zambia, the so-called representative of
South Africa said:
“At the outset I wish to state that the South
African Government had no knowledge of an attack
on a Zambian village at Sialola on 11 July 1976.
The South African Government at no time authorized
and would not authorize attacks on Zambian
villages.” [Ibid., para,. 48.1

115. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received
letters from the representatives of Ethiopia
Madagascar and Uganda, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the debate in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly, I propose,
in accordance with the usual practice of the Council
and if there is no objection, to invite those representatives to participate in the Council’s debate without the
right to vote.

In the view of my Government, the categorical deniai
by the representative of South Africa regarding this
matter raises very serious questions.
123. I should now like to address myself to the:
Government of South Africa through its representative
in this chamber.

116. I invite the representatives of Ethiopia, Madagascar and Uganda to take the places reserved for
12

124. Is the Government of South Africa willing to
accept and co-operate fully with a fact-finding mission
of the Security Council regarding this matter? Is the
South African Government willing to make available
to that fact-finding mission all relevant information
on its troop movements during this period?

said; the number of resolutions is voluminous;
and
the international
community’s
cry of protest against
the brutal system of apcrrtheid-which
constitutes,
as shown by the present agenda of the Council, a
threat to the Governments and peoples of Africa and,
even more, to international peace and security-is
loud
and clear.

125. Numerous
resolutions
of the Council have
declared illegal South Africa’s presence in Namibia.
Consequently,
no part of the territory of Namibia
can be used by South Africa as a staging-ground either
to violate the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Zambia or to attack Namibians fighting for the liberation of their country.

133. Scarcely a month ago it was necessary to bring
the South African rigime here and put it in the dock
because of the bloody massacre in Soweto and many
other places, where students and other persons had
risen up against oppression. The news coming from
Johannesburg shows clearly that rebellion inside the
country is on the rise and that the police and the racist
army have increased their desperate and useless acts
to drown that rebellion in blood.

126. If it was all right for European countries to fight
for the liberation
of their countries from the iron
clutches of the Nazi occupation, why should it be
wrong for the heroic people of Namibia to fight for
the liberation of their country from the illegal racist
rCgime of South Africa?

134. Today the Council has had to meet once again
to examine another act of aggressi& by the South
African rCgime. We are not surprised at this new
attack, directed this time against an independent and
progressive State of Africa: the Republic of Zambia.

127:” In conclusion, I request of the South African
representative a reply to the question I raised a moment
agd regarding a fact-finding mission so,that this facto1
may be taken into consideration in any draft resolution
that might be adopted on the question before the
Council.

13.5. This year there have been 14 acts of armed
aggression by racist South Africa against the people
and Government of Zanibia. The most recent act-that
of 11 July-was committed in the village of Sialola.
in the Kaunga-Mashi region of the Western Province.
Without justification, South African troops committed
an incursion into that area, which is 28 to 30 kilometres inside Zambian territory, and, supported by the
air force, they attacked and bombed the village and
the SWAP0
transit camp,, killing 24 persons and
wounding 45.

128. May I further tell the South African rCgime,
as I have done in the Council before, that the hands
of the clock cannot be turned back. To kill liberators
or people struggling. to liberate themselves is simply
to sow a seed that will bring, back even more. They
shall rise again and again until all of Africa is free.

136. That act of .aggression, as denounced in the
statement made before the Council by the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Zambia [1944th ~wr/irr,~],
constitutes a flagrant violation of the territorial integrity
of Zambia and a threat to international
peace and
security. So flagrant is this offence that yesterday
the representative of South Africa, in his statement to
the Council [i/Tit/.], resorted to the oft-repeated
statement that his Government was ignorant of events,
of which it undoubtedly was the protagonist.

129. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Cuba, 1 invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
130. Mr.

ACOSTA
(Cuba) (i/lfo’~~r’rt~rlic,~~ ,/i.o/?l
At a previous meeting my delegation congratulated you, Mr. President, on the efficient way
in which you have been conducting the work of the
Security Council and applauded the cordial and
respectful relations existing between Italy and Cuba.
I would repeat those sentiments today. My delegation
wishes to express to you, Mr. President, and to, all the
members of the Council its gratitude for having been
given the opportunity to speak in this debate, without
the right to vote.

Sprr~rish):

137. NOI content with launching a platoon of racists
against Sialola, the Vorster rCgime gave “appropriate
use” to the arms of its reactionary air force. We say
“appropriate
use” because the international
community knows full well that for this purpose South
Africa receives military resources from the Western
Powers. It produces arms and receives them in ordct
LO perpetuate the shameful system of trpartlzcid,
to
combat the liberation movements,
to try to strangle
internal resistance, and lo attack other African States
of the region, as was shown in Zambia’s denunciation.

131. We wish also to express our condolences in
respect of the victims of the earthquake that struck the
People’s Republic of China yesterday.
132. The situation that has brought us here today,
albeit dramatic, is not new. For over 15 years the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies
have been considering and condemning the racist,
aggressive, expansionist
and hence intolerable
character of the South African rtgime. Much has been

138. The delegation of Cuba condemns with profoul?d
indignation this Fascist and racist aggression against a
sovereign, progressive, non-aligned State.
13

imperialism,
which daily draw fabulous profits from
them. By way of illustration,
suffice it to say that
over 200 United States corporations account for onefifth of their foreign investments in South Africa.

139. Not long ago the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the
meeting
at Algiers from
Non-Aligned
Countries,
30 May to 2 June, expressed its repudiation of the
South African regime and gave voice to its serious
concern at the support being given to the racist
minority enclave by the imperialist Powers. The solemn
declaration by the Co-ordinating
Bureau at Algiers
has acquired new validity today in the light of the
events we are consi,dering.

146. In short, it is the international
alliance of
imperialist monopolies that supports and upholds thla
South African regime. It is the product of this alliance
which places in the hands of the Pretoria racists atomic
reactors, helicopters,
modern aircraft-in
short,
weapons of every kind for purposes of aggression.
These are the same weapons that were used to
massacre the patriots in Soweto and other places, the
same which a few months ago were defeated by the
heroic action of the Angolan patriots, the same which
today are used against the Republic of Zambia and
threaten all the peoples and Governments on that
continent.

140. Faced with these facts, it is imperative that we
analyse, if only briefly, the roots of this putrid regime,
its effects and its prospects.
141. The system of upurtheid was created parallel
with the establishment of the cold war by imperialism
in 1948, and went hand in hand with the emergence
of the aggressive North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) bloc and the so-called brink-of-war policy,
the provocations in Berlin and the installation
of a
series of bases and military pacts against the Soviet
Union and the socialist community.
The South African
~cpl//*thrit/ regime made a good combination with the
imperialist
strategy of throttling
the revolutionary
national liberation movement
and established itself
as the policeman of reaction in Africa.

147. It is important to say that undoubtedly
the
heinous system of crpartheid has already entered into
an unavoidable stage of definitive crisis from which
not even the best imperialist medicine men can save it,
and, they will not be able to save it because the crisis
of South Africa is a reflection of the crisis of colonialism
and neo-colonialism
on the African continent. The
victories of the peoples of Guinea-Bissau, Angola arid
Mozambique bear this out.

142. Eighteen million blacks have been confined to
the worst land, within the framework of a brutal
system of discrimination and repression which exploits
them like true slaves, turning them into the cheapest
labour in the world.

148. In Soweto unarmed people faced their oppressors with sticks and stones in their hands; in Angola
the invasion by the South African regime was
triumphantly
repulsed, thus destroying forever the
myth of white racist supremacy; and in Namibia and
Zimbabwe the national liberation movement is being
strengthened.

143. Mr. Botha, in his statement of 19 June last
[19-?&I1 uwtiug],
was daring enough to supply fallacious, prefabricated figures established by the regime
he represents. He forgot, however, to point out that
a black worker doing the same work as a white worker
receives a salary that is, IO to 20 times lower. Neither
did he say anything about the heavier work which is
assigned to blacks. He forgot to point out that in the
country the difference in wages between a black and a
white can be over thirtyfold,
nor did he say that
between 1948 and 1973 over 10.5 million Africans
had been brought to trial and gaoled as a result of the
brutal system of law created by the architects of
d[~/rt/~ei~l to oppress them.

149.

In this process so critical for the rkgime of
and its supporters, the role of the international community, through its militant solidarity with
the sovereign and progressive States of Africa and the
national
liberation
movements,
acquires special
importance. That is why today, in the face of this
new aggression by the South African regime against
the Republic of Zambia,
the Cuban delegation,
representing its Government and people, endorses the
strong protest of that fraternal people and all the
Governments members of OAU.

~rprrrtheitl

144. To this we must add that the military budget of
South Africa for the year 1975-1976
amounts to
1,300 million Rand, equivalent to 18 per cent of the
overall budget and 3 per cent of South Africa’s
gross national product. These military expenditures
constitute,
moreover, a 36 per cent increase as
compared to the previous budget.

150. There is much African blood in our veins from
the slaves brought to the American continent from
Africa.
151. Cuba hopes that the Security Council will
vigorously condemn this new racist aggression and
repudiate the presence of the South African rCgime iI1
Namibia. We request that it do so. Cuba hopes that the
Council will adopt effective measures against ithe
South African regime and requests that those States
which provide South Africa with weapons and which
encourage it with the development
of diplomatic
relations and support it through investments
and

145. One might well ask why at this point in time so
despicable and inhuman a regime is still maintained
alive. The answer is very simple. On the shoulders
of the black masses of South Africa we find sitting not
only the leaders in Pretoria but also-and
I would
emphasize this-the
transnational
monopolies
of
I4

-

trade relations put an end to such ties, thus complying
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

159. The acts of premeditated
violence committed
by the Pretoria regime on 1 I July in the village of
Sialola, 30 kilometres inside Zambian
territory, are
viewed with extreme gravity by ‘my delegation, if only
for the number of victims involved. I wish to take this
opportunity
to convey to the Zambian Government
and, through it, to the bereaved families the sincere
condolences and heartfelt sympathy
of the people
and Government of Madagascar.

152. In making this appeal, Cuba is loyal to its
principles and is merely reciprocating with militancy
for the solidarity evidenced towards it in its struggle
against imperialism.
1.53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

160. These acts of violence are serious and must be
condemned,
because they constitute
a serious and
flagrant violation of international
law and of Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations-an
Organization to which the Pretoria regime should no
longer belong, I might say. That paragraph, I need
hardly recall, prohibits “the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations”.

154. Mr. RASOLONDRAIBE
(Madagascar) (i/?lo’,fh~m
Fwnc~h): Mr. President, allow me to
express my delegation’s great satisfaction at seeing
you presiding over the Security Council. The close and
cordial relations between Italy and Madagascar lead
me to hope that under your diligent, wise and welladvised leadership the Council wilt be able, after
examining the Zambian complaint, to take a decision
that will give grounds for hope that Africa will
experience an era of peace and security and, above all,
of justice and liberty.

pwlotion

161. The criminal raid on Sialola is serious also
because of its purpose, since it was directed against
the Namibian nationalists fighting under the banner of
SWAP0 for the reafization of their inalienable rights
and for the liberation of their country, which has been
illegally occupied by the Vorster Administration
in
defiance of the decisions of the United Nations and the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice.’

155. At the same time, I should also like to address
to you personally and, through you, to the other
members of the Council, my delegation’s thanks that
its request to participate in this debate has been
granted.

162. The tragic incident of 11 July is also serious
because it is not an isolated or exceptional act, but
part of a long series of attacks carried out by airborne troops equipped with sophisticated
weapons
against a State, Zambia, whose only crimes are having
a common frontier with Namibia,
being opposed to
racial discrimination,
white supremacy and minority
regimes, and being in favour of majority rule and selfdetermination
in Africa. During the Council’s debates
in October 1971 [1.59&h to 1592nd meetings], the representative of the Zambian Government
informed us of
24 violations of his country’s sovereignty by the racist
South African regime. Yesterday, Mr. Mwate gave a
list of 14 other violations
perpetrated
since the
beginning of this year-that
is, an average of two per
month.

156. I wish also to associate myself with the message
which you addressed to the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China, expressing our condolences over
the loss of human life and the material damage caused
by the recent earthquake which affected a large area
of China.
157. The facts brought to the attention of the Council
by the Foreign Minister of Zambia Mr. Mwale [!9441h
meeting], are by now too well known for me to risk
inconveniencing the Council by repeating them; and
much as I might have liked to, I could not have
presented them with as much eloquence and authority
as was done by the member of the Zambian Government who is honouring us by his personal participation
in this debate, for which we convey our sincere thanks
to him.

163. The fact that a State systematically
resorts to
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
another State in order to achieve its national objectives
is sufficient to cause it to lose all legitimacy-assuming
it had any in the first place. The Vorster rCgime
never had any legitimacy,
and the objectives it is
pursuing in attacking Zambia are illegitimate
as well.

158. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Madagascar condemns the illegal racist regime of
Pretoria for the repeated acts of aggression committed
against the Republic of Zambia, a friendly country
with which we have long-standing
ties based on
solidarity in struggle and on common aims as regards
the total liberation of Africa. In fact, my country
considers any aggression committed
against any
African State as an aggression against itself, against its
own sovereignty and territorial integrity; and this is
true, whoever the victim may be: the Comoros,
Somalia, Angola, Mozambique, Uganda or Zambia-to
mention only the countries that have been the subject
of Council debates this year.

164. The fact that the representative
of Pretoria
chooses to lie about the incident of 11 July does not
alter the situation at all. This tie cannot disprove the
fact that his regime harbours hostile intentions towards
the independent African countries
in passing a law
permitting the dispatch of South African expeditionary
forces to any point south of the Sahara-in
Zambia
1.5
c

“The central issue, therefore, is black major@
rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe, and the destruction
of optrrthpicl in South Africa. As long as thle white
minority racist rkgimes continue to exist in the
region, the international
community
will witness
repeated acts of aggression by these rkgimes against
independent African countries... peace and security
in southern Africa will remain precarious, and
international peace and security will be threatened.”
[19#4t/7 meeting, /7(//‘11.241

or elsewhere. That lie of his will not make us believe
that it is Martians who periodically
come to sow
death and destruction in Sialola and in the neighbouring areas of the Caprivi Strip. There are only two
explanations:
either Pretoria has lost control over its
troops illegally stationed in Namibia and those troops
are now becoming dangerous to everybody, including
the Pretoria rCgime itself, or the intervention in the
territories
of neighbouring
African countries has
become such a routine matter that these troops no
longer need the green light from Pretoria before
carrying out their raids. In either case, the dangers to
the sovereignty and security of neighbouring States
cannot be minimized.

169. Clearly, if the Council has the duty, as a result
of this debate, to take a decision t,hat will render
justice to the demands of Zambia, that decision must
also take into account the responsibility that this body
bears for the maintenance of international peace am
security. In southern Africa this requires that Nainibi;
and Zimbabwe be liberated at once and that rrpar’fhcic
be wiped out.

165. It is time that the Council stopped wanting
two contradictory
things. It is time that, in the spirit
of resolution 300 (1971), it showed its determination
to ensure the sovereignty, integrity and security of
Zambia and stopped tolerating the presence of South
African armed forces illegally stationed in the Caprivi
Strip and throughout Namibia, for purposes inimical to
the independent African countries. It is time that the
Council
stopped proclaiming
its support for the
principle of independence for Namibia while tolerating
its occupation by South Africa and the use of its
territory as a base for aggression against neighbouring
African countries. It is time we stopped pretending
to support SWAP0 and its legitimate claims if the
Council is going to continue to close its eyes to the
persecution and massacre of Namibian nationalists by
South African troops in Namibia itself or in foreign
territory, such as Zambia.

170. We are all too familiar with the tricks that the
South African rCgime is capable of and therefore WC
cannot be unduly surprised at the tactic it has chaser
to use during the present debate. Do we need to recall
that the most flagrant example of these tactics occurred
in San Francisco, when the South African r&me
signed the Charter of the United Nations while at the
same time reserving to itself the right to apply its policy
of aparrhcid at home? Its offer to engage in dialogue
and its so-called policy of dCtente with regard to the
independent African countries have turned out to be
only empty promises designed to pull the wool over
the eyes of world public opinion, promises which,
moreover, are contradicted by its’ interventions io
Angola and Zambia. We firmly believe that, in the
present case, the Pretoria rCgime has acted against its
well-understood interests by publicly revealing the
extent of its impudence and effrontery-something
which will be felt above, all in those circles which
still dare to hope for some hypothetical contributiorl
on the part of South Africa to a peaceful development
of the situation in southern Africa.

166. In the circumstances I have just described, the
Security Council has the duty to demand the withdrawal from Namibia of the South African troops
responsible, among other crimes, for repeated acts
of aggression against the Republic of Zambia. Such a
measure, if adopted and followed up, would satisfy
Zambia’s security requirements. Such a measure does
not imply the use of armed force by the United Nations
or its Members, even though it is not on the list of
measures-which
in any case is not restrictive-in
Article 41 of the Charter. Such a measure is in keeping
with the law because, not exercising any sovereignty
over Namibia, South Africacannot maintain any armed
forces there. Moreover, such a measure, I need hardly
say, cannot run counter to any decision that the
Council may adopt once it has examined, as it will
in a few weeks’ time, the question of Namibia as a
whole.

1.71. To the representatives of those circles I wish to
address myself specifically by recalling that if there
is to be any peaceful evolution in that region, the
conditions laid down by independent Africa to that end
are to be found in the Lusaka Manifesto’ and the
Dar es Salaam Declaration on southern Africa adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its ninth extraordinary session in
April 197.5. South Africa rejects those conditions.
When we invited them to negotiate with the African
population of Azania, the racists of Pretoria replied
with the massacre at Soweto. South Africa apparently
does not wish to negotiate with us under threat; but
this is precisely the experience it has forceid Ihe
Zambian Government to undergo, except that the
threats have been carried out. My delegation is certaill
that the Council will unanimously condemn this mode
,-, /’
of action.

167. In his statement
yesterday,
the Zambian
Minister for Foreign Affairs called on the Council to
honour the commitment
it had entered into when it
adopted its resolution 300 (1971). He asked for effective
and energetic measures against South Africa. The
measure I have just mentioned can and must be one
of them.
168. I would not wish to continue my statement
without associating myself with what the Foreign
Minister of Zambia said yesterday before the Council:
16

172. I would not wish to conclude this statement
without referring to the broader problem that worries
the militarily
weak countries, particularly
those of
Africa, as a result of the Council’s failure to take a
decision on Uganda’s complaint, whose similarity
to
the case at present under consideration does not need
to be demonstrated.
173. Starting from the idea that the territorial
inviolability
of States has always been and remains one
of the essential and universally recognized principles
of international
law, we are disturbed at the practices
and theories invoked by Israel and South Africa in
an effort to legitimize or legally justify their infringements on the sovereignty and integrity of Arab or
African States. In our view, the territorial sovereignty
of any country, large or small, must be respected,
and we do not believe that there is any reason whatsoever that can render legitimate or admissible any
violation, even of a temporary nature, of this principle. Scrupulous respect for the principle of territorial
sovereignty today constitutes one of the guarantees
for the maintenace of that peace and justice for which
we constantly strive. We are sure that the Council
will wish to guarantee that the decisions it takes in
the future will keep the scope of that principle inviolate.

178. This is the fourth time in less than seven months
that the highest authority of the United Nations has
found it necessary to convene to consider crimes of
the most condemned criminal regime in the world,
namely that of South Africa.
179. In January of this year, the Security Council
sat to consider the crime of the continued
illegal
occupation of Namibia by the npcrrtheid
regime. At
that time the Council [resolution
385 (197611 called
upon that regime to withdraw from and to cease
henceforth using the international
Territory of Namibia
as a springboard for aggression against neighbouring
States.
180. In March the Council was again called upon to
consider South Africa’s military aggression against the
People’s Republic of Angola. The Council [resoluth
387 (1976)] then condemned South Africa’s invasion
of the People’s Republic of Angola and demanded that
the clpcrrtkeid regime scrupulously
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that
country. It also demanded that South Africa desist
from utilizing
Namibia
to mount provocative
OI
aggressive acts against the People’s Republic of Angola
or any other neighbouring
African State.
181. Before the dust had settled, however, this body
was again urgently convened, last month, to discuss
the massacre of school children at Sowefo and other
places in South Africa itself, perpetrated
by that
notorious regime.

174. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker
is
Mr. 0. T. Emvula, Deputy Chief Representative
of
the South West Africa People’s Organization.
In
accordance with the decision taken earlier by the
Council under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

182. Today the Council is again sitting to considei
the most recent flagrant act of aggression against the
Republic of Zambia. On the eleventh of this month,
the repugnant racist regime of South Africa, once again
using the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia as
its staging base, launched an unprovoked attack by ail
and land against the village of Sialola in the Western
Province of Zambia, killing at least 24 people and
seriously injuring 45 others.

175. Mr. EMVULA
(Deputy Chief Representative of
the South West Africa People’s
Organization):
Mr. President, distinguished members of the Security
Council, let me express my delegation’s
sincere
gratitude for having been given the honour of speaking
before you. We have deep respect for this august body
because it has a great responsibility to mankind. My,
delegation believes that ultimately
a decisive step
will be taken on an issue of specific concern to us.

183. On the same day Mr. Agostinho
Neto, the
President of the People’s Republic of Angola, disclosed
that three villages in southern Angola had been
attacked and burned down by the same racist South
African forces of aggression, again using Namibia as
their launching base.

176. Since this is the first time SWAP0 has appeared
before the Council during the term of your, service,
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on behalf
of the people of Namibia and on behalf of Comrade
Sam Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, and on my own
behalf, on your assumption of that very responsible
office so important for upholding justice and peace,
which are the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations.

184. All these acts of aggression are being committed
at the very time when the armed struggle being waged
by the People’s Liberation
Army of Namibia under
its vanguard party, SWAPO, has reached new proportions resulting in the opening up of new military
fronts and operational areas in central and southern
regions of Namibia and the consolidation
of previously
contested areas of military
operation
in northern,
north-western and north-eastern regions of Namibia,

177. I want also to avail myself of this opportunity
to express our shock and heartfelt grief at the bad
news we have heard concerning the disaster that has
happened in China. We wish to extend our condolences
to the people, to the Government and the Party of
China.

185. Because of its dismal failure to match and
contain the determined forces of SWAPO, the clpc~r~17

..

/?ci(/ rtgime and its occupation forces of aggression
have resorted to flagrant armed attacks in neighbouring
independent African States and to harassment, torture,
murder, rape, arrest and detention of SWAP0
political cadres and sympathizers at home.

They were relegated to concentration
camps called
protected villages on the desert peripheries, where
men and beasts face untold suffering and misery. It
is in that process that scores have been murdered and
hundreds have lost their limbs or have been permanently crippled in their stoic effort to resist this
forcible removal from their ancestral lands.

186. Most of the atrocities perpetrated by the South
African terrorist forces do not come to the knowledge
of the world because the rCgime has banned any
reports on them in its,attempt to present to the world
a mask of peacefulness in Namibia and general
acceptance by the Namibians of its ugly occupation.
But the reality is poles apart from the propaganda
South Africa presents to the world.

194. Namibia has been turned into a den of misery.
Everywhere people are mourning. Mothers are losing
their children, who are being killed, while looking
after cattle or when going to or coming from schools,
by the roaming racist terrorists, who number mlore
than 50,000 in the northern area of Namibia alone,
Pregnant women are assaulted; mothers and thei]
babies on their backs are sewn together by the ratist
bullets.

1’87. On 29 August 197.5, two uncontrolled, irresponsible, occupationist terrorist soldiers raped the halfblind 75-year-old Mrs. Nailenge of Ongenga and
seriously assaulted her BT-year-old husband, Mr. Paulus Nailenge. The two old victims spent more than a
month in hospital. Since then, incidents of that nature
have become common occurrences in northern
Namibia.

195. Searching for information about the movement
of SWAP0 freedom fighters, the forces of occupation
break into people’s houses and kidnap, torture and
interrogate them. More often than not, such action
has resulted in the death or permanent injury of many,
many Namibians.

188. In the same month of last year, the illegal
occupationist rigime of South Africa conducted a
general sweep in the wake of the assassination of
puppet Chief Elifas of the Ovambo Bantustans. That
resulted in the torture, trial and subsequent sentencing
to death of Aaron Muchimba and Hendrik Shikongo.
The trial itself was by its nature and substance illegal
and totally unfair since it degenerated into the shameful
trial of SWAP0 as an organization. The representative
of the International Commission of Jurists has confirmed that the trial was a mockery of justice.

196. SWAP0 has irrefutable evidence on every single
act of terror 1 have mentioned and many others, It
has facts about the ugly reality of the present Namibian
situation which contradict what the representative of
the forces of terror said yesterday in an attempt to
hoodwink the Council.
197. The people of Namibia are weary of the continued illegal presence of the South African colonial
regime in Namibia, but nobody in an effective position
seems to take their plight seriously.

189. On IO June the Reverend Cornelius Nghishitende was killed at a village of Epinga, from which
the people were forcibly removed by the racist army.
His one-year-old son and the Reverend Haukongo
were seriously injured. This was done because of their
opposition to the removal of villagers.

198. On the eve of the Kissinger-Vorster
talks in
West Germany, the churches in Namibia having the
widest contact with the people wrote a letter to
Mr. Kissinger in which they said:
“We are convinced that the vast majority of :the
black people of our country fervently desire tlhat
the South African police, army and administration
should rapidly leave this Territory,.,
the discriminatory political policies which have been so callously
implemented here.. , [and the] ever-increasing rule
of terror which has been inflicted on the people
-especially arbitrary arrest, indefinite detention and
brutal torture.., have destroyed human dignity
and bedevilled relationships within the family and
community
alienated
the black
and totally
population.”

190. On the weekend of 11 July, the forces of
occupation killed a 1%year-old boy near Ondangua
while he was looking after cattle.
191. Those are only a few of the hurtdreds of acts
of terror.
192. While the illegal occupationist rkgime of South
Africa was illegally condemning the Namibian compatriots to death, it also engaged itself in the destruction of Namibia’s natural ecology and the human
habitat along the northern border areas. Villagers have
been forcibly removed from Ruacana, on the Cunene
River, through Okalongo, to Engela, through Epinga
and Ohauwanga, right to Nkurenkuru,
on the Okavango River; then, from Andara, through Singalamwe,
to Katima Mulilo, on the Zambezi.

199. It should therefore be obvious that the pious
presentation
to which the Council was subjected
yesterday by the spokesman of the most untruthful
and hypocritical rCgime was calculated to blindfold,
manipulate and confuse world public opinion to lthe
point where it believes that racist South Africa nlow
intends to withdraw from Namibia. This applies alSo

193. Thousands of families were uprooted, leaving
behind them their ripe farm crops and property.
18

--

to the denial
Zanlbia.

of that regime’s

aggression

against

6‘
. . .

200. Yesterday South Africa introduced itself here
as a sort of innocent victim of the world-the
very
attitude of a wolf in sheep’s clothing. That was a
manoeuvre to hijack attention from facts before the
Council. South Africa has had no change of heart that
would justify that move. If anything, the regime has
become. more dangerous. What South Africa has
brought to Namibia is some window dressing and
callous repression-repression
which has had repercussions in neighbouring States.
201. The so-called constitutional
talks in Namibia
are and remain nothing other than an instrument
of colonialist racist South Africa to impose its evil
schemes of bantustanization in disguise and perpetual
white minority domination of the majority of the people
of Namibia. The so-called Turnhalle is totally controlled by the same reactionary National Party of
South Africa. It is a shameful undertaking and a
collection of useless puppets, some of whom the
regime had to give new suits and shoes which they
were to wear for the first time in their lives. In fact,
they decided to carry those shoes into the hall because
they did not fit.

“It demanded freedom and independence for.
South West Africa with its territory intact and
democratic rights and equality for all inhabitants,
irrespective of their race, colour or ethnic origins,”
203,. The racist representative
has laboured to
convince the Council by deception that the so-called
constitutional
talks have brought changes in Namibia.
Of course, they have helped South Africa to entrench
itself militarily in Namibia; of course, they have caused
more deaths in Namibia, But the change the Namibians
want is total withdrawal of the occupationist regime,
204. We are aware that the culmination
of the socalled constitutional talks is meant to be the creation,
probably by the end of next month, of a puppet
government
in Namibia headed by a puppet black
prime minister camouflaging
a real, white prime
minister, who will be his deputy. Such a government
will leave defence and foreign affairs in the hands of
Pretoria, or it will have agreed by then that the racist
forces remain in Namibia at its “invitation”.
That,
of course, will facilitate the aggressive activities against
independent African countries.
205. The acts of terror and international gangsterism
to which I have referred, taking place at a time when
South Africa is expected to comply with Security
Council resolution 385 (1976), are calculated methods
used by the illegal regime in its attempt to impose
the results of the so-called constitutional
talks-or
the Turnhalle,
as it is called-on
the Namibian
people. Like any devil, South Africa knows full well
that it will never succeed in imposing its ugly schemes
and machinations upon the people of Namibia behind
the Turnhalle smoke-screen as long as SWAP0 of
Namibia, their vanguard party, is strong and dynamic,
as it is.

202. This Turnhalle exercise has been rejected by
Namibia, and I wish to.quote the tribal group recognized by South Africa which has rejected participation in the Turnhalle. This is from the Windhock
rlthJerri.ver-the
only English newspaper in Namibiaof 21 July:
“A move to include dissiaenr groups in the Damara
delegation to the constitutional conference suffered
a serious setback here today when the Damaraland
Advisory Council rejected the Turnhalle as a farce.
“Meanwhile,
a Windhoek-based
faction of the
Damara Tribal Executive announced that it would
not participate without United Nations supervision.

206. As a matter of fact, all the criminal acts committed by the occupationist
regime of South Africa
against the Namibians, and against SWAP0 supporters
in particular, have been aimed at the physical elimination of SWAP0 so as to frustrate its efforts for the.
decolonization
and true liberation of Namibia. For
only SWAP0 threatens the evil plans of South Africa.
My delegation therefore appeals to the Council not to
be misled by this most delinquent regime. The South
African racist regime has always been and will continue to be an aggressive, expansionist and dangerous
rkgime as long as definite steps are not taken by the
international community to force it to abandon its evil
designs. The regime wants to continue its colonial
presence in Namibia and to use Namibia in its aggressive designs.

“The
Chairman
of the officially-recognized
Damaraland Advisory Council (DAC), Mr. Justus
Garoeb, said the DAC regarded all decisions taken
in the Turnhalle as invalid and not applicable to
South West Africa. As far as the DAC was concerned, the Damaras were not represented. The
delegation, under Mr. E. Christy, was ‘a South
African-inspired group, who are there in a personal
capacity’.
“Mr. Garoeb said the DAC had received no
invitation from’hlr. Christy. Even if it had done, it
would have summarily refused it. The Turnhalle
would have to make changes of principle if Damara
groups were expected to participate. In addition, an
invitation would have to come from ‘a qualified,
responsible instance, not from a group of chanters’.

207. Occupation of Namibia by racist South Africa
is central to the tension in the region, and the ending of
that occupation will promote
the achievement
of
peace there. We have asked to participate in these
19

1

those dissident groups is to overthrow the Ga’vernments of those countries. The Mushala gang, was
trained by them and is troubling the Republic of
Zambia today. We believe that these 1’1 other groups
are or will be involved in subversive activities against
their respective countries of origin. This is another
threat posed by the South African racist regime
towards destabilization in Africa. African States should
take note of this. In this respect, the occupationists
are also training Angolan reactionary elemenlts as
terror gangs that terrorize the Namibians posing as
SWAP0 fighters in order to bring it into disrepute.
This attempt will fail.

debates specifically because our country is being used
by the belligerent, expansionist regime to violate the
airspace and territorial integrity of independent African
States.
208. The South West Africa People’s Organization
of Namibia is for the upholding of international
law;
it is for total respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United’Nations
and for human rights in general,
as formulated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is for respect for the sovereignty of countries and the inviolability of their territorial integrity.
209. It was indeed mostly unarmed Namibian compatriots who died in the racist raid on the village of
Sialola in Zambia. We believe that the aggression was
an act of international terrorism, in contravention
of
international law, and it must be condemned.

214. SWAP0 of Namibia has a responsibility to the
Namibian people, and’ Namibia
must and will be
liberated. The SWAP0 Congress at Walvis Ba:y, in
Namibia, has reiterated its confidence in the leadership of Comrade Sam Nujoma, in its recognition of the
fact that Namibia’s liberation can be brought about
only by the efforts made under his leadership. SWAP0
is not going to be cowed or intimidated
into submission. The racist acts of terror and intimidation will,
if anything, only strengthen our belief that the riacist
occupationist regime is not serious when it proclaims
that it has no claim on Namibia, and, therefore, the
war of liberation will continue and broaden to face
up to the challenges posed by this racist regime.

210. South Africa is our enemy because it occupies
our land. We are justified in regarding South Africa as
our enemy. And South Africa regards us as its enemy
because we make it difficult for South Africa to carry
out its evil plans. If this wanton act by South Africa
is not to be condemned, must we, as enemies, take
each other on wherever we meet? Must I take on
this enemy whom I find in New York?
211. South Africa, by its actions and practices, is
not for the principle which we and the Security
Council stand for. It has repeatedly violated the
territories of Angola and Zambia. The racist representative argued here yesterday that his regime did not
have knowledge of the actions of its aggressive forces
towards Zambia. That is right, I guess. For he and his
regime did not need to know, because his regime
enacted a law this year giving its racist generals a
green light to roam and sow death and destruction
anywhere in Africa south of the Sahara, without
recourse to their parliament at Cape Town.

215. The representative of the terror regime amused
us yesterday here when he said that recrimination
will only be counter-productive.
What, to him, is not
counter-productive?
He says that the devastatiorn of
war must be avoided and that no one should accept
it. I would remind him that it is his regime that
threw into the dustbin resolution 385 (1976), in which
the Council sought to remove the cause of war, namely,
by demanding the withdrawal of the occupationist
forces from Namibia and the holding of free elections
under United Nations supervision and control.

212. He argued also that Zambian citizens have
violated South African territory. But South Africa has
no common border with Zambia. If the racists mean
that Namibia is South Africa, then that, together with
other facts, only confirms that South Africa does not
want an inch of Namibia but wants and has annexed
the whole of it. That is why SWAP0 continues to
fight. We are Namibians, not South Africans. It is the
South African racist regime which we are fighting in
Namibia, not in South Africa. Once they are out of
Namibia, the war will stop. So if they are as peaceful
as their representative claimed yesterday that they
were, if they want understanding and conciliation and
not recrimination, why do they not quit our country?
Why do they militarize Namibia with impunity? Why
do they kill Namibians? Why do they misuse our
country?

216. At this juncture, I want to thank those countries
that have helped us and appeal to these friendly countries to react favourably and assist us in defending the
rights of our people. in Namibia, Zimbabwe and South
Africa.
217. I find it unnecessary to list the contradictilons
of the most provocative regime the world has ever
known. Rather, I wish to say a word to those who form
alliances with this regime.
218. I want to refer to the picture of Israel which is
now emerging in the context of southern Africa. The
clearing in the area along the northern Namibian
border and the intricate defence mechanism there are
laid out in the style of the Bar-Lev line along the
Suez Canal prior to the war of October 1973. In this
respect, it is worth noting that, according to our
reliable information,
this is being done through he
generous assistance of Zionist Israel to the ctpwlheid
regime, in their concerted efforts to enhance, promote

213. The representative of aggression disclosed here
yesterday that they are in contact with 11 dissident
groups from ‘11 African States, and that the aim of
20

L

and consolidate
the so-called medium-power
State
theory pIanned during Vorster’s visit to Tel Aviv.

wanton killing of Namibians
at home and abroad.
Finally, the Council must decide to remove the cancer
by the application of relevant provisions under Chapter VII of the Charter.

219. The recent military incursions into the African
independent
States of Zambia and Angola that took
place just a few days after the Israeli raid on Entebbe
airport should be seen in this light. It is unfortunate
that just today I saw this newspaper-The
Star
of Johannesburg of 24 July 1976-which also alludes
to the co-operation between South Africa and Israel
and mentions that Israel is helping to train South
Africans in guerrilla warfare. That is in order to
frustrate the activities of those who are justified in
fighting for their rights.

224. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has taken note
of the statement made by Mr. Emvula and the
personal contribution
he wished to make to our
deliberations.
225. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (irlterpr’ctatiorl
fiou~
Chinese): First of all, allow me to express our warm
welcome to Mr. S. G. Mwale, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Zambia, and Mr. Ibrahim
Kaduma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Republic of Tanzania, who are participating
in the
Security Council meeting personally. In his statement
yesterday Mr. Mwale produced an abundance of
irrefutable facts to expose and condemn the South
African authorities’
aggression against Zambia. The
Security Council should give serious consideration to
his statement.

220. It is also of great significance to note that the
war machinery employed to commit all the aforementioned
acts of terrorism, aggression and internationa1 gangsterism has been supplied to South Africa
by some members of the Council. The Alouette and
Puma helicopters used in the blitzkrieg attacks on
Zambian and Angolan villages are supplied by France
and the United Kingdom respectively. The Buccaneer
bombers, the Mirage jet-fighters and the Impalas that
daily sow death and destruction among the African
people of Zambia, Angola and Namibia have been
procured directly, or through licences to build, from
the United Kingdom, France and Italy respectively.

226. On 11 July, the South African troops, supported
by its air force, flagrantly raided and bombed Sialola
village in the border area of Zambia, causing heavy
losses of lives and property to the Zambian people.
Prior to this, the South African authorities had carried
out unprovoked attacks on Zambian border areas on
more than a dozen occasions in succession. This series
of aggressive acts are grave new crimes committed by
the Vorster racist regime against the Zambian people
and constitute a gross violation
of Zambia’s State
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity and aggression
against Zambia. They are a breach of international
peace and security and wanton provocations against
the entire African people. The Chinese Government
and people express indignation at these acts of aggression committed by the ‘South African racist regime and
strongly condemn them.

221. The regime of South Africa is even now
dripping with the innocent blood of Soweto, of Angola
and of Namibia and it has degenerated into a psychopathic merchant of death and destruction that will
not rest in peace unless it has spilled the blood of the
African people. It has become a murder maniac. That
is why the regime has enacted that most aggressive
legal instrument defining South Africa as the whole of
Africa south of the Sahara, Of course, Mr. Vorster
himself is a Nazi; he was gaoled for that reason during
the Second World War.
222.

227. The current aggression committed by the South
African racist authorities against Zambia is another
revelation of their reactionary nature and a manifestation of their last-ditch struggle. In recent years the
national liberation struggle of the people of southern
Africa against imperialism,
colonialism,
racism and
hegemonism
has been steadily developing in depth,
landing the South African Vorster racist regime and
its like in unprecedented isolation.

It

is therefore inconceivable
and disturbing
all reason that the United Kingdom, France,
the Federal Republic of Germany and other Western
countries
should continue to arm South Africa and,
worse still, to promote its nuclear technology. One
has no alternative but to conclude that any country
which flirts with the racist regime of South Africa is
an accomplice
to all its dastardly acts of terror,
murder
and aggression. Our humble
submission
here to them is that they should stop this dangerous
ilttitude towards South Africa.
beyond

228. To maintain its tottering rule, the South African
racist regime is actively employing
the counterrevolutionary
dual tactics with the abetment and
support of the super-Powers. While advertising “racial
reconciliation”
at home and talking profusely about
“dialogue and talks” abroad, it has greatly intensified
its barbarous suppression of the South African people
and its collusion with the Southern Rhodesian racist
regime and kept making military provocations against
its neighbouring
independent African countries in an
attempt to put out the revolutionary
flames of the

223. In conclusion, my delegation strongly urges the
Council to condemn in the strongest possible terms
the wanton
acts of aggression against Zambia and
other
neighbouring
countries by the racist South
African regime. The Council must condemn again the
use of Namibia as a springboard for attacks on independent African States and demand that the Fascist
forces immediately
leave the Territory of Namibia.
Racist South Africa must also be condemned for the
21

South African racist rCgime and the pressure Iby
hegemonism. We express our admiration for all this.
The Chinese delegation firmly supports the just
demand put forward by the Foreign Minister of
Zambia for a strong condemnation of the aggression
by South Africa, and we hold that accordingly the
Security Council should adopt a resolution strongly
condemning the South African racist rkgime for its
atrocities of aggression against Zambia and demanding
the non-recurrence of such gangsterism, and should
adopt other necessary corresponding
measures in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Azanian people and obstruct the African States from
support
to the just struggle of the Azanian
people. On 16 June, the South African authorities
created single-handedly the shocking tragic incident of
Soweto. Subsequently, they made unprovoked armed
attacks on Zambia’s border area; a few days ago
they again murdered in cold blood unarmed black
students in Witbank, in South Africa. TO date, it is still
forcibly occupying Namibia and even using it as a base
for military
aggression against neighbouring
independent African countries. These heinous crimes and
perverse acts of the South African racist rCgime have
totally
shown up its counter-revolutionary
dual
tactics and its hostility towards the broad masses of
the African people. This can only arouse the Azanian
people to even more tenacious struggles. As pointed
out in resolution CM/Res.476 (XXVII)
adopted at the
twenty-seventh session of the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity held recently in
“the only effective guarantee for the
Mauritius,
African people of South Africa against the repetition
of massacres is the launching of armed struggle for the
seizure of power by the people”.
With the wide
support of the entire African people who are fighting
in unity, the development of the armed struggle of the
people of southern Africa will certainly hasten the
doom of the South African racist rigime.

giving

23 1. According to a report from the Hsinhua News
agency, a strong earthquake occurred in the TangshalnFengnan area in eastern Hopei province, Chiria, #on
28 July. Comparatively
strong shocks were felt in
Tientsin and Peking. At present, the Chinese Government has taken emergency measures to lead the
masses in speedily fighting against the effects of the
quake and taking precautions against possible future
shocks. The broad masses of the people in the stricken
area have been organized in a united fight to overcome the effects of the earthquake with confidence.
In their speeches at today’s meeting, the President of
the Security Council and many representatives have /
extended sympathy to us. In the name of the Chinese
delegation, I wish to express sincere thanks for thei!
cordial sentiments, and I will convey their sentiments
to the Chinese Government and people.

229. Under the leadership of President Kaunda, the
Zambian Government and people firmly support the
just struggle of the people of southern Africa for
national liberation, firmly support the just struggle of
the third-world countries and people against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and have made
important contributions in this respect.

Nofcs

230. To defend their State sovereignty and territorial
integrity and render support and assistance to the
people of southern Africa in their liberation cause,
the Zambian Government and people have carried out
unremitting
struggles against the provocations by the

Sa.s.siou. Arwses,
agenda
.1 Ihitl. I TII,c~/lf\,-fbr/~rh~
document
A/7754.
.1

i’iem 3, document
&‘.S.ShJ.

AJrJ7c~.w.s.

A/977$..
agenda

item

22

Litho

in

United

Nations,

New

York

00400

83-60801-April

1985-2,21$0

106.
