Resolutions adopted on the reportll of the Sixth Conunittee

S. Decides to place an item entitled "Consideration
of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations" on the provisional agenda of its· nineteenth session in order to
consider the report of the Special Committee and
to study, in accordance with operative paragraphs 2
and 3 (d) of resolution 1815 (XVII), the following
principles :
(a) The duty of States to co-operate with one another
in accordance with the Charter;
( b) The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples ;
( c) The principle that States shall fulfil in good faith
the obligations assumed by them in accordance with
the Charter ;
6. Invites Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before 1 July 1964, any views
or suggestions they may have regarding the principles
enumerated in paragraph 5 above, and further urges
those Member States which have not already done so
to submit by that date their views in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 1815 (XVII);
7. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to Member States, before the beginning of the nineteenth
session, the comments requested in paragraph 6 above.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

•

• •

Thi President of the General Assembly, 111 pursuance of
,O,-agraph 1 of the above resol1dio11, appoi11ted the members
of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law

crmctn&ing Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States.6
The Special Committee will be composed of the following
Member States: AFGHANISTAN, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA,
UME100N,

CANADA,

CZECHOSLOVAKIA,

DAHOMEY,

Believing that an important contribution to the peace·
ful settlement of disputes and to the prevention of
such disputes could be made by providing for impartial
fact-finding within the framework of international
organizations and in bilateral and multilateral conventions,
Taking into account that, with regard to methods
of fact-finding in international relations, a considerable
practice is available to be studied for the purpose of
the progressive development of such methods,
Believing that such a study might include the feasibility and desirability of establishing a special international body for fact-finding or of entrusting to an
existing organization fact-finding responsibilities complementary to existing arrangements and without prejudice to the right of parties to any dispute to seek
other peaceful means of settlement of their own choice,
1. Invites Member States to submit in writing to the
Secretary-General, before 1 June 1964, any views
they may have on this subject and requests the
Secretary-General to communicate these comments to
Member States before the beginning of the nineteenth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study the relevant aspects of the problem under consideration and
to report on the results of such study to the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session and to the Special
Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States established under Assembly resolution 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963;
3. Requests the Special Committee to include in it,;
deliberations the subject-matter mentioned in the las!
preambular paragraph of the present resolution.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963

FRANCE,

GHANA, GUATEMALA, INDIA, ITALY, JAPAN, LEBANON, MADAGASCAR, MEXICO,

NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, POLAND, ROMANIA,
SWEDEN, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED ARAB
REPUBLIC, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
luLAND, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, VENEZUELA and
YUGOSLAVIA.

1967 (XVIII). Question of methods of fact-finding
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 1815 (XVII) of
18 December 1962 the principle that States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in such
a manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered is mentioned as one ·of the
principles to be studied at the eighteenth session of the
General Assembly,
Recognising the need to promote further development
and strengthening of various means of settling disputes,
as described in Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Considering that, in Article 33 of the Charter, inquiry is mentioned as one of the peaceful means by
which the parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall seek a solution,
Considering further that inquiry, investigation and
other methods of fact-finding are also referred to in
other instruments of a general or regional nature,
e See A/5689.

7l

1968 (XVIII). Technical assistance to promote
the teaching, study, diHemination and wider
appreciation of international law

A
The General Assembly,
Reca/,ling its resolution 1816 (XVII) of 18 Decem•
ber 1962 on technical assistance to promote the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
Recalling that the General Assembly, as early as 194;.
by its resolution 176 (II) of 21 November 1947, rt:
quested the Governments of Member States to take
appropriate measures to extend the teaching of international !aw i? all its phases, including its development
and cod1ficat10n, in universities and institutions of
higher education,
Having co_nsidered . the re~rt of the SecretaryGen~ral,7 which contam~ certam p~actical suggestions
relating to the proclamation of a Umted Nations decade
of _international law and to an initial programme of
assistance and exchange in the field of international
law,
T'!'king int? accou1,1t the v~luable proposals, sug.
gesttons and mformat1011 submitted by Member States
and international organizations and institutions,
Believing that the promotion, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law and its teaching in
1 qfficial Recm·ds of the Gmt'ral Au,.mbly, Eighlrrnth
Sessio11, Annexes, agenda item 72, docllment A/5585.
