132

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

the environment, 112 and requested the Governing Council to ensure its completion,
Taking note of resolution 32 of 19 August 1976 of the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, regarding compensation for the
material remnants of war, 113
Recalling also decisions 80 (IV) of9 April 1976 1 '~ and
I 01 (V) of 25 May 1977 11 ' of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme,
Taking note also of resolution 26 / 11-P, concerning the
right to compensation for the effects of wars and mines,
adopted by the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17 to 22 May 1980,' 1"
Recognizing that most developing countries have been
subjected to foreign occupation and exposed to wars
waged by certain colonial Powers, thus incurring tremendous loss of life and property,
Recognizing also that the presence of material remnants of war, particularly mines, on the territories of
certain developing countries seriously impedes their development efforts and entails loss of life and property,
Convinced that the removal of those remnants of war
should be the responsibility of the countries that implanted them and should be carried out at their expense,
I. Regrets that no real action has been taken to solve
the problem despite the various resolutions and decisions adopted by both the General Assembly and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
2. Calls upon those States which took part in those
wars to make available forthwith to the affected States
all information on the areas in which such mines were
placed, including maps indicating the position of those
areas, and information concerning the types of mines:
3. Supports the demand of the States affected by the
implantation of mines on their lands for compensation
for the losses incurred from the States which planted the
mines;
·4_ Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the States concerned to find ways and means, including
the possibility of convening a conference under the
auspices of the United Nations, for solving the problem
of material remnants of war, particularly mines, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
steps taken towards the implementation of the abovementioned resolutions and decisions and on the obstacles he has faced in that regard.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/72.

Implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of
the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/170 of 10 December 1977,
32/172 of 19 December 1977, 33/88 and 33/89 of
112
A/31/210.
"' See A/31/197.
114
See Official Records of the General Assemhlr. Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/31 /25), annex I.
·
"' Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/32/25). annex I.
'" See A/35/4 I9-S/ 14 I 29, annex I.

15 December 1978 and 34/184, 34/185 and 34/187 of
18 December 1979,
Recalling also section I I of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978 and Council
resolutions 1979/51 of 2 August 1979 and 1980/52 of
23 July 1980,
Noting decision 8 / 17 of 29 April 1980 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme' 17 and decision 80/45 of 30 June I 980 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme,'"

Having considered:
(a) The report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification,'' 0
(h) The report of the Secretary-General on the
restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon
massif, 12 "
Reiterating its concern over the particular seriousness
of desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region and the
severe effects on the region's economic and social development and on the way of life of its population, as well
as the need for the implementation in the region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification on an intensified and sustained basis,
1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and the report
of the Secretary-General on the restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif:
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the progress made
by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the Governments of the region, under a joint venture of the United Nations Environment Programme
and the United Nations Development Programme, in
implementing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification:
3. Commends the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme for
the effective and co-ordinated manner in which they
have continued to support the joint venture:
4. Notes with satisfaction the addition of Djibouti,
Guinea and Guinea-Bissau to the list of countries to be
assisted by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
in their efforts to implement the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, and the inclusion of the pilot project
for the improvement and restoration of the FoutaDjallon massif within the programme of action of the
United Nations Environment Programme against desertification:
5. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to examine at its next
session the possibility of including Benin in the list of
countries which receive assistance, through the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, in implementing in the
Sudano-Sahelian region the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification and to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
'' See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-_fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/35 '25). annex I.
"' See Of]icial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980.
Supplement No. 12 (hl980/421Rev.1). chap. XI.
''" A/35;41 I. annex, sect. Ill.
'·"' A 1 J'i/J68.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Also notes with satisfaction the decisions of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to expand and
strengthen their support to the joint venture and invites
them to continue their support so that the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office may carry out its expanded responsibilities at a level commensurate with the
pressing needs of the region;
7. Urges all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental
bodies, private organizations and individuals to respond
favourably, bilaterally or through the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to
requests from the Governments concerned of the region
for assistance in combating desertification;
8. Welcomes, in this regard. the inclusion of the
programmes of the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office among those considered at the United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities and
urges all Governments and donor organizations to consider contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Sudano-Sahelian Activities;
9. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to report
annually to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation in
the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/73.

Implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 172 of I 9 December 1977,
in which it approved the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, 121 and its resolutions 33 /88 and 33 /89 of
15 December 1978 and 34/184, 34/185 and 34/187 of
18 December 1979, dealing with various aspects of the
implementation of the Plan of Action,
Taking note of the relevant sections of the report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its eighth session m and Governing Council decision 8 / 17 of 29 April I 980 121 on the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, rn the report on financing the Plan of
Action, prepared by the Secretary-General in consultation with the Governing Council, 125 the study on
the same subject prepared by a group of high-level
specialists· in international financing convened by the
Executive Director of the Programme, as called for in
General Assembly resolution 34/184, 12 " and the report
of the Secretary-General on the restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif, 12 '
121

A/CONF.74/36, chap. I.
122
See Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty~fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/35/25).
"' Ibid annex I
124
A/35/411, an~ex.
12
' A/35/396.
126
Ibid., annex.
12
' A/35/368.

133

I. Notes with concern the findings of the analysis made by the Administrative Committee on Coordination and the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme 128 of the constraints
on the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, particularly the problem of insufficient
financing and the increasing demands on the scarce
resources of countries suffering from desertification;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision by the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme to include pilot projects for the development and restoration of the Fouta-Djallon massif in the
programme to combat desertification. in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 34 / I 85, and of the
initiatives taken by the Executive Director of the
Programme for the implementation of those projects;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the initiatives taken
by the United Nations Environment Programme in
seeking to overcome those constraints through its coordinating and catalytic role in the United Nations system,
its role in seeking additional means and measures for
financing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, the convening by its Executive Director of the Consultative Group for Desertification Control, and efforts
by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, on its
own behalf and as a joint venture with the Programme,
in combating desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian
region, and invites the organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to extend their full cooperation to the Programme in its task of ensuring the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification:
4. Invites the Governments of countries affected by
desertification to continue to give priority, as. far as
possible, to desertification-control projects in their development plans and in their requests for multilateral
and bilateral financial support:
5. Strongly· appeals to international financial institutions, multilateral financial institutions and Governments of industrialized countries, and of those developing countries in a position to do so, to give their financial support and contribute generously to the Special
Account, with a view to enhancing the implementation
of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
6. Urges -the Consultative Group for Desertification
Control to develop its work further, in order to ensure
the availability of the financial resources required for
the implementation of the projects supported by it:
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
and the study annexed thereto of the group of high-level
specialists on additional measures for financing the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the attention of donor Governments and international organizations concerned to the continuous threat of desert encroachment and to the meagre resources available for
combating desertification and further requests him to
mobilize the international community with a view to implementing speedily the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare, in consultation with the United
Nations Environment Programme and with the assistance
of similar groups of experts on the subjects concerned
to be convened by the Executive Director of the
Programme:
·
'·'• See .\;3'i/41 I, annex. ,eel. IV
