S/2021/498

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 25 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti,
Permanent Representative of India, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, as well
as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the videoteleconference on “The situation in Libya” convened on Friday, 21 May 2021. A
statement was also delivered by the representative of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06873 (E) 260521 070721

*2106873*

S/2021/498

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Ján Kubiš
Over the course of the last several months, positive developments have
renewed hope for the reunification of Libya and its institutions, for the restoration of
its sovereignty, and for sustainable peace, development, security and stability in the
country and the region.
A critical task of Libyan authorities and institutions remains to ensure the
holding of parliamentary and presidential elections on 24 December as set out in the
road map of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF) and called for by resolution
2570 (2021). This priority lies at the core of the mandate of the Government of
National Unity. The House of Representatives has the responsibility of clarifying
the constitutional basis for elections and adopting the necessary electoral legislation.
This must be done by 1 July at the latest, to give Libya’s High National Elections
Commission (HNEC) adequate time to prepare for the elections.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) facilitated the work
of the LPDF’s legal committee, which developed a proposal for the constitutional
basis of the elections. The LPDF will discuss the proposal at its plenary meeting,
which is scheduled for 26 and 27 May, with a focus on resolving the remaining
open issues and forwarding the proposed constitutional basis to the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State.
Following our meeting, the Speaker of the House, in his statement of 4 May,
confirmed the importance of holding the presidential and parliamentary elections on
time. He noted that if the LPDF agrees, the agreement should be referred to the House
of Representatives to be adopted and added to the constitutional declaration, and if
there is no agreement, then we, said the Speaker, will implement House Resolution
No. 5 of 2014, to conduct direct presidential elections. Draft legislation on direct
presidential elections is ready to be presented to the House of Representatives, said
the Speaker.
The HNEC has been working consistently for the elections to be held on
24 December 2021. The voters list has been revised to be ready for an upcoming
voter registration update, and the production of 2.3 million voter cards for those
voters who registered in previous electoral processes has already started. At the
local level, the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections aims to conclude
70 outstanding council elections this year, including in the eastern region. But
HNEC efforts will be futile if the electoral legislation is not adopted by the House
of Representatives by the end of June at the latest, in order to implement credible
national elections.
The ceasefire continues to hold. Notwithstanding occasional clashes between
diverse armed groups, confidence-building between the two sides continues. In the
past period, hundreds of prisoners and detainees were released by both sides, with
releases taking place almost weekly in different parts of the country, particularly
during the month of Ramadan.
Yet, progress on such key issues as the reopening of the coastal road between
Sirte and Misrata and the start of the withdrawal of foreign mercenaries, fighters and
foreign forces has stalled, thus entrenching the division of Libya.
The recent report of the United Nations Panel of Experts (see S/2021/229)
painted a bleak picture of non-compliance with the arms embargo. Resolutions
2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021) found it necessary to again urge Libyan parties and all
Member States to respect and support the full implementation of the arms embargo
2/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

and ceasefire agreement, including through the withdrawal of all foreign forces
and mercenaries from Libya without delay. I would like to acknowledge in this
regard the important role played by the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI.
Article 2 of the ceasefire agreement stipulates that:
“... all military units and armed groups shall clear all confrontation lines and
return to their camps; in parallel, all mercenaries and foreign fighters shall
depart from the Libyan territories — land, air and sea”.
Accordingly, having a limited number of mercenaries withdraw and then flying
them out of Libya can commence a reciprocal, balanced and sequenced withdrawal
of foreign mercenaries, fighters and foreign forces from the country. This approach,
already adopted by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC), needs to be
complemented by a plan and timeline agreed with those external forces that are
associated with mercenaries and foreign forces in Libya.
Resolution 2570 (2021) authorizes UNSMIL to deploy monitors in support
of the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism. For the
first phase, the Secretariat plans to deploy a forward presence to Tripoli of a total
10 monitors from existing United Nations capacities of United Nations observers.
The continued use, presence and activities of thousands of mercenaries,
foreign fighters and armed groups is a significant threat not just to Libya’s security
but to the region as a whole. The recent disturbing events in Chad remind us again
of the interrelated nature and links between the security situation in Libya and the
security and stability of the region.
The high mobility of armed groups and terrorists as well as economic migrants
and refugees, often through channels operated by organized criminal networks and
other local players across uncontrolled borders, only enhances risks of furthering
instability and insecurity in Libya and the region. It is therefore critical to ensure an
orderly departure of foreign fighters, mercenaries and armed groups, together with
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating them in their countries of origin.
Withdrawal of foreign fighters and armed groups with origins in the region
must be accompanied by scaled-up efforts across Libya and the wider region to address
root causes of instability, notably through inclusive reconciliation, peacebuilding
and development programmes, with a focus on youth and women’s empowerment.
Coordinated, complementary measures and programmes supported and co-financed
by the international community, coupled with resolute domestic and international
action against criminal gangs of traffickers of persons, drugs and weapons, must
be a part of the solution, if it is to be durable and sustainable, as should cooperative
measures to enhance control in the border areas, including integrated border control
and management. It is equally critical to revisit the approach undertaken by the
European Union (EU) in addressing the issue of refugees and migrants, working in
partnership with Libya, the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
The ceasefire agreement establishes the Libyan-owned framework for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The JMC has been given the
task of establishing a DDR subcommittee to start identifying and categorizing armed
groups and armed entities on Libyan territory, with a view to dismantling them
and reintegrating their personnel into society or State service. The United Nations
is committed to supporting the commencement of planning for DDR and security
sector reform (SSR) pursuant to a nationally-owned and nationally-led strategy for
DDR and SSR.

21-068733/38

S/2021/498

On 5 April, the Libyan Presidency Council announced the establishment of
a high national reconciliation commission. Joint United Nations-AU work is under
way to support Libyan authorities on promoting rights-based reconciliation and
transitional justice, with a focus on community and local-level reconciliation and the
meaningful participation of women, youth and all of Libya’s cultural components.
The common thread running through all the human rights challenges in Libya
is impunity, including for the most serious violations of international law. One of
the starkest reminders of the horrors of the Libyan conflict is the discovery of over
a hundred mass graves, following the Government of National Accord’s recapture of
Tarhouna. The rights of victims to truth, justice and reparation — and the return to
full accountability for crimes — is the only way to ensure justice and rights-based
reconciliation in the country. Unless Libya addresses violations perpetrated by all
sides in the cycles of conflict, then any efforts towards sustainable peace will fail.
The situation of migrants and refugees in Libya remains of grave concern.
There are approximately 575,000 migrants from over 41 countries in Libya, with
more than two thirds coming from neighbouring countries. More than 500 have died,
and, so far in 2021, some 9,135 migrants and refugees have been returned to Libya by
the Libyan Coast Guard, compared to 12,000 returned for all of 2020. Most of those
returned are arbitrarily detained by the Department for Combating Illegal Migration
in extremely poor conditions with restricted or no access for humanitarian agencies,
or they are transferred to non-State actors, with the result that thousands of people
are missing and unaccounted for in the official detention system. The Government of
National Unity should swiftly put in place due process guarantees to end and prevent
arbitrary detention by establishing a judicial review system led by the Ministry of
Justice in line with its recent commitments to addressing arbitrary detention. In this
regard, we welcome a very positive response from the Libyan Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Justice, both of whom are women.
The Government’s active support in facilitating the Organization for
Migration and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in humanitarian evacuation and voluntary return and resettlement of migrants
and refugees from Libya is urgently needed in view of Libyan authorities’ recent
cancellations and postponements of such departures. I welcome renewed efforts
aimed at addressing the multifaceted migration and refugee issues in Libya through
the revitalized AU-EU-United Nations tripartite task force.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), as of early May, the
total number of reported cases of the coronavirus disease in Libya was 181,174. The
Government of National Unity’s national vaccination programme is under way in
municipalities across the country. As of mid-May, with 731,000 people registered
in the programme, about 100,000 people have received their first vaccine dose.
The WHO and UNICEF continue to support national efforts aimed at fighting the
pandemic, including with the arrival in Libya on 19 May of the second batch of
117,600 vaccine doses through the COVAX facility.
It is up to the Libyan authorities and the national institutions to use the
opportunities of the newly regained nascent unity and sovereignty to continue the
political transition towards a unified, fully sovereign, peaceful and stable country,
with the full, effective and meaningful participation of women and youth. The
significant progress and achievements witnessed in the past many months must
be consolidated. The processes must regain momentum, and the authorities and
institutions of Libya must live up to their responsibilities. All Libyan parties need to
cooperate and support the Presidency Council and Government of National Unity in
their efforts to fully extend and effectively assert their authority as they fulfil their
responsibilities throughout the whole of Libya.
4/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Concerted and aligned efforts of the international community in support
of Libyan-led and Libyan-owned processes remain critical. We need to continue
working together with and providing meaningful support to Libyan authorities and
institutions in their efforts to achieve national reconciliation and transitional justice,
unification of State institutions, full implementation of the ceasefire agreement —
all with a view to setting the stage for the elections to be held on 24 December. The
elections must be conducted in a free, fair and secure manner in order to ensure that
the results are accepted. This is important for the Libyan people and for the region
as a whole.

21-068735/38

S/2021/498

Annex II
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), T.S. Tirumurti
In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. I will report on developments since
the beginning of my term as Chair, 1 January 2021, to the present date, given that
the Committee’s annual report for 2020 (S/2020/1256), covered the period from my
predecessor’s last briefing (S/2020/879, annex II) on 2 September 2020, to the end of
2020. During this period, the members of the Committee met twice in the “informal
informals” format via closed video-teleconference and conducted additional work
using the silence procedure.
Allow me to begin by recalling resolution 2571 (2021), adopted by the Security
Council on 16 April 2021 (see S/2021/382), in which it extended the timebound
authorizations and measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of petroleum from
Libya, including crude oil and refined petroleum products, to 30 July 2022. The
arms embargo, the travel ban and the assets freeze were not timebound and continue
to apply. The Council also extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Libya
to 15 August 2022. On 14 May, the Secretary-General appointed six individuals to
serve on the Panel.
On 5 March, the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts on its
final report (see S/2021/229) submitted in accordance with resolution 2509 (2020).
Since the report is publicly available, I will not summarize its findings. During
the closed video-teleconference, Committee members commended the work of the
Panel. They expressed concern over the reported violations of the arms embargo,
urging all States Members of the United Nations to respect the embargo. They also
expressed concern over the continued presence of foreign forces and mercenaries in
Libya, despite the signing of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October 2020, and called
for those forces’ and mercenaries’ immediate withdrawal. They further underlined
the Panel’s reporting on violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights abuses in Libya, including the events in Tarhouna and Mizdah, and the plight
of migrants in general. Committee members agreed on follow-up action in relation
to the nine recommendations addressed to the Committee.
The publication of the Panel’s final report was preceded by leaks to the media
of some of its contents, as well as the spread of misinformation. Committee members
expressed their concern and dismay in that regard.
In terms of agreed follow-up action, the Committee dispatched letters to
Libya on matters pertaining to migrants, asylum seekers and detainees, including
the killings at Mizdah, and aspects of the assets freeze in relation to the Libyan
Investment Authority. At a technical working level, members of the Committee
discussed, but agreed to take no further action on, two further aspects of the assets
freeze highlighted by the Panel. The Committee also updated some identifying
information on its sanctions list.
On 10 May, the Committee and invited participants heard a briefing by the
Panel of Experts. Eighteen Member States, including Libya, and three regional
organizations participated in the closed video-teleconference. The purpose of this
event was to continue to strengthen the dialogue on the effective implementation
of the sanctions measures imposed by the Security Council in relation to Libya. In
addition to participating in the meeting, the Syrian Arab Republic also conveyed a
note verbale to the Committee dated 9 May 2021.
6/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee received letters from Egypt
and Greece, respectively, on different aspects of that measure. The Committee
approved a request for exemption, under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011),
submitted by Malta. The Committee received five inspection reports on five vessels
and three reports on the attempted inspections of three vessels from the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
With regard to the assets freeze, no negative decision was taken by the
Committee in relation to two exemption notifications, invoking paragraph 19 (a)
of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Switzerland and the United Kingdom. In
connection with three additional notifications, invoking paragraphs 19 (a) or 21 of
resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Belgium, Bahrain and Canada, the Committee
determined that none met the scope of the provisions stipulated in the paragraph
invoked. The Committee also received a letter from Liechtenstein in follow-up to a
notification previously submitted under paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee received two letters from the Libyan Investment Authority on various
aspects of the assets freeze. Lastly, during the reporting period, the Committee
received two implementation reports from India and Mexico.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Committee’s commitment to
contributing to the promotion of peace and stability in Libya.

21-068737/38

S/2021/498

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Special Representative Kubiš and the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
Ambassador Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India, for their briefings.
Since the beginning of this year, the ceasefire in Libya has generally been
maintained and the political process has continued to move forward. All parties in
Libya and the international community must cherish the fruits of peace, seize the
window of opportunity and continue to strengthen their efforts to achieve long-term
stability in Libya. I would like to make the following points.
First, the ceasefire should be maintained, and peace and stability should be
preserved. Maintaining the ceasefire is the fundamental prerequisite for advancing
the political transition and unifying State institutions. Under the mechanism of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, all parties in Libya should continue to fully
implement the ceasefire agreement, actively promote security sector reform and
establish joint military and police forces. The international community must create
favourable conditions for that.
The United Nations must deploy the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) ceasefire monitoring mechanism as soon as possible, in accordance
with the requirements of resolution 2570 (2021) and on the basis of the principle of
ownership and leadership by the Libyans. The withdrawal of foreign combatants and
mercenaries from Libya should be carried out in an organized and orderly manner to
prevent further negative impacts on regional stability.
Secondly, we should maintain the positive momentum and advance the political
transition. Recently, the Libyan parties successfully formed the Government of
National Unity, completed the transfer of power, embarked on a national reconciliation
process and held municipal elections, achieving positive results.
The next step is to ensure that the general election at the end of the year is
held on schedule and smoothly. We encourage all parties to put the interests of the
country and its people first, strengthen unity and cooperation and resolve disputes
that may arise in the course of the election preparations through dialogue and
consultation. In accordance with its Security Council mandate, UNSMIL should
strengthen its communication and coordination with the Libyan Government and
provide constructive assistance.
Thirdly, we should expedite post-war reconstruction and consolidate the
gains of peace. China appreciates the efforts made by the Libyan Government to
draw up a Government budget, unify the Central Bank institutions and improve
economic management. It encourages the Libyan Government to continue to
stabilize oil production, promote economic reforms, improve public services and
resume economic development as soon as possible. The international community
should increase assistance to benefit and deepen investment cooperation in trade,
investment, infrastructure construction and other fields.
Fourthly, we should take the current situation into account and serve the
overall goal. China has always believed that sanctions are only a means, not an
end in themselves. Under the current circumstances, the arms embargo imposed
on Libya should be effectively implemented. Libya is concerned about the loss of
frozen assets, and the Sanctions Committee should expedite its consideration of
8/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

appropriate ways to respond to its legitimate concerns. The annual report of the
Sanctions Committee’s Panel of Experts on Libya (see S/2021/1256) was leaked
before its official release, causing speculation. It is hoped that further measures will
be taken to prevent the recurrence of such incidents.
China is ready to work with the international community to further contribute
to achieving lasting peace, prosperity and development in Libya.

21-068739/38

S/2021/498

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank the Special Envoy, Ján Kubiš, for his briefing. I would like to
express Estonia’s full support for his work and for the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
The continuation of Libya’s political process is encouraging and gives hope
that a lasting peace in a unified Libya can be achieved. It is now crucial to keep
up this pace for the elections to take place on 24 December. The Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map and the Security Council’s recently adopted resolution
2570 (2021) provide the necessary framework for that.
The genuine and constructive engagement of all Libyan parties is of key
importance in ensuring that a credible and transparent election process takes place
in the planned time frame. It is extremely important to involve the voices of women
and young people at all stages and all levels of the process. Moreover, creating a
safe space for women and young people to express their views without the fear of
retaliation is the only viable way to a lasting peace.
Regarding the military track, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission’s commitment
to the 23 October ceasefire agreement is encouraging. It is of the utmost importance
to fully implement the ceasefire agreement. We commend the recent prisoner
exchanges, as they are important confidence-building measures. The opening of the
coastal road — a major element of the ceasefire agreement — would further build
trust between the parties and serve the purpose of unifying Libya.
Another essential element of the Libyan ceasefire agreement is the removal
of all foreign fighters and mercenaries. Libyans have expressed their wishes very
clearly, and it is the duty of the international community to show respect by ending all
foreign interference. We reiterate our call on all those involved to put an immediate
end to the blatant violations of the Libyan sanctions regime and to withdraw all
foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya. All actions that violate the Libyan
arms embargo must stop immediately.
Estonia welcomes the efforts of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI in supporting the implementation of the Security Council arms
embargo. Operation IRINI acts strictly under Security Council authorizations, is
impartial in its activities and offers an important contribution to the implementation
of the sanctions regime. It is therefore important to renew the Security Council
authorizations, as set out in resolution 2526 (2020).
In its resolution 2570 (2021) the Security Council gave a clear and flexible
mandate for the establishment of a credible, realistic and effective ceasefiremonitoring mechanism that acts under the auspices of the United Nations. We now
call for the implementation of all necessary measures to allow for the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned ceasefire-monitoring mechanism and its international support
component to be deployed as soon as possible.
Concrete steps need to be taken to further build trust between the Libyan parties
and in Libyan society. That includes thoroughly investigating all alleged human
rights violations, mass killings, torture and enforced disappearances and ensuring
justice for the victims. Taking concrete measures to fight against impunity, ensuring
accountability and focusing on reconciliation are essential in healing the society.
Estonia remains concerned about the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The extremely dire situation and the constant exposure to violence, including sexual
10/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

and gender-based violence, to which migrants and asylum seekers fall victim, are of
great concern. We call on the authorities to take clear steps to alleviate the suffering
of civilians.
Finally, I would like to stress that the political process under the auspices of
the United Nations and the Berlin process remains the only acceptable international
framework to support Libyans in their efforts to achieve a lasting peace.

21-0687311/38

S/2021/498

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I thank Special Envoy Ján Kubiš and the Indian Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for their
briefings. I would also like to welcome the presence among us of the Libyan
Permanent Representative.
Libya has seen encouraging progress on the political front in recent months,
but the situation remains fragile. It is imperative that every effort be made to ensure
that the political transition is successful.
In particular, all the conditions necessary for the successful holding of
elections on 24 December must be met. Those conditions were clearly established
by the Security Council in resolution 2570 (2021), which was unanimously adopted
and welcomed by the Libyan stakeholders. That resolution must now be fully
implemented. A legal framework for the elections must be developed. A unified
budget must be adopted. The meaningful participation of women and young people
in the electoral process must be ensured. The stability and sovereignty of the country
and the security of Libyans must be guaranteed. To that end, the ceasefire agreement
of 23 October must be fully implemented and the arms embargo should be respected.
As we know, foreign forces and mercenaries must withdraw from Libyan
territory, as provided for in the ceasefire agreement endorsed by the Libyans in
the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and in accordance with
resolution 2570 (2021). France is ready to work with the Libyans and with all the
relevant Member States to provide a diplomatic solution to enable that withdrawal
and its verification, while ensuring that it does not destabilize Libya’s neighbouring
countries, from which some of the mercenaries very often originate.
We call for the implementation of all the confidence-building measures
provided for in the ceasefire agreement, in particular the urgent reopening of the
coastal road between Sirte and Misrata.
We also call on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to make every effort without delay to facilitate the establishment of the Libyan
ceasefire-monitoring mechanism, in accordance with resolution 2570 (2021), with
a sufficient number of international observers. The European Union (EU) is fully
prepared to respond to requests from the Libyan parties and UNSMIL to contribute
to that mechanism.
We also recall the essential role played by the EU Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI in the implementation of the arms embargo decided by the Council.
Operation IRINI is the only mechanism dedicated to the implementation of the
embargo, the violations of which have been amply documented by the Panel of
Experts on Libya for the benefit of both parties. It is therefore indispensable. It
implements its mandate with neutrality and impartiality, and must continue to do so.
That is why France and Estonia will soon propose a draft resolution that will renew
the high-seas inspection mechanism established by resolution 2292 (2016). We are
counting on the unanimous support of the Council.
The crisis in Libya will be resolved in the long term if a number of key
structural issues are addressed.

12/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

The death of President Idriss Deby reminds us of the security risks posed
by foreign armed groups in Libya, especially for all neighbouring countries and
in particular the Sahel. With regard to Libyan armed groups and militias, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process in Libya must begin without
delay, in parallel with the reconstruction of unified security institutions. The
objective is clear: Libya cannot regain its sovereignty without dismantling the militia
groups as soon as possible.
The unification of Libya’s armed and security forces, as well as its economic
and financial institutions, is essential. That must also ensure a fair and equitable
distribution of Libya’s resources for the benefit of the entire Libyan population.
The serious human rights violations in Libya are unacceptable. We must
put an end to the trafficking of migrants, which has been highlighted by many
speakers today. We therefore call on our partners in the Security Council to remove
their reservations on the individuals proposed for sanctions by the Committee. It
is also important that UNSMIL particularly ensure the protection of children in
the Libyan conf lict. Finally, in order to fight against impunity for perpetrators of
international crimes, we recall the obligation imposed by resolution 1970 (2011) on
the Libyan authorities and the relevant parties to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court.
France will remain committed and engaged, together with its European
partners, in order to put an end to the Libyan crisis so as to build a peaceful future
in Libya. The Council meeting in July, under the French presidency of the Security
Council, will provide an opportunity to take stock of the situation exactly six months
before the elections.

21-0687313/38

S/2021/498

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I would like to thank Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for his briefing to the Security
Council. I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya, to this meeting.
We are happy to note that, more than a decade since the start of the conflict
in Libya, there is now reason for cautious optimism. The Government of National
Unity, charged with the conduct of elections on 24 December, is moving ahead
with purpose and the ceasefire agreement is largely holding. However, as we heard
from the Special Envoy, despite the progress, there are still causes for concern and
the possibility of spoilers hindering the political process. It is incumbent upon the
international community, and the Council in particular, to provide support to Libya
as it embarks on its journey towards peace and stability. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Libya
need to be safeguarded. The peace process must be fully Libyan-led and Libyanowned, with no imposition or external interference.
Secondly, it is imperative that elections be held smoothly on 24 December in
a free and fair manner. For that, the Government of National Unity needs to provide
the necessary administrative support, including the provision of an adequate budget,
and the House of Representatives needs to clarify the constitutional and legal basis
for the elections and then enact legislation, as necessary, by 1 July.
Thirdly, sustainable peace requires an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process. We hope that all the parties concerned will engage sincerely in
that endeavour. We also urge the international community to support such a process.
Fourthly, it is a matter of concern that provisions of the ceasefire agreement
continue to be violated, in particular those relating to the withdrawal of foreign
fighters and mercenaries. The continued presence of foreign fighters poses a serious
threat not only to Libya but also to its neighbours and the region as a whole. It
is imperative that the coastal road be opened at the earliest possible time as an
important element of the ceasefire agreement. Besides integrating Libya, this will
also be a visible symbol of the commitment of the global community to the ceasefire
agreement and the peace process. We look forward to an early deployment of the
ceasefire monitoring component of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), as approved by the Security Council through its resolution 2570 (2021).
Fifthly, it is important to plan for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of armed groups and non-State armed actors. We appreciate the fact
that UNSMIL is prepared to render assistance to Libya in that process.
Sixthly, we must ensure that terrorist forces and organizations not be allowed
to thrive in Libya, since that may lead to a cascading effect throughout the region.
The international community must speak with one voice against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually beneficial bilateral ties
with Libya, reinforced by close business and other links. India remains committed
to supporting Libya and the Libyan people in their endeavour to bring about lasting
peace in the country. To that end, we look forward to working with the Government
of National Unity in providing capacity-building and training assistance in mutually
identified areas.
14/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
My thanks to Ján Kubiš for his briefing and his assured stewardship of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) at such an important moment
for Libya. I want to thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing and to welcome
Ambassador Elsonni and thank him for his excellent briefing this morning.
We welcome the significant progress in Libya on the political front in recent
months. We see this as a testament to the work of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum and the political will and desire among the Libyan people themselves for a
better future. It is important to keep up the momentum on the political and security
tracks. We want also to commend Germany for its leadership of the Berlin process,
which plays a vital role in maximizing international support for Libya, and we look
forward to its meeting next month.
On the political track, obviously much remains to be delivered — we have
heard that this morning — to ensure that the Libyan people will have the unified and
peaceful future they deserve. The elections scheduled for 24 December mark a pivotal
moment for Libya and must proceed as planned. It is important therefore that the
House of Representatives clarify and enact, at the latest by 1 July, the constitutional
basis, as well as the legal and budgetary framework for the elections, as the Security
Council called for in resolution 2570 (2021), adopted last month. This will help ensure
that elections are peaceful, transparent and inclusive, so that the people of Libya can
determine their own future. It will be critical for the Government of National Unity
to ensure the safety of political figures, candidates and voters alike. The conduct of
municipal elections, despite the political, security and pandemic-related challenges,
is an important and encouraging achievement.
It is also of vital importance that women fully participate in the December
elections and in the political process more broadly. I would like to salute the key role
of the women’s caucus in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, and I also want to
welcome the pledge by the new interim executive authority to appoint women to at
least 30 per cent of senior executive positions. We are going to watch that and ensure
that it is fulfilled. Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s call on the Government of
National Unity to deliver on that important commitment.
On the security track, Ireland urges UNSMIL to play a more forward role
on the ceasefire monitoring mechanism in close coordination with the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission. While the process should of course be Libyan-owned and
Libyan-led, UNSMIL and the international community must support Libyans in the
implementation of the ceasefire. We look forward to the deployment of UNSMIL
monitors as swiftly as possible. We emphasize the need to ensure that gender
considerations are taken fully into account.
Ireland remains deeply concerned about the continued presence in Libya of
foreign fighters and mercenaries. We commend the African members of the Security
Council, namely, South Africa, Tunisia and the Niger, as well as Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, for highlighting the implications of this situation for neighbouring
countries. We reiterate our call that all provisions of the ceasefire be implemented.
Welcome progress has been made in clearing explosive remnants of war from
the coastal road. However, the road’s continuing closure is regrettable. Libya and
neighbouring countries will also need support on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and on security sector reform. Gender considerations will be important
there too.
21-0687315/38

S/2021/498

Ireland is very concerned by continuing reports of violations of the arms
embargo, despite numerous calls by the Security Council, most recently in resolution
2570 (2021). We commend the important role of the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which objectively enforces the embargo on the high
seas. We look forward to renewal of Operation IRINI’s mandate next month.
Ireland shares the Secretary-General’s concern about the continued arbitrary
detention of migrants and refugees, including women and children. This practice
should be ended. Measures are also needed to protect detainees from the horrors of
sexual violence, assist victims and survivors and ensure that all allegations of sexual
violence are effectively investigated and prosecuted.
Accountability must be an important step in Libya’s peace process and must
be ensured for human rights violations, including the Tarhouna massacres. It is
unacceptable that perpetrators of serious international crimes can act with impunity.
Yet the recently reported deaths of two International Criminal Court fugitives,
before they could be brought before the Court, highlights a lack of accountability.
Peace requires justice, and justice is served by cooperation with and assistance to
the Court.
In conclusion, I welcome the establishment of the High National Reconciliation
Commission to lay the groundwork for a national reconciliation process. Ireland is
pleased to share its own experience of reconciliation on our own small island, which
remains a work in progress. I echo the Secretary-General’s call for an inclusive
process based on justice and human rights, which is critical to support long-term
peace, stability and social cohesion in Libya.

16/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
My delegation is grateful for the briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of
the Secretary General on Libya, and Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning
Libya. We also welcome our colleague Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent
Representative of Libya, and thank him for his contribution.
Libya stands at the cusp of a major breakthrough in its long and painstaking
peace process. We recognize the commendable gains achieved through the sheer
resilience and determination of its people. We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the critical role of neighbouring
States, regional organizations and other partners.
The recent adoption of resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021) was the
required strong voice of the Council. We should now pursue their implementation as
we help the Libyan people press stronger towards the intended mark — a peaceful,
secure and stable Libya devoid of unnecessary foreign interference.
Kenya takes note of the Secretary-General’s report on UNSMIL (S/2021/451)
and agrees on the need to ring-fence the political gains made towards the delivery of
the 24 December elections.
To inject more impetus into the ongoing process, Kenya emphasizes the need
for all parties and Member States to fully respect the ceasefire agreement, including
the immediate departure of foreign fighters and mercenaries, and comply with
the arms embargo. The Secretariat should, in particular, complete the exercise of
detailing the requirements for the deployment of the ceasefire monitoring support
envisioned by resolution 2570 (2021).
Kenya also calls for the deployment of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme in Libya, which should happen alongside security
sector reforms. We are willing to share our experience in this regard, based on
the implementation of our counter-terrorism and radicalization strategy. However,
we must be conscious of the risk of fuelling the cyclical conflict in the region if
the envisaged DDR programme is not accompanied by corresponding similar
programmes in neighbouring States. It is therefore important that UNSMIL, in its
support to Libya on this matter, work in close coordination and consultation with
neighbouring States, regional organizations and other interested partners.
Kenya encourages the Government of National Unity to continue working
towards the reunification of national institutions for the fulfilment of its commitments
to the people.
We also encourage continued investment in national reconciliation. In
this regard, we welcome the establishment of the High National Reconciliation
Commission and acknowledge the commitment of the African Union in supporting
this process.
The continued interception at sea, unfair treatment and return of migrants
to Libyan ports, in violation of their basic human rights, is of concern to Kenya.
Considering that Libya is not a safe port of return, we call on all those involved to
discontinue this practice. Meanwhile, the continuing appalling situation of refugees
in Libya calls for urgent attention.

21-0687317/38

S/2021/498

Sanctions should assist in advancing the peace process. It is important
that frozen assets be well guarded for the future benefit of the Libyan people and
appropriately reviewed, according to resolution 2571 (2021).
We support the implementation of the arms embargo through the renewal of
authorizations under resolution 2292 (2016). We urge close consultation with the
Government of National Unity in their implementation.
Finally, Kenya calls on all Member States and regional organizations to continue
extending support for a truly Libyan-led and -owned peace process in a manner that
upholds Libya’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence.

18/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations, Alicia Buenrostro Massieu
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Special Envoy Kubiš and Ambassador Tirumurti of India, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for their briefings. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to the Security Council.
Since the signing of the ceasefire agreement last October, the Libyan people
have succeeded in overcoming multiple obstacles to move towards the reunification
of the country and national reconciliation. Despite remaining challenges, particularly
in the area of security, the transitional Government, led by Prime Minister Abdul
Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah, has made progress in reorganizing the State, and the
Libyan economy is on track for a significant recovery this year.
In that regard, Mexico welcomes the progress in the political process that
has allowed the formation of the Government of National Unity, the progressive
unification of State institutions and the validity of the ceasefire agreement. The
positive outcome is the result of the responsible behaviour of Libyan political
actors and the excellent work done by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to structure the dialogue.
We trust that this constructive attitude will prevail and that the various Libyan
political actors will reach the necessary agreements to facilitate the democratic
transition through the organization of general elections on 24 December. In that
regard, we call for the proposals on a constitutional basis for elections set forth by
the legal committee of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum to be discussed and
legislation to be enacted by 1 July.
Mexico is pleased that the current draft constitutional basis includes measures
to guarantee the representation of women in the legislative branch and provides
for the inclusion of young people, refugees, internally displaced persons and the
country’s cultural diversity. We hope that the virtual meeting to be held next week
under the auspices of UNSMIL will allow progress to be made towards the adoption
of that draft.
Moreover, a political agreement must be reached within the House of
Representatives to adopt a unified budget. That will ensure that the State has the
necessary resources to organize the next elections and restore basic services.
Despite the substantive progress we are seeing in the political process, the
humanitarian situation remains serious, in particular with regard to migrants.
Shipwrecks in recent weeks have claimed the lives of hundreds of people who
embarked in Libya with the intention of reaching Europe. Mexico deplores those
tragedies and calls on the authorities of the migrants’ countries of origin and
destination to work in coordination with the Libyan Government and international
and regional organizations to assist and protect migrants.
We reiterate our call on the Libyan authorities, with the assistance of UNSMIL
and the support of the African Union, to take the necessary measures to bring the
weapons accumulated over the years of the conflict under State control. At the
same time, the Security Council must insist that the arms embargo be scrupulously
observed and punish those who violate it.
The organized departure of foreign combatants is also essential to strengthen
the progress made so far and to avert the prospect of a return to hostilities.
21-0687319/38

S/2021/498

The risks of weapons and fighters in Libya moving to other countries in the
region are high, and the events of April in Chad, as we already heard, show us the
magnitude of the threat. The international community must therefore support the
Libyan State and its neighbours in improving control over its southern border.
Mexico has requested the deployment of protection advisers for women and
children, as part of the strengthening of UNSMIL’s capacity to assist those two groups,
which have been particularly affected by the conflict. Having reiterated the appeal in
resolution 2570 (2021), adopted with the unanimous support of Council members last
month, we hope that the deployment will be effective as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we hope that the strategic review of UNSMIL will be an
opportunity to reflect on, among other things, the way in which the gender perspective
has been incorporated into the mandate of that mission.
My country, Mexico, reiterates its commitment to lasting peace, with full
respect for Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

20/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
At the outset, I should like to express my thanks to Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya, and to Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for their informative briefings and their ongoing commitment to stabilizing the
situation in Libya.
The information they have just provided us allows us to take stock of the
situation in Libya in terms of the progress made in implementing the November 2020
road map and the remaining challenges to be overcome in the political and national
reconciliation processes.
Six months out from the December 2021 elections, and after over a decade of
chaos and division, Libya is at a decisive turning point to succeed in the endeavour
of reconciliation among its daughters and sons, healing wounds and laying the
foundations for a democratic, peaceful and prosperous future. This is why the
resistance and delays observed in implementing certain prescriptions of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum remind us that Libyan political actors must show a renewed
spirit of patriotism to overcome final obstacles to the successful completion of the
transition process under way.
Against that backdrop, I should like to make the following remarks.
On the security front, after 10 years of civil war, Libya is making progress
towards lasting peace thanks to reconciliation efforts led by the Libyans themselves
and to the positive support of neighbouring countries and the international community.
The United Nations, through the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), has played a pivotal role. However, we fear that while the guns are silent
in Libya, they may resonate more deafeningly in the Sahel, which, it must be said, is
suffering its second wave of impact from the situation in Libya. Recent developments
in Chad are a perfect illustration of that.
To this end, we recall the crucial need to establish an orderly plan for the
withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya, with a support
mechanism for the Sahel countries encompassing security sector reform and,
especially, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Faced with the threat of sophisticated weapons and well-trained and seasoned
combatants spreading across the porous borders of the Sahel countries neighbouring
Libya, the first challenge to tackle, therefore, turns out to be securing and monitoring
of those borders.
Indeed, since 2018, Chad, the Niger, Libya and the Sudan have been trying
to coordinate security at their borders against the threat coming from southern
Libya. We therefore call on the Security Council to consider this matter further with
due care, with a view to averting possible threats to the integrity of neighbouring
countries in the Sahel.
In addition, echoing the ministerial meeting of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union held on 18 May, my delegation reaffirms the importance of
respecting the provisions regarding the ceasefire and cessation of violations of the
arms embargo.
21-0687321/38

S/2021/498

Moreover, as reflected in the conclusions of the 961st meeting of the Peace and
Security Council, we advocate good cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union when it comes to taking steps to support the ceasefire monitoring
mechanism in Libya.
On the political front, we welcome the key role played by the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum. This momentum must be kept up to allow for the holding of
national elections on 24 December 2021, in accordance with the road map of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and as requested by resolution 2570 (2021). We
commend UNSMIL for its efforts to facilitate and support the finalization of draft
constitutional and electoral documents and hope that the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum will consider these at its virtual meeting scheduled for 26 and 27 May so as
to allow for their adoption by the July 2021 deadline set by the road map.
My delegation also welcomes the efforts of the co-facilitators of the Berlin
Conference working group of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya for
the support and sound advice they provide to the actors of the transition with a view
to moving the transition process forward.
Moreover, we welcome the holding of municipal elections despite the political,
security and pandemic-related challenges, which demonstrates the commitment of
Libyans to democratic values and peace.
I cannot end my remarks without expressing my country’s concerns about the
situation of the estimated 571,000 migrants and refugees in Libya and underscoring
the need to review the policy of disembarking migrants and refugees intercepted
at sea on Libyan soil. The poor conditions in which women and children find
themselves in arbitrary detention centres demands a response from us in more ways
than one. This is why the Niger intends to propose that the Council discuss this
issue in due course.
For their part, Libya’s neighbouring countries should work together with the
African Union to promptly lay the groundwork for the convening of the national
reconciliation forum, the importance of which to the process of ending the crisis in
Libya is now clear to all.

22/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Special Envoy Kubiš for his and his team’s ongoing work to support
the political, security and economic processes under way in Libya. We are pleased
to see continued progress on the political track, especially as part of the road map
towards December elections.
We welcome the continued steps by both the Government of National Unity and
the House of Representatives to sustain the positive momentum. And we encourage
continuous focus on the preparations to approve and pass the constitutional and legal
framework for elections, and other necessary legislation. In this regard, the adoption
of a budget is a critical next step. And we urge the interim government to prioritize
measures important to the daily lives of the Libyan people — such as restoring basic
services of water, electricity and health care.
We also commend the role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and of Special Envoy Kubiš in facilitating the finalization of a draft
constitution proposal in advance of the upcoming plenary meeting of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum. Norway fully supports the Libyan people in their quest for
peace and reconciliation through an inclusive political process, and we continue to
urge the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all levels, as well as the
effective inclusion of voices from youth and civil society groups in all their diversity.
We also welcome the establishment of a High National Reconciliation
Commission and the Special Envoy’s engagement with the African Union on this
issue. Investigating and prosecuting violations of international humanitarian law,
and human rights violations and abuses, as well as promoting transitional justice, are
critical components of achieving sustainable peace and stability in Libya.
The fact that the ceasefire is still holding remains a positive signal. A safe
environment for voting in December is essential to break the military deadlock.
Norway welcomes the progress report on the ceasefire monitoring arrangements
and commends preparations under way to deploy the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring
component. Norway also welcomes the continued efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission to facilitate the withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries.
The implementation of the ceasefire provisions must be prioritized, including
the reopening of the strategic coastal road connecting Misrata with eastern Libya.
In line with these efforts, a comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process is also needed for returning foreign fighters, in order to avoid
spreading instability in the region. And security sector reform is urgently needed.
I would also like to reiterate the obligation of all countries to respect the weapons
embargo instituted by this Council. Breaching the embargo only fuels the conflict.
We support the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in
implementing the United Nations arms embargo on Libya.
Norway joins the Special Envoy in expressing our continued concern about
the arbitrary detention of migrants and refugees, including children, in formal
detention centres.
With an increasing number of migrants crossing the Mediterranean, the number
of refugees and migrants in detention is also increasing. Particularly alarming are the
reports of torture, sexual violence and abuse within these centres. We welcome the
announcement of a 15-member committee to address the issue of arbitrary detention
and, as always, urge respect for international humanitarian law and human rights
21-0687323/38

S/2021/498

law. As we enter a season when migration across the Mediterranean is expected to
increase, we also need to focus on the prevention of drowning tragedies.
Let me end by reiterating Norway’s firm support for the Special Envoy and
all the work undertaken to ensure fair and safe elections in December, as well as
comprehensive and inclusive political, security and economic processes. As we
know, there are many potential spoilers of these efforts, and hurdles remain ahead.
It is our responsibility as Council members to provide the Libyans with the support
they need.

24/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
I cannot but express our regret over the continuing practice of virtual meetings
that the Security Council holds to discuss matters regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security. We all know that, as recently as yesterday, the
General Assembly stepped up its openness by convening an in-person debate on
the Middle East, with the participation of delegations that had arrived from abroad.
The city of New York also has lifted some restrictions to fully open on 1 July.
However, the Council keeps ignoring those trends, as if trying to hide from the
international community.
We call on the Council presidency to take exhaustive measures in order to
resume in-person meetings in the Security Council Chamber that meet all relevant
safety requirements.
We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his briefing on the
situation in Libya. We welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Libya, Ambassador Elsonni, at this briefing. We thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador
Tirumurti, for providing a review of the work of that subsidiary body. In this regard,
we would like to express concern over illegal arms trafficking in Libya, a factor that
is destabilizing the security situation both inside the country and in the Sahara-Sahel
region. We underscore the importance of safeguarding Libya’s frozen assets. This
issue has become even more urgent in light of third-party attempts to profiteer from
Libya’s resources. All questions pertaining to control of the oil infrastructure and
export operations must be handled by the Libyans themselves.
We are cautiously optimistic about prospective developments in Libya.
There has been considerable progress on the political track of the settlement. New
authorities have been formed for the transitional period: the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Unity. In general, they could assume responsibilities
from the former western Libya administration and the interim Government based in
the east of the country. This was a landmark step towards resolving the prolonged
acute crisis on the basis of a constitutional compromise between the opposing sides.
We hope that the Presidential Council and the Government of National Unity
will be able to promptly establish the top-down executive structure and unify State
bodies and financial and economic institutions, as well as the armed forces. Once
successfully resolved, these tasks will ensure the conditions necessary for the
constitutional referendum and general elections, scheduled for 24 December this year.
However, achieving these goals will not be easy. The odds are that, given
the heavy burden of Libya’s political and socioeconomic problems, the transitional
period may take longer than expected. The most important thing Libyans must do
now is overcome the mutual distrust caused by many years of conflict, which was
to a large extent provoked from the outside back in 2011. We remind our colleagues
of this ordeal, for which Libyans continue to pay the price to this very day, and we
call on them to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of independent States,
including Libya.
Russia has contributed to the establishment of the ceasefire regime in Libya.
We were among the first to welcome the establishment of transitional authorities,
with our Foreign Ministry issuing a special statement on that matter. We will
21-0687325/38

S/2021/498

continue to maintain close contacts with the leading political forces of various
Libyan regions. The recent progress of the political process can lead to success only
when it becomes truly inclusive. The representatives of the former regime and of
Libya’s eastern regions have an important role to play in this regard. Post-conflict
State-building must not leave them behind.
Political settlement in Libya must not be an arena for international competition.
We believe that it is essential to take on board the opinion and interests of Libya’s
neighbouring countries, because they endure the direct consequences of the ongoing
crisis and can play a positive constructive role in promoting peaceful settlement.
On 16 April 2021, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2570
(2021), which expands — as requested by the Libyan sides — the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We proceed from the assumption that
United Nations personnel must strictly follow its mandate to monitor the ceasefire.
All parameters of such monitoring must be acceptable for Libyans and negotiated
with them.

26/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Permit me to extend our appreciation to the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his comprehensive briefing, and to thank T. S. Tirumurti,
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya, for presenting the Chair’s fortieth report. I also recognize the presence of our
distinguished colleague, Taher Elsonni.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its unwavering support for
the United Nations multitrack process in Libya and appreciates the efforts of the
international community, including the initiatives of neighbouring countries and
regional organizations.
Approximately a decade following Libya’s descent into turmoil, the country is
now on the cusp of new beginnings, presenting the ideal opportunity for all Libyans
and the international community to reset relations and facilitate lasting peace,
stability and sustainable development.
My delegation welcomes the significant progress highlighted in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/451) and extends its support to the Government
of National Unity. We encourage the Government to fulfil its responsibilities in
conformity with the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map. Prioritizing the
reunification of the country, undertaking economic reforms, delivering basic
services, finalizing preparations for inclusive, free, fair and transparent national
elections and inaugurating a comprehensive national reconciliation process are key
for Libya’s democratic transformation.
The transitional Government has a very short preparation time frame for the
crucial 24 December elections. We encourage the Government of National Unity
and the relevant stakeholders to expedite all logistical arrangements and resolve
constitutional and legal differences to ensure that elections be conducted in a
conducive environment.
We also applaud the ongoing work of the High National Electoral Commission
and the complementary efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Successful elections would pave the path for national reconciliation. We are
satisfied with the establishment of the High National Reconciliation Commission
and renew our support for the collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations in this regard.
Absolute peace in Libya will not be fulfilled until all parties comply strictly
with their international obligations and all conflicts are eradicated. In this context, the
importance of strictly adhering to the arms embargo and all the relevant resolutions
on Libya, including the recently adopted resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021),
cannot be overstated.
The deeply entrenched presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries on
Libyan soil is unacceptable. We are pleased that the 23 October ceasefire agreement
continues to hold and note progress in its implementation.
Nevertheless, we are extremely worried about the scant regard in the call
for foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries to depart without delay. We therefore
repeat our clarion call for their complete withdrawal. Furthermore, we commend the
work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement and look forward to the operationalization of the Libyan-owned and -led
comprehensive ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
21-0687327/38

S/2021/498

Non-compliance with Security Council resolutions and the concomitant
security challenges have grave ramifications for Libya, neighbouring countries,
the Sahel region and the wider continent. Given Libya’s intricate security situation,
enhanced cooperation between the Government of National Unity, regional
organizations and neighbouring countries, particularly in the development of an
efficacious security sector reform and demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programme, is critical.
Beyond the headlines, the human rights and humanitarian situation,
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, is troubling. The groups made
most vulnerable, particularly migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons,
also require specific attention. We urge the authorities to facilitate safe humanitarian
access to refugees and migrants, as well as to respond adequately to the pandemic.
It is also critical that the international community continue contributing to Libya’s
2021 humanitarian response plan.
We underscore our support for the Fact-Finding Mission to Libya and its
investigation into the mass graves found in Tarhouna, and we repeat our views that
Libya is an unsafe port for the disembarkation of refugees and migrants.
Libyans’ immediate past has been regrettably laden with suffering.
Their resolve and determination, however, with the support of the international
community, has brought them to this critical juncture of hope and optimism. It is
now time now for Libyans to reconcile and forge a deeper and more harmonious
society to improve markedly the overall quality of their lives, through the Libyanown and led political process.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its support
to continue accompanying our brotherly nation in its pursuit of durable peace,
reconciliation, reconstruction and sustainable development.

28/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ján Kubiš for his detailed briefing and
express our appreciation for his efforts alongside the staff of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to advance a political settlement in Libya.
Tunisia remains committed to doing everything it can to facilitate the work of
UNSMIL and its headquarters in Tunis.
My delegation takes note of the report of the Security Council committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and commends the
work done by India as Chair of the Committee since it assumed that role at the
beginning of this year.
I also welcome the participation of Taher M. T. Elsonni, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Libya, at this meeting.
Tunisia is pleased that, at this critical stage in the history of Libya, our Libyan
brethren are determined to ensure that the political settlement process is successful.
We reaffirm the importance of the commitment of all parties to holding legislative
and presidential elections as scheduled on 24 December 2021, in accordance with
the road map adopted in Tunis, to ensure that the move from the transitional stage
to permanent institutions takes place in an environment of freedom, democracy and
the rule of law.
In preparation for the upcoming elections, my country welcomes the meeting
of the Legal Committee of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, held in Tunis from
7 to 9 April 2021, and that Committee’s tangible progress towards finalizing the
draft constitutional basis for the exercise of legislative and executive powers. Tunisia
looks forward to the virtual meeting of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum to be
held later this month to discuss the Legal Committee’s proposed constitutional basis
for the elections.
Tunisia stresses that the 1 July 2021 deadline set by the High National Elections
Commission for adopting the constitutional basis and the law on elections must be
adhered to, in order to allow the Commission to organize these important elections
under the best possible circumstances. The necessary support and facilitation must
be provided in order to guarantee that the elections are successful.
Tunisia appreciates the commitment of the Libyan parties to respecting the
agreement for a complete and permanent ceasefire in Libya and calls for more to be
done to implement it fully, including by accelerating the departure of all mercenaries
and foreign combatants from Libya. During the interactive dialogue initiated by the
African members of the Security Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1) on 29 April 2021, Council members unanimously agreed that foreign fighters
and mercenaries must leave Libya immediately, given that their continued presence
in the country poses a threat to the security of Libyans, the stability of Libya and
the security and stability of neighbouring countries, particularly in the Sahel region.
Tunisia calls on regional and international actors to support the Libyan
authorities and the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in their bid to implement the
ceasefire agreement, which constitutes a mainstay of the political settlement process.
Tunisia calls upon all the parties concerned to support the establishment of a
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism and looks forward

21-0687329/38

S/2021/498

to the deployment of the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring component in support of
that mechanism, in line with Security Council resolution 2570 (2021).
Tunisia reiterates that all parties must commit to implement the arms embargo
imposed on Libya, to refrain from interfering in its internal affairs and to respect its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. In that connection, Tunisia looks
forward to the renewal of Security Council 2292 (2016) with a view to enforcing the
arms embargo, and it values regional and national efforts to that end.
Tunisia also stresses the importance of respecting international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and promoting accountability for serious
crimes committed in Libya.
There is a need for a comprehensive and inclusive reconciliation process
in Libya. Tunisia therefore welcomes the establishment of the High National
Reconciliation Commission and the efforts of the African Union to support national
reconciliation in Libya.
Lastly, Tunisia reaffirms its steadfast support for a Libyan-led, Libyanowned political settlement under United Nations auspices. It is firmly committed
to supporting the efforts of Libyan authorities and the aspirations of the Libyan
people to democracy, security and reconstruction. Tunisia will continue to assist
United Nations and international efforts with a view to guaranteeing the restoration
of security and stability that Libya deserves.

30/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to thank Special Envoy Kubiš and Ambassador Tirumurti for
their reports and their work.
As we have heard from other colleagues, this is a critical moment for Libya.
There is now a pathway to national elections in December and a prospect for longerterm stability. A month ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2570 (2021), which sets out the next steps in four key areas.
First, the relevant Libyan authorities, including Libya’s House of
Representatives, need to clarify the constitutional basis and any necessary legislation
by 1 July in order to allow election preparations to go ahead. We urge the House of
Representatives to consider the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum’s proposals and to
play its part in the process. We note that the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum may
also take steps to facilitate elections, if necessary.
Secondly, delivering the successful and inclusive elections that Libyans
deserve requires more than just legislation, so the United Kingdom urges the interim
Government of National Unity and all the Libyan actors to take the necessary steps
to create a conducive environment, with support from the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. This includes measures to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of female candidates and voters. Progress on the unification of
institutions, effective service delivery across the country and the transparency of
public finances will help build confidence among Libyan actors. The implementation
of the Libyan ceasefire is an urgent priority, including opening the coastal road to
connect east and west.
Thirdly, the international community must play its part. Those undermining
Libyan sovereignty and breaching the United Nations arms embargo must stop. All
foreign forces and mercenaries must be withdrawn from Libya without delay. Their
presence undermines the peace and stability of Libya and the wider region, as seen
in recent events in Chad. We encourage the rapid deployment of the United Nations
forward team in support of the Libyan ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
Finally, resolution 2570 (2021) is clear that those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human
rights law must be held accountable. The news of the discovery of further mass
graves in Tarhouna, bringing the total to over 100, is shocking. The United Kingdom
has imposed sanctions on the Al-Kaniyat militia and its leaders for their role in these
heinous acts. Libyans have had enough of impunity, interference and obstruction,
and where necessary, we — the international community — must act.
To conclude, Libya has made significant steps towards a sustainable, Libyanled and Libyan-owned political settlement. The next steps to maintain that momentum
are clear. It is now up to Libya’s leaders and to the international community to deliver.

21-0687331/38

S/2021/498

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Kubiš for his briefing today. I would
also like to thank the Ambassador for India for his briefing and welcome the Libyan
Permanent Representative for joining us, as well.
Just over a month ago, this Council unanimously adopted resolution 2570
(2021) and renewed the mandate of the Libya sanctions regime in resolution 2571
(2021). We made it clear that free and fair elections must be held on 24 December
2021. Anyone who obstructs or undermines the elections planned for in the Libya
Political Dialogue Forum road map may be subject to sanctions.
In the meantime, it is critical that we protect human rights and combat
corruption in Libya. For their part, the Libyan people have made tremendous
progress towards national reconciliation. Now, they want elections, so it is time for
the Libyan leadership to clarify the constitutional basis for the election, pass the
required legislation and ensure that elections are not delayed. As Special Envoy
Kubiš and others have said, that progress has to happen by 1 July.
Additionally, the 23 October ceasefire agreement must be fully implemented.
The Security Council has issued statements supporting the ceasefire and unanimously
confirmed and reaffirmed its parametres in April. The United States fully supports
the terms of the ceasefire. To that end, all external actors involved in the conflict must
cease their military interference and begin to withdraw from Libya immediately.
There is no room for interpretation here. All means all.
Further, all external military support inconsistent with the United Nations
arms embargo must end — no more training and financing of mercenaries, proxy
forces and armed groups. The recent violent instability in Chad underscores the
dangers of foreign mercenaries. They cannot remain in Libya. We also fully support
the continuation of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI. A sovereign Libyan Government, empowered through national elections,
will be able to determine the best range of partners for future security cooperation
relationships. Resolution 2570 (2021) requests the continued support of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
We urge the United Nations to identify all necessary and appropriate means
to fully support the Joint Military Commission’s efforts. We are encouraged by
the Commission’s continuing to develop its plans for the ceasefire monitoring
mechanism — in consultation with UNSMIL — including the deployment of a small
number of observers. We also support the investigation of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) into the situation in Libya. Those who are subject to arrest warrants by
the ICC for charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity — including former
senior officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime — must face justice.
Finally, it is time for the leadership of Libya to unify the budget, build anticorruption institutions and include Libyan civil society and women leaders in the
political process. Libya needs a unified budget to provide for the needs of the Libyan
people, and the Government needs to implement transparency measures to reach a
lasting agreement on the management of oil revenues. In polls, Libyans consistently
point to corruption as a deep-rooted problem that must be overcome if Libya is
to prosper. The Government of National Unity needs to build institutions that will
counter the scourge of corruption and take control away from militias that have
abused their positions for personal gain.
32/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

The Council has an obligation to support the construction of sovereign
institutions that are transparent, technocratic and apolitical, and to punish those who
engage in corruption. And as these institutions and others develop in Libya, civil
society and women leaders must be included. Their inclusion will help foster peace,
ensure equity and advance accountability.
In the spirit of our votes last month, the Council needs to continue to speak with
one voice on Libya. Let us do everything we can to help the Government maintain
positive momentum as it moves towards national elections on 24 December.

21-0687333/38

S/2021/498

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Libya, for his comprehensive briefing and Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti for his
first briefing in his capacity as Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I also welcome Ambassador Taher Elsonni,
Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting.
Significant progress in Libya in recent months offers a window of opportunity
for the pursuit of long-term peace and stability in Libya. The unanimous adoption of
resolution 2570 (2021) demonstrated the unified message of the Council on supporting
the Libyan-led and owned peace process and the road map towards elections by the
end of this year. In this regard, I wish to highlight three following points.
First, we call on the Government of National Unity to put in its best efforts
in facilitating the transitional period and make all necessary preparations for the
holding of national elections, in line with the agreed road map. It is imperative that
the Libyan parties continue to demonstrate a spirit of mutual understanding and trust
to advance the political process.
We commend the collaboration among the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), regional organizations, neighbouring countries and other
international partners in promoting the peace process in the country. Sustainable
peace in Libya will mark a successful story for the people of Libya and of cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations in maintaining peace and security.
In this regard, the international community should continue to foster dialogue and
support confidence-building measures among the relevant parties at this crucial
time. We also look forward to increasingly active and meaningful participation by
women and youth in the political life of the country.
Secondly, we urge the relevant parties to fully respect and implement the
provisions of the ceasefire agreement. This must also go in line with the commitment
to uphold the arms embargo in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions on
Libya to maintain a conducive environment for the transitional process.
We look forward to the work of UNSMIL in supporting the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism, as outlined in resolution
2570 (2021). It is important to ensure the safety, security and independence of the
Mission’s observers.
Furthermore, peacebuilding efforts should also be facilitated to ensure longlasting peace and development in Libya. We reiterate our support for the withdrawal
of all foreign forces and mercenaries from the territory of Libya, in line with the
ceasefire agreement and resolution 2570 (2021).
Thirdly, strengthened efforts are needed in addressing the humanitarian and
economic challenges in the country. While Libya has achieved economic progress
over the past months, over 1.3 million people still require humanitarian assistance due
to the consequences of the conflict and the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call
on international partners to continue to provide support to vulnerable groups such
as women, children and migrants in Libya in addressing their needs and challenges.
In addition, we particularly commend the efforts to clear Libya’s coastal
roads of mines and explosive remnants of war, with support of the Libyan Mine
Action Centre and the United Nations Mine Action Service. It is encouraging

34/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

that 120 kilometres of roads have been cleared. We call for further efforts in riskmitigation to protect civilians from explosive remnants of war.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms our strong support for the inclusive Libyanled and Libyan-owned peace process.

21-0687335/38

S/2021/498

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations, Taher Elsonni
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank you for convening this meeting. I also
thank Ján Kubiš for his briefing and the Chair of the Security Council committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya for his report on the activities
of the committee.
Today, I speak for the Libyan street, and perhaps also for many other countries
in the region, which have tired of all these meetings and briefings and of hearing the
same statements time and time again, hoping instead for more practical and realistic
steps to be taken to implement the resolutions of the Security Council, which are
supposed to be binding, so that we can extricate ourselves from a cycle of conflict
that has lasted a decade.
The Presidency Council and the Government of National Unity are working
together to take advantage of the positive developments in the situation in Libya.
Those developments would not have been possible without sincere local and national
efforts and initiatives, or without the support of many countries for a peaceful,
political solution, ruling out military solutions that have wrought nothing but
havoc and instability in Libya and the region. We therefore call on the international
community to seize this local and international momentum to help my country to
emerge from its crisis and fulfil the aspiration of the Libyan to build a democratic
State based on institutions and the rule of law.
Against that backdrop, we wish to stress the following points:
First, we call on all States to abide by the conclusions of the Berlin Conference
on Libya, endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2510 (2020), 2570 (2021)
and 2571 (2021), and to work to support the full implementation of the ceasefire
agreement and the conclusions of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, in particular,
the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries, so as to prevent the will of the
people from being pressured and enable the State to extend its sovereignty over all
of Libya.
Secondly, the United Nations observer team must retain its role in support of
the Military Commission and the latter’s conclusions as required. The team must
also preserve its civilian character. It must not by any means become a military force
on the ground.
Thirdly, we welcome the role of UNSMIL in following up the work of the
Legal Committee of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and the Mission’s call for
the Forum to meet in the coming days to resolve the proposed constitutional basis
for the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for 24 December 2021,
so that the House of Representatives and the High Council of State can hold their
elections in line with the road map, by the deadline of 1 July set by the High National
Elections Commission.
Fourthly, we call on the United Nations to immediately send a team to Libya
to evaluate electoral support needs, in order directly and promptly to consider the
High National Elections Commission’s requirements. Doing so will ensure that the
elections that will be held in every Libyan city will be successful and transparent,
leaving no room for the process or results to be called into question after the elections.

36/38

21-06873

S/2021/498

The Government of National Unity is working to implement the mandate set
out in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map. The Government is committed
to overcoming all the difficulties and obstacles in its path, despite the short period
of time available. The Government has been able to unify approximately 80 per
cent of executive State institutions fully. During this short period, it has worked to
launch some programmes and projects to improve the provision of services to and
economic conditions of the citizenry. However, several challenges continue to hinder
the implementation of the programmes. The most significant of those obstacles are
the failure to make appointments to leadership positions after the consolidation of
State institutions and the delay in adopting the regular budget. We are therefore
waiting for the House of Representatives and the High Council of State to conduct
their elections, each in its area of responsibility, so that the Government can fulfil its
promises in an optimal manner. In that context, we welcome the call by the Speaker
of the House of Representatives to convene a meeting on the subject next Monday.
We reiterate that peace is a priority and that successful national reconciliation
is key to establishing peace. On 5 April 2021, the President and members of the
Presidency Council announced the establishment of the High National Reconciliation
Commission. The focus of its work is to promote reconciliation, justice, healing rifts
and reuniting Libyans by achieving transitional justice and openness and establishing
the principle of forgiveness, tolerance and reparation. In that context, a few days
ago, the Minister of Justice announced that tangible steps would be taken to release
detainees from prisons, starting with the release of 78 detainees. A prisoner exchange
was carried out under the auspices of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission a few days
ago. The Government is working to release citizens throughout Libya who were
imprisoned without being charged, as well as those who have been proven innocent.
In the same vein, we once again call on the African Union, in cooperation
with the United Nations, to support the national reconciliation project announced by
the Presidency Council. We support the recommendation of the Secretary-General,
contained in his recent report, concerning the role of the United Nations and the
African Union in any bid to achieve intra-Libyan reconciliation.
Human rights issues in Libya, which are addressed in United Nations reports,
including the reports of the Secretary-General, are an important aspect of the work
of the Government of National Unity. The Ministry of Justice and other relevant
national institutions are working in concert with the Office of the Prosecutor on a
number of human rights issues, in order to ensure that the perpetrators of crimes and
violators of human rights of all kinds are held accountable. Efforts are also under
way to consolidate the principle of non-impunity with reference to the violations and
crimes committed by any party since 2011.
With regard to the question of illegal migration, which is mentioned in the
most recent report of the Secretary-General, while we are determined to ensure the
safety of migrants and protect them from violations, we also reaffirm our consistent
rejection of any endeavour to reduce the issue to the circumstances and suffering
of migrants in Libya during conflict, without also mentioning that the international
community bears some responsibility for its inability to address the root causes of
the problem, deal with countries of origin and destination, and combat and punish
human traffickers and their cross-border networks. Only the situation of migrants
in shelters is discussed. That is an important matter; but we must not forget that
migrants in shelters account for 5 per cent of the total number migrants in Libya,
who perish in the desert or at sea in pursuit of a better life in Europe. Those cases
are never discussed.
We therefore echo the Secretary-General’s call on international partners to
reconsider their migration policies. The partners often see Libya as a safe haven for
21-0687337/38

S/2021/498

migrants. They adopt a strategy of intercepting migrants at sea, forcing them to return
to Libya and refusing to receive them in their territory. If the unstable humanitarian
situation in Libya worries you, make a positive and effective contribution to Libyan
stability and stop intervening in a detrimental manner so that we can accommodate
our brethren by lawful means.
The Security Council has pledged to preserve the frozen Libyan assets, which
belong to the Libyan people. We object to the manner in which some countries are
taking advantage of the decision to freeze Libyan assets and attempting to seize them
without returning them to the Libyan people. We therefore warn those countries that
we will initiate legal proceedings against them if such attempts continue.
As we have said before, we ask that the sanctions regime be amended in a
manner that would enable the Libyan Investment Authority to manage those funds
without lifting the freeze on them now, and that would make it possible, under the
exceptions provided for in the applicable sanctions regime, to benefit from those
resources on an exceptional basis by investing them to remedy the humanitarian
crises ravaging the country, especially in the areas of electricity, energy and health
services; the latter face the strain of combating the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Lastly, we once again hope that the Council will play a positive and more
effective role in supporting the Libyan consensus and that it will work to end all
forms of interference in Libya. We call on all parties to stop shielding the spoilers,
whether individuals or entities, some of whom are still trying to sabotage the political
process and plunge Libya back into chaos, out of fear of losing their influence
and having their power usurped by the Libyan people through a free and direct
democratic process.

38/38

21-06873
