S/2001/521/Add.1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2001
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Great Lakes
region, 15-26 May 2001
Addendum

Annex I
Statement issued in Kinshasa on 21 May 2001 by the
Security Council mission at the close of its visit to Kinshasa
1.
The Security Council mission expresses its appreciation to President Joseph
Kabila and his Government for receiving them in Kinshasa and for the meetings
they have had during their visit to Kinshasa.
2.
For the first time since the outbreak of the conflict, a solution seems to be in
sight in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security Council mission
stresses the urgency of taking advantage of this window of opportunity.
3.
In 1999, the parties to the conflict signed the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
which set out a road map for the resolution of the conflict and the withdrawal of all
foreign forces. The Security Council fully supports this Ceasefire Agreement, freely
signed by all the belligerents, which has now begun to be put into effect. It is in that
spirit that the Security Council dispatched this mission to the Great Lakes region.
4.
The ceasefire is holding and the parties to the conflict, with one exception,
have disengaged their forces in accordance with the agreement they have signed. It
is imperative to complete the disengagement. The Security Council mission calls on
the Front de libération du Congo (FLC) to respect its commitments to the full.
5.
The parties to the conflict are working with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to prepare detailed
plans and precise timetables, both for the total withdrawal of all foreign forces and
for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or repatriation
of the armed groups, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1341 (2001).
The Security Council mission will take up these points with the members of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in
Lusaka on 21 and 22 May 2001. It will determine whether the conditions have been
met for the entry into phase III of MONUC.
6.
The inter-Congolese dialogue has also moved forward, with the adoption of the
declaration on fundamental principles for the inter-Congolese political negotiations
01-39346 (E) 080601

*0139346*

S/2001/521/Add.1

adopted on 4 May 2001. The Security Council mission welcomes the measures taken
to liberalize the political environment announced on 17 May 2001 by President
Kabila, which create conditions favourable to the launching of the dialogue. The
mission calls for a date to be set as soon as possible for sessions of the dialogue to
commence, on Congolese soil.
7.
The Security Council mission also calls on the parties to pursue their efforts
towards the full implementation of the commitments they have entered into. Several
important stages remain to be covered, including:
(a) The demilitarization of Kisangani, in accordance with Council resolution
1304 (2001);
(b)

The co-location of the Joint Military Commission with MONUC.

8.
The Security Council mission considers it indispensable for the return to peace
to be accompanied by an economic revival. The mission announced yesterday the
reopening of the inland riverine system within two weeks, thanks to the deployment
of MONUC’s riverine units, to be based at Mbandaka. The restoration of river traffic
will permit the re-establishment of links between Kinshasa, Mbandaka and
Kisangani.
9.
The deployment of MONUC will also contribute to development in the sectors
where the force is present. The international community and its donors will
undertake numerous small local quick-impact projects.
10. Furthermore, the Security Council mission stresses the urgency of providing
economic assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
accompany the onset of peace.
11. The looting of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s natural resources is
unacceptable. Those resources belong to the Congolese people. The Security
Council intends, if no progress is made within three months, to consider the
measures necessary to put an end to this illegal exploitation.
12. The Security Council mission calls for the full respect of human rights by all
the parties in the Congolese tragedy. It intends to recommend a significant increase
in the number of human rights observers stationed with each MONUC contingent.
Whatever the outcome, war criminals must be held accountable. Impunity must not
be tolerated.
13. Lastly, there will be a durable peace only if all the countries of the region are
successful in defining among themselves the rules by which to promote security and
development. When the time comes, a conference on the Great Lakes region would
allow for a close and continuous examination of these questions and would also
bring together contributors from the donor countries.
14. Without underestimating the great difficulties that remain to be solved in this
region, the Security Council mission leaves Kinshasa encouraged. The Security
Council is determined to spare no efforts in assisting the parties in following
through on their engagements. We must turn the page on the time of war. It is with
peace, democracy, development and regional cooperation that the next page must be
written to benefit all the people of the Great Lakes Region, and most of all the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

2

S/2001/521/Add.1

Annex II
Agreement for a Ceasefire in the Democratic Republic
of Congo
Joint meeting of the Political Committee for the Implementation of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region
Communiqué
1.
At the initiative of both parties, a joint meeting of the Political Committee for
the Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement (S/1999/815, annex) in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo took place in Lusaka, Zambia, on 22 May 2001,
at the closing of the eleventh meeting of the Political Committee.
2.
Mr. Frederick Chiluba, President of the Republic of Zambia opened the
meeting.
3.
All the signatories to the Ceasefire Agreement attended the meeting. They
included the following: Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Namibia,
Rwanda, Uganda, Zimbabwe, the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo (MLC),
the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) and the Congolese Rally for DemocracyKisangani (RCD-K). For the first time, representatives of Burundi were invited to
participate in the meeting in order to discuss the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR) process. The Security
Council mission was led by the Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations and included the representatives of China, Colombia, Ireland, Jamaica,
Mali, Mauritius, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The representatives of the
Republic of Zambia and the Organization of African Unity and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
also attended the meeting.
4.
The Political Committee exchanged views with members of the Security
Council on the process of implementation of the Lusaka peace agreement. It
reviewed what had been done in the areas of disengagement, DDRRR, the
withdrawal of foreign forces, the inter-Congolese dialogue, the co-location of the
Joint Military Commission with the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the demilitarization of Kisangani
since their last meeting in February 2001. In all these, the Political Committee
apprised the members of the Council of the efforts made by the signatories to ensure
the return of peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as a
whole. The Political Committee expressed its appreciation and asked for
continuation of the partnership with the Council. The members of the Council
assured the Political Committee of their support and cooperation.
5.
The meeting expressed satisfaction with the progress made by the various
parties in the disengagement process and redeployment of forces since the last
meeting of the Political Committee held on 6 April 2001. The Political Committee
and the Security Council welcomed the declaration by MLC that it would disengage
to the agreed positions with effect from 1 June 2001.

3

S/2001/521/Add.1

6.
The meeting welcomed the adoption by the Political Committee of the plan for
the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with a calendar containing dates and timetables for implementation. The
calendar is based on a start date of 22 February 2001, which is derived from
Security Council resolution 1341 (2001). That resolution was adopted by the
Council at the end of the last joint meeting, in New York, of the Council and the
Political Committee.
7.
The meeting welcomed the adoption by the Political Committee of the plan for
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration of all armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was agreed that all parties that had not
already done so would provide information as soon as possible on the numbers,
location and armaments of the armed groups in order to facilitate United Nations
planning to assist the parties in the DDRRR process. All parties confirmed the
existence of relations at the level of head of State and senior officials and considered
these an important contributory factor to the peace process.
8.
The Political Committee appealed to the Security Council to authorize the
planning for phase III of MONUC deployment, as soon as the Joint Military
Commission and the Political Committee had made available to MONUC all the
necessary information on DDRRR and the withdrawal of foreign forces. The
Political Committee called upon the Council to take into account the complexity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo peace process when considering the size and
mandate of phase III MONUC deployment.
9.
The meeting appreciated the efforts made by the Facilitator of the interCongolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire, and welcomed his proposal to convene a
preparatory meeting for the dialogue on 16 July 2001. The Security Council and the
Political Committee expressed strong support for the inter-Congolese dialogue.
10. Concerning the co-location of the Joint Military Commission and MONUC in
Kinshasa, the Chairman of the Political Committee announced the creation of a
team, comprising the Chairman and Vice-Chairman assisted by Namibia, Rwanda,
Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, to find a compromise on this issue.
11. The meeting also discussed the demilitarization of Kisangani, in light of
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), in which the Council had called for the full
demilitarization of the city. Kisangani is still occupied by the forces of RCD.
12. The meeting expressed its profound gratitude to the people and Government of
the Republic of Zambia for the hospitality and warm welcome extended to the
members of the Political Committee during their stay in Lusaka.
Done at Lusaka on 22 May 2001

4

S/2001/521/Add.1

Annex III
AGREEMENT FOR A CEASEFIRE
IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
JOINT MILITARY COMMISSION
DRAFT PLAN FOR DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION,
REPATRIATION, REINTEGRATION (RESETTLEMENT) (DDRRR)
OF ALL ARMED GROUPS IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
CONGO, HANDING OVER MASS KILLERS, PERPETRATORS OF
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY AND OTHER WAR CRIMINALS
AND DISARMAMENT OF ALL CONGOLESE CIVILIANS WHO
ARE ILLEGALLY ARMED.
PREAMBLE
PURSUANT to the Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) particularly Article III, paras. 11a and b, 21 and 22; chapters
7, 8 and 9 of Annex A to the Agreement, in particular 7.4 (f-h), 8.2.1 (h),
8.2.2 (a-e), 9.1 and Annex C to the Agreement;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the Mechanisms for Disarmament,
Demobilization, Repatriation and Reintegration (Resettlement) of Armed
Groups adopted by the Political Committee at its 6th Session held in Lusaka
on 8-9 June 2000;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the Concept of Operations on DDRRR
endorsed by the Political Committee at its 10th meeting held in Lusaka on 6
April 2001 and the Committee’s decision to request His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Zambia, F. J. T. Chiluba, Chairman of the
Lusaka Peace Process to invite Burundi to participate in the preparation and
implementation of the DDRRR;
PURSUANT TO the 7th report of UN Secretary-General submitted to
UN Security Council on 17 April 2001;
FURTHER TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions, particularly 1291, paras. 7 (c) and 15; 1304,
para. 11; 1332, paras. 9 and 11; and 1341, para. 8;
The Governments of Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), Namibia, Rwanda, Uganda, Zimbabwe and the leadership of the
Draft Plan as at 19.05.01

5
