Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second t.:ommiuee

1957, to discuss the subject of international commodity
problems at its twenty-sixth session;
2. Draws the attention of the Governments of Member States to General Assembly resolution 1029 (XI)
of 20 February 1957 and invites them, in terms of
paragraph 1 of that resolution, to submit their commodity problems to the Commission on International
Commodity Trade which, at its sixth session in May
1958, will prepare a report for consideration at the
twenty-sixth session of the Economic and Social Council;
3. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council to the importance of the United Nations assisting in the promotion of international commodity
agreements as an effective means of improving and
stabilizing commodity prices ;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
communicate to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
session, the conclusions drawn from its action under
this resolution.
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1219 (XII). Financing of economic development

The General Assembly,
In conformity with the determination of the United
Nations, as expressed in its Charter, to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
and for these ends, to employ international machinery
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Conscious of the particular needs of the less developed countries for international aid in achieving accelerated development of their economic and social
infrastructure,
Recalling its resolutions on the establishment of an
international fund for economic development within
the framework of the United Nati')ns and, in particular, reaffirming its unanimously adopted resolutions
724 A (VIII) and 724 B (VIII) of 7 December 1953,
Noting the recommendation of the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 662 B (XXIV) of 31
July 1957,
Recognizing that the United Nations Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance is of proven effectiveness in promoting the economic development of
the less developed countries,
Recognizing _however that neither the Expanded Programme nor other existing programmes of the United
Nations or the specialized agencies can now meet certain urgent needs which, if met, would advance the
processes of technical, economic and social development
of the less developed countries, and, in particular,
would facilitate new capital investments of all types
-private and public, national and international-by
creating conditions which would make such investments
either feasible or more effective,
Convinced that a rapidly achieved enlargement in the
financial resources and scope of technical assistance
rendered by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to the less developed countries would constitute a constructive advance in United Nations assistance and would be of immediate significance in
accelerating their economic development,

15

Recognizing that, while long-term pledges are desirable, some Governments are unable to make financial
commitments except with the approval of their legislatures and on an annual basis,

I
Commends the Ad Hoe Committee on the Question
of the Establishment of a Special United Nations
Fund for Economic Development for the work embodied in its final7 and supplementary8 reports prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolutions
923 (X) of 9 December 1955 and 1030 (XI) of 26
February 1957;

II
1. Decides that, subject to the conditions prescribed
hereunder, there shall be established as an expansion of
the existing technical assistance and development activities of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies a separate Special Fund which would provide
systematic and sustained assistance in fields essential
to the integrated technical, economic and social development of the less developed countries,
2. Decides further that, in view of the resources
prospectively available at this time, which are not likely
to exceed $100 million annually, the operations of the
Special Fund shall be directed towards enlarging the
scope of the United Nations programmes of technical
assistance so as to include special projects in certain
basic fields to be defined by the Preparatory Committee
provided for in paragraph 4 below, for example, intensive surveys of water, mineral and potential power
resources, the establishment-including staffing and
equipping-of training institutes in public administration, statistics and technology, and of agricultural and
industrial research and productivity centres;
3. Considers that while, without impairing the separate identity of the Special Fund, the fullest possible
use should be made of the existing machinery of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies-including the
existing international financial institutions-and the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, the
Special Fund will require some new administrative and
operational machinery ;
4. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee
composed of representatives of sixteen Governments
to do the following, taking into account the principles
set out in the annex to the present resolution and the
views and suggestions forwarded by Governments pursuant to paragraph 7 below:
(a) Define the basic fields of assistance which the
Special Fund should encompass and, within these fields,
the types of projects which should be eligible for assistance;
( b) Define in the light of paragraph 3 above the
administrative and operational machinery to be recommended for the Special Fund, including such changes
as may be required in the present legislation and procedures of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance ;
( c) Ascertain the extent to which Governments
would be willing to contribute to the Special Fund;
5. Invites the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Preparatory Committee;
7
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, documents A/3579 and Add.1.
• Ibid., document A/3580.

General Auembly-Twellth Session

16

6. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the Preparatory Committee with all the necessary facilities,
including the provision of such expert consultants as
might be required ;
7. Requests Governments to assist the Preparatory
Committee in its work by forwarding their views and
suggestions to the Committee through the SecretaryGeneral and, in particular, by indicating the extent to
which they would be willing to contribute to the Special
Fund;
8. Invites the Secretary-General, the executive heads
of the specialized agencies and the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board to forward their
views and suggestions to the Preparatory Committee;
9. Requests the Preparatory Committee to submit
the results of its work in the form of a report and
recommendations to the Economic and Social Council,
at its twenty-sixth session;
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit the Preparatory Committee's report, together
with its own comments, to the General Assembly, at
its thirteenth session, for final action ;
11. Looks forward to the establishment of the Special Fund as of 1 January 1959;
12. Appeals to all States Members of the United
Nations, in a spirit of co-operation and solidarity, to
give the greatest possible assistance to the Special
Fund;

III
Decides that as and when the resources prospectively
available are considered by the General Assembly to
be sufficient to enter into the field of capital development, principally the development of the economic and
social infrastructure of the less developed countries,
the Assembly shall review the scope and future activ-

ities of the Special Fund and take such action as it
may deem appropriate.
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
ANNEX

1. The Special Fund shall be a multilateral fund of the
United Nations, with financial resources principally derived
from voluntary annual contributions of Governments and others
in or transferable into currency usable by the Fund and, as
much as possible, pledged or indicated for a number of years.
2. Assistance from the Special Fund shall be given only to
projects which would make a contribution to the economic
development of the requesting country or countries. The operations of the Fund shall be in conformity with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and shall not be influenced by political considerations.
3. The Special Fund shall be administered by a chief executive officer under policies established by an executive body in
accordance with such rules and principles as may be laid down
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
The membership of the executive body shall be equally distributed between two groups, one consisting mainly of major
contributing countries and the other consisting mainly of less
developed countries. Each member of the executive body shall
have one vote. Decisions of the executive body on questions
of policy, including the allocation of funds, shall require a
qualified majority vote.

* *

At the 730th plenary meeting on 14 December 1957, after the
adoption of the resolution, the President of the General Assembly appointed the following States Members to be represented on the Preparatory Committee, ,,. accorda1tce with
paragraph 5 of section II of the resolution above: CANADA,
CHILE, DENMARK, EGYPT, FRANCE, GHANA, INDIA, JAPAN,
MEXICO, NETHERLANDS, PAKISTAN, Pnu, UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NoRTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMEllICA and YuooSLAVIA.
