56

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Noting the efforts on behalf of the Sahel by the Office
for Sahelian Relief Operations of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system to
extend assistance to the newly independent and emerging States,
Recalling further United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development recommendation 99 (IV)
of 31 May 1976, 6 particularly paragraph 4 thereof, in
which the Conference recommended that measures of
assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States of Africa,
Noting the outline of the economic and social situation in Cape Verde submitted by the Government of
Cape Verde to the Secretary-General, and the appeals
of the Secretary-General of 26 March 1975 and 18
October 197 6 for assistance to Cape Verde,

1. Urgently appeals to Member States and the
international institutions concerned, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme, to assist the Government
of Cape Verde in an effective and continuous manner
so as to enable it to deal effectively with the catastrophic
drought situation and its consequences;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its thirteenth session, as a matter of priority,
to give favourable consideration to the question of the
inclusion of Cape Verde in the list of the least developed countries and to submit its conclusions to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations
of the United Nations system to grant Cape Verde the
same benefits as those enjoyed by the least developed
among the developing countries in the light of prevailing conditions in Cape Verde;

31/42.

The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fourth session, held at Nairobi
from 5 to 31 May 1976, in which the Conference
noted the serious and disturbing nature of the economic
situation in the Comoros, where the per capita income
is one of the lowest in the world, 7
Being aware, moreover, that the Comoros is faced
with certain specific tasks arising from its recent attainment of independence,
Recalling further its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8
December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and emerging States,
1. Urgently appeals to Member States and to the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, particularly the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to assist the Government of the Comoros in
an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it
to face successfully the critical situation resulting from
the economic difficulties experienced by that country;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize financial, technical and economic assistance from the international community, particularly from the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations within the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to give favourable consideration at its thirteenth
session, as a matter of priority, to the question of
the inclusion of the Comoros in the list of least developed countries and to submit its conclusions to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session;

4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations
of the United Nations system to grant to the Comoros,
in view of that country's difficult economic situation,
the same benefits as those enjoyed by the least developed among the developing countries;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
the matter under review and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
this matter under review and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
24 November 1976
6 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10),
part one, sect. A.

Assistance to the Comoros

31/43.

Assistance to Mozambique

The General Assembly,
Recalling the resolutions of the Security Council on
the question of Southern Rhodesia, in particular resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 1966, in which the
1 Ibid.
