A /77/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

93rd plenary meeting

Monday, 24 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ray (Nepal),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable Development
Draft resolution (A/77/L.80)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Tourism, Culture and the Arts of Trinidad
and Tobago to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.80.
Mr. Mitchell (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
distinct honour to introduce to the Assembly draft
resolution A/77/L.80, entitled “World Steelpan Day”.
The story of the steelpan is one of resilience and
sustainability. Indeed, I am immensely proud to share
with the Assembly that through the innate creativity
and resourcefulness of our people, the evolution of the
steelpan took flight from humble beginnings in an urban
working-class community called Laventille, located
just east of the capital city of Port of Spain, where it
rapidly gained widespread appeal and acceptance.
For the people of our nation, Trinidad and
Tobago, the steelpan represents more, much more than
musical versatility. In fact, it is emblematic of artistic
excellence, community empowerment, endurance,
self-determination, community, culture, heritage
and identity and, not least of all, national pride. Not
surprisingly, the rhythmic tones and dance-enticing
energy of steelpan music saw it adopted and replicated

throughout the Caribbean, making it a common offering
at tourist resorts and even at most remote getaways in
the Caribbean.
The steelpan emerged in response to the
suppression of the use of other musical instruments
and its conceptualization began from the recycling of
discarded materials, such as milk cans, garbage-can
covers and oil drums by underprivileged AfroTrinbagonian youth for use in the annual carnival
parades in the early 1900s. As the musical complexity of
the carnival parades evolved, larger 55-gallon oil drums
were used to replace the earlier metallic objects and
smaller drums. Those larger oil drums allowed for more
musical notes and more complex melodies, making the
steelpan the only acoustic musical instrument invented
in the twentieth century.
Following naturally, was the rise of the steelband,
which is an orchestra comprising the tenor pan, the
double tenors and double seconds, the double and treble
guitars and treble cellos, and the tenor, six, nine and
twelve basses, essentially a family of steelpans, being
played by a group of musicians called pannists.
The steelpan industry is far-reaching and heavily
dependent on the integration of a variety of sectors, such
as tourism, culture, trade and education. Therefore, the
manufacturing of the steelpan worldwide is a means of
economic impetus, requiring both skilled and unskilled
labour in its production.
In 1999, the Government established the Trinidad
and Tobago National Steel Orchestra and later, in 2007,
upgraded that organization to form the National Steel

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21804 (E)

*2321804*

A/77/PV.93

Symphony Orchestra. The National Steel Symphony
Orchestra was designed to raise the benchmark for
professional steelpan presentation and serves to test and
establish the viability of Trinidad and Tobago’s very
own genesis pan, also known as the g-pan, which was
developed in 2006 by the University of the West Indies,
in collaboration with the Office of the Prime Minister.
The g-pan is made from durable high-grade steel
sheets, and its creation is the result of the integration of
the arts, science, technology and engineering into the
manufacturing of steelpans.
Pan Trinbago is the premiere representative
body for steelbands in Trinidad and Tobago and is
responsible for the organization of the annual steelband
competition, known as Panorama. As the mother of all
steelband festivals, Panorama is the ultimate steelband
competition, usually featuring as many as 200 junior
and senior steelbands competing for the coveted title
of national champions. Made up of both local and
international steelpan players, Panorama is one of the
predominant events during Carnival in Trinidad and
Tobago, which is considered the greatest show on Earth.
Owing to their unique participatory nature, steelbands
have gained prominence in more than 40 States in
almost every corner of the globe, with steelband
competitions similar to Panorama now occurring in
many countries across North America, Europe and, of
course, the Caribbean.
I might add that some universities in Europe,
Canada and the United States have academic
programmes dedicated solely to steelpan music. In the
province of Ontario, Canada, the steelpan has long been
used as a teaching aid in the country’s multiculturalism
programmes, which support the integration of
Caribbean and other immigrant youth into the Canadian
school system and into the wider community, helping to
build tolerance and understanding among and between
communities. The steelpan allows for considerable
tonal versatility and is used equally effectively to play
local cultural compositions of soca, calypso, rapso,
reggae and jazz, as well as more complex compositions,
such as classical music in the genre of Bach, Beethoven,
Mozart and other composers. Such renditions have
brought adoring audiences to their feet, as much in the
local steelpan yards or “panyards”, as they are called in
Trinidad and Tobago, as at some of the most prestigious
concert halls the world over, including Carnegie Hall,
Madison Square Garden, the Royal Albert Hall, the
Kennedy Center and other venues.
2/15

24/07/2023

We cannot deny that music and, by extension,
musical instruments have had a positive impact on our
lives and livelihoods. In 2019, Port of Spain, the capital
city of Trinidad and Tobago, was designated a UNESCO
Creative City of Music for its creativity through the
steelpan as a strategic component for sustainable urban
development. In that context, it is irrefutable that the
steelpan meaningfully contributes towards the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), specifically with regard to
SDG 3 on maintaining good health and promoting wellbeing; SDG 4 on providing educational opportunities,
particularly for those children and youth that may not
be academically inclined; SDG 5 on promoting gender
equality; and SDG 11 on fostering sustainability
within and among communities. I would also like to
underscore that the steelpan has the potential to create
an enabling and sustainable environment for rural and
small communities through income generation for small
businesses involved in the industry, thereby, positively
impacting their overall socioeconomic development.
The melodious sounds of the steelpan are a true
reflection of Trinidad and Tobago’s dynamic culture,
history and traditions and, in a sense, encapsulate its
national aspirations for robust innovation and product
development that is world class. However, given its
potential and contribution to sustainable development,
it is anticipated that, should the General Assembly give
its assent to the proclamation of 11 August as World
Steelpan Day, there will be an accompanying increase
in its advocacy and the use of the steelpan worldwide.
We have now arrived at this pivotal point in the journey
of the steelpan, and we hope that the international
community can envision the positive impact of the
musical instrument in the context of sustainable
development, as we do. The ubiquitous nature of the
steelpan, its versatility and its ability to cross over
several musical genres, but most importantly, its proven
ability to bring people together and to build intercultural
understanding, is a testament to the fact that there are
no limitations to confine the trajectory envisioned for
the steelpan.
I would like to take this opportunity to salute and
pay tribute to the entire pan fraternity, including those
who are no longer with us, who have paved the way
for global recognition of the steelpan. We are therefore
eager to present this evening, right here at the United
Nations, the national instrument of Trinidad and
Tobago — our symbol of excellence and a medium of
23-21804

24/07/2023

A/77/PV.93

expression for our people, which has now achieved the
prominence that the pioneers and creators of the steelpan
have toiled for since the early twentieth century. In that
regard, I would like to express the deepest appreciation
of the people and the Government of the Republic of
Trinidad and Tobago for the enthusiasm shown and the
invaluable support provided by Member States. I would
like to especially recognize the Member States that
have joined in co-sponsoring the draft resolution.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.80?

I would like to share with Member States that the
late Dennis Franklyn Williams, a prolific composer
and calypsonian from Trinidad and Tobago, who was
known in the calypso world by his sobriquet Merchant,
lamented in his popular calypso “Pan in danger”, that
the steelpan was in danger. I have every reason to
believe that were Merchant alive today, he would be
confident that, with the adoption of this draft resolution,
the steelpan will continue to rise to its zenith.

Agenda item 124 (continued)

On that note, musically speaking, Trinidad and
Tobago kindly requests the support of all Member
States for the draft resolution, which will recognize
11 August, annually, as World Steelpan Day.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.80.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.80, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, China, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Djibouti, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovenia, Thailand, Türkiye, Tuvalu, the United Arab
Emirates and Zambia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.80 entitled
“World Steelpan Day”.

Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/316).

A/77/L.80

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 18.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/77/451/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. I would
like to remind members that, in accordance with
decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee. I
further remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by representatives
from their seats. Before we begin to take action on
the recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision
entitled “Revitalization of the work of the Second
Committee”. The Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 77/538 B).

23-218043/15

A/77/PV.93

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded the stage of its consideration of
agenda item 124.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of agenda item 68 at its 55th plenary meeting, on
16 December 2022. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 68.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution A/77/L.81
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of Spain to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.81.
Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour for me to present on behalf of Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, Germany, the Philippines, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom and my own country, Spain, draft
resolution A/77/L.81, entitled “International Day of
Care and Support”, for consideration by the General
Assembly. The text is the result of consultations that
benefited from broad participation, and it reflects
the vast majority of the contributions proposed in the
negotiation process.
We thank all States that actively participated
in the negotiations for their constructive attitude
and cooperation in arriving at the text that we are
considering today. We would also like to thank the
United Nations system, in particular UN-Women, the
International Labour Organization and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their support during the drafting and negotiation of
the draft resolution.
We enormously appreciate the co-sponsorship of
the 35 Member States, representing all the regional
4/15

24/07/2023

groups, and encourage all those that have not yet done
so to join us in co-sponsoring of the draft resolution.
The importance of the care economy is such in our
societies that the International Labour Organization
states that, if the value of care were valued based on a
minimum wage per hour, it would reach 9 per cent of
the global gross domestic product.
With this draft resolution, which proclaims
29 October the International Day for Care and Support,
we would like to highlight the importance of the care
economy, promoting decent work for care workers
and ensuring that they are represented and that they
benefit from social dialogue and collective bargaining.
Collaboration among all stakeholders involved to
ensure compliance with this draft resolution, including
the United Nations system and all civil society
organizations, will be key to ensure that care and support
systems, as a fundamental pillar of the protection and
well-being of States, will be comprehensive, inclusive
and grounded in human rights.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.81.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.81 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Greece, Honduras, Iceland. Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Türkiye, Ukraine, Uruguay and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/77/L.81, entitled
“International Day of Care and Support”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.81?
23-21804

24/07/2023

Draft resolution A/77/L.81 was adopted
(resolution 77/317).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
Agendas items 28, 58 and 114 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/77/720)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/77/756, A/77/756/Corr.1)
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Croatia for the superb work done
as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We greatly appreciate the time taken to share Croatia’s
experience and insights to make significant progress in
strengthening the Commission’s role, particularly its
bridging, advisory and convening role.
There has been enough evidence over the past few
years to show that the Peacebuilding Commission has
fostered a more inclusive and effective multilateralism
by promoting and supporting multidisciplinary solutions
that cut across current silos and help reshape United
Nations responses to the multidimensional nature of
new threats. In particular, the Commission has made a
remarkable effort to deliver on its promise by supporting
national and regional peacebuilding priorities.
In that context, I would like to focus my intervention
on the following as a framework for our future agenda
of the PBC:
First, in order to sustain the significant role of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, more
needs to be done to address the most critical and
pressing challenges it faces, namely, financing. We
remain hopeful that our consultations will translate our
commitment into concrete actions towards realizing
adequate, predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding. I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the need for concerted efforts to overcome

A/77/PV.93

the challenges facing the Peacebuilding Fund which
is critical to strengthening the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
Second, it is important to strengthen the
interdependence
between
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding activities in a way that contributes
to addressing the root causes of armed conflicts and
strengthens the peace, security and development
systems. In that context, there is a need to support the
efforts of States in building their national institutions
and capabilities in a way that prevents them from
slipping back into conflicts and implements their
priorities in a way that guarantees security and stability
for the sustainability of development.
Third, the instability caused in recent years by
rising inequalities, wars, conflicts and pandemics has
made it clear that the focus should be on prevention and
proactive approaches, taking into account the provisions
of Chapter VI related to negotiation, mediation and
conciliation, as well as the emphasis on prevention
and peacebuilding.
Fourth, we reaffirm the centrality of peacebuilding
efforts to the work of the United Nations throughout
the peace continuum. In order for peacebuilding to
succeed, it is crucial to destigmatize prevention and
make it a sovereignty enhancer by ensuring national
ownership. It is therefore important that the PBC put
national actors front and centre in prevention efforts
and rally international support behind national
peacebuilding priorities.
Fifth, all phases of the mandates of peace operations
should include broader and adequately resourced
peacebuilding components and contain guidelines to
encourage timely transitions. With its broad peacebuilding
mandate, the PBC is extremely well positioned to advise
the Security Council during the formation, review and
drawdown of peace operations’ mandates.
Sixth, it is important that more be done to strengthen
the PBC’s cooperation with the Security Council and
that avenues for strengthening its cooperation with
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council be explored. In strengthening coordination
with the Economic and Social Council, there is a
need to explore innovative partnership modalities
that incentivize international financial institutions to
scale up financing and operational collaboration for
peacebuilding and development efforts, particularly
with international financial institutions and multilateral

23-218045/15

A/77/PV.93

development banks focusing more on fragility and
transition contexts.
Seventh, it is important to enhance the role of
women and young people in peacebuilding and postconflict contexts. The empowerment of women and the
inclusion of youth in various areas must be translated
into executive policies to overcome economic, social
and security challenges.
I would like to conclude by affirming that Egypt
remains fully committed to supporting the Commission
in its efforts to accomplish the goals of our Committee
and to ensuring that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture’s engagement in support of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace will continue to receive the
requisite attention.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the President for convening this meeting.
We take note of the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (A/77/720), the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/77/756) and the
reports of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Lasting
peace
requires
an
international
environment based on respect for multilateralism and
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as respect for
friendly relations and cooperation among States. In that
context, we proudly recall the contribution of the Latin
American and Caribbean region in proclaiming itself a
zone of peace, and we reaffirm Cuba’s commitment to
that monumental proclamation. What is required is the
eradication of the root causes of conflicts, especially
the social and economic development problems
affecting our nations — particularly the countries of
the global South — as a consequence of the current
unjust international order. The full implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
creation of capacities in developing countries and their
access to technologies under equal conditions and
without discrimination, as well as the fulfilment of
official development assistance commitments, without
preconditions, would help to address those issues.
Peacebuilding activities should be carried out from
the early stages of peacekeeping operations in order
to help countries emerging from conflict develop and
strengthen their national strategies for sustainable
development. National Governments have the primary
responsibility for implementing strategies for building
6/15

24/07/2023

and sustaining peace. The role of the United Nations is
to assist them in those efforts, as requested and within
the framework of the functions and mandates given to
United Nations bodies. That role must be performed
in accordance with the Charter of the Organization,
in full compliance with international law, and based
on the consent of the receiving State and respect for
national ownership and priorities. Also necessary is
total respect for the sovereign equality of States, the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, the
political independence of countries, the principle
of non-interference in their internal affairs and the
rejection of the threat or use of force. That is the
only way we can objectively and impartially support
peacebuilding and sustain peace.
We join the call for increased funding for United
Nations peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities.
Decisions are required to ensure adequate, predictable
and continued funding for those activities. At the same
time, those activities should not divert or affect the
resources allocated to development.
Mr. Murugasu (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to pay tribute to Croatia’s remarkable
work at the helm of the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as that of Germany and Bangladesh. I also
commend the Chairs of the country configurations on
their personal commitment.
I would like to emphasize three points.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission must focus
its efforts on specific geographical situations. Last
year, the Commission was able to support a greater
number of geographical situations. It has brought
Member States into interactive dialogue with civil
society, regional organizations and the private sector.
The Peacebuilding Commission’s strength lies in its
convening power. France supports the Commission’s
work in transitional and post-conflict contexts. The
Commission must also support preparations for the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations by mobilizing
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and all
partners, development partners in particular. Its support
for the transition of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be especially vital.
Secondly, the operational contribution of the
Peacebuilding Commission must be decoupled,
especially with regard to the General Assembly and
the Security Council. In 2022, the Commission made
23-21804

24/07/2023

several recommendations to the Security Council,
and France is particularly pleased that the Central
African Republic country configuration made
recommendations to the Council ahead of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Force in the Central African
Republic. With regard to the Security Council, the
Commission must continue to produce complementary,
targeted and operational recommendations that respect
the mandates of the two bodies. Doing so before the
renewal of peacekeeping operations mandates and in
anticipation of dialogue with the Security Council
penholders is essential. All those avenues must be
explored as part of the discussions on the New Agenda
for Peace, to which the Peacebuilding Commission
must actively contribute.
Thirdly, lasting peace must be based on sustained
and predictable financing. The Peacebuilding Fund has
proven its ability to catalyse financing to support an
integrated United Nations response and to work with all
actors on the ground. To that end, sustained financing
for peacebuilding must be ensured. France reiterates
its support for the possibility of putting in place
arrangements for sustained financing. Once again,
France will continue to support the Peacebuilding
Fund this year in the amount of €5.5 million. The Fund
must continue its efforts with international financial
institutions in a coordinated manner, but also by fully
mobilizing the private sector.
Mrs. Gui Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) during its sixteenth session, the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador Muhammad
Muhith, for his briefing on the PBC’s work and progress
achieved over the past year. China will continue to
give its full support to the Chair of the PBC during its
seventeenth session, the Permanent Representative of
Croatia, Ambassador Šimonović, and his work. China
commends the PBC for its accomplishments over the
past year and also takes note of the many challenges the
Commission faces in its efforts.
I would like to make a few points.
It is important to allow the countries concerned to
take ownership and, at the same time, to support them
in exploring a development path that is well suited
to their national conditions, to provide constructive
assistance based on their actual needs and priorities,
and to improve the relevance and effectiveness of

A/77/PV.93

peacebuilding programmes. It is up to the countries
concerned to determine whether peacebuilding is
effective or not. In that regard, engagement with the
countries concerned should be enhanced, and their
opinions and ideas should be taken on board in a
timely manner.
Development must remain the top priority, as it is
the master key to solving all problems. The most critical
challenge for post-conflict countries is to grow their
economy and improve people’s livelihoods. Resources
should therefore be prioritized for eradicating poverty,
protecting people’s livelihoods and improving access
to education and public health, among other things.
Peacebuilding efforts should synergize with the
efforts of regional and international organizations and
international financial institutions. Greater investments
should be made in the development field in order to
help post-conflict countries out of the vicious cycle of
falling back into turmoil due to poverty and to deliver
a peace dividend to the people. Developed countries
need to earnestly fulfil their commitments on official
development assistance and climate financing and
make up for historical gaps.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission
should play a constructive advisory role. As a body
that is jointly mandated by the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the PBC has the advantage of
balancing politics, security and development. In the
past year, the PBC has provided advice to the Council
17 times, and its engagement with the Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council has also been further
strengthened. We welcome that. We expect the PBC
to make full use of its own advantages and — on the
basis of adhering to the ownership of the countries
concerned and promoting partnerships and by further
strengthening engagement with the three United
Nations organs I just mentioned — put forward more
valuable and practical advice and recommendations.
China highly values peacebuilding and has always
been a staunch supporter of conflict-affected and
post-conflict countries in their nation-building and
development efforts through multilateral and bilateral
channels. The Belt and Road Initiative and the Global
Development Initiative that we put forward have
injected strong impetus into common development
efforts. China has made multiple financial donations
to the Peacebuilding Fund and has provided funding
support to many peacebuilding projects through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund.

23-218047/15

A/77/PV.93

As we speak, discussions on peacebuilding
financing issues are under way in the Fifth Committee
and agreement has yet to be reached among the parties
on assessed contributions, monitoring and oversight
and other issues. China will continue to participate
constructively in those discussions and expects all
parties to reach a consensus on those issues. We will
also continue to support the cause of peacebuilding
through practical actions and contribute to achieving
lasting peace.
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres (Brazil): I thank
the President for convening today’s meeting. I also
thank Ambassador Muhammad Muhith of Bangladesh
for his comprehensive overview of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2022 and for his
country’s commitment and leadership in presiding over
the PBC. I also thank Ambassador Ivan Šimonović and
his country, Croatia, for their support and leadership in
the Peacebuilding Commission in the first half of 2023
and their contribution to bringing the collaboration
between the PBC and the General Assembly to the
top of our agenda. They can count on the Brazilian
delegation’s continued cooperation on those matters.
The presentation of the Commission’s 2022 annual
report (A/77/720) has provided clear examples of the
significant contributions the PBC can make by playing
its advisory, bridging and convening roles. The PBC
is well suited to work as a platform to promote greater
coordination among the relevant partners of a particular
country at risk of lapsing or relapsing into conflict,
for example. It can mobilize regional organizations
and international financial institutions and stimulate
South-South and triangular cooperation arrangements
to support national peacebuilding initiatives. The
Commission can also support the implementation of
peacebuilding efforts through peacekeeping operations.
It helps to mobilize political support to promote
reconciliation, the women and peace and security
agenda, institution-building and other nationally
defined peacebuilding priorities. However, the PBC
could do more. For instance, the relations between the
Commission and the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly remain
yet to be fully explored. That matter has a priority status
for most PBC members, which is why the relationship
between the PBC and other bodies was included in its
2023 programme of work.
In that regard, I want to raise the issue of
communications and take advantage of this opportunity
8/15

24/07/2023

to reach out to the broader United Nations membership.
Today’s debate provides a good occasion to once again
propose the suggestion for the holding of a seminar
wherein current or former PBC and Peacebuilding
Fund-supported countries could share their experiences
with new potential partners, as a long-due measure of
clarification to countries that may still be hesitating to
seek PBC support out of a lack of understanding of the
Commission’s role. The General Assembly is by far the
best venue to address such misunderstandings, which
continue to hinder the outreach of the PBC. I trust the
Commission and the countries under its consideration
can offer valuable input on that topic.
Since today’s debate also encompasses the work
of the Peacebuilding Fund, I would like to assure the
Assembly of my delegation’s continued and constructive
engagement with other Fifth Committee members
aimed at the implementation of resolution 76/305 on
financing for peacebuilding, adopted on 8 September
2022. We have made some progress in addressing the
issues related thereto and trust that common ground
can be found on the remaining ones.
Ms. Baños Müller (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador appreciates the convening of
today’s plenary debate, which is taking place in a
context of enormous obstacles that stand in the way of
making peacebuilding and peacekeeping a reality for
millions of people affected by violence and conflict.
In those circumstances, El Salvador reiterates that
placing prevention at the centre of the United Nations
efforts and investing politically and financially in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping are urgent and
essential to alleviate human suffering and to build just
and inclusive peaceful societies.
Allow me to refer to the important work carried
out by the Peacebuilding Commission, as outlined
in the report on its sixteenth session (A/77/720). We
commend Bangladesh and Croatia’s leadership of the
Commission and thank their respective representatives
for their excellent briefings.
El Salvador commends the role played by the
Commission in its advisory, bridging and convening
functions in support of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts in 14 region- and country-specific contexts
and on a number of relevant cross-cutting issues. The
general trend of increased activity and outputs of the
Peacebuilding Commission throughout 2022 clearly
demonstrates the recognition of its relevant role within
23-21804

24/07/2023

the United Nations. As the Assembly has recognized
on numerous occasions, in order for peacebuilding to
be effective, it is necessary to strengthen the synergies
within our Organization.
In that regard, El Salvador recognizes the
important role of the Commission, which in 2022
advised the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council on more than 20
occasions. Promoting coherence throughout the United
Nations system is also crucial for enhancing the impact
of peacebuilding initiatives. In that connection, we
believe that the Commission’s work has played a role in
improving the coordination of a wide range of United
Nations entities in the field and at Headquarters, and it
also continues to be a key instrument for humanitarian,
development and peace actors.
El Salvador believes that the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women is key in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace initiatives. That is
why my country commends the inclusion of the gender
dimension and the prospects for and priorities of the
women who work in the Commission’s peacebuilding
activities in specific countries and regions and on specific
issues. Furthermore, we encourage the Commission
to continue to advocate for its role as adviser to other
intergovernmental organizations to support the crucial
role of youth and youth organizations in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and in institutionalizing the youth,
peace and security agenda globally.
With regard to the future of the Peacebuilding
Commission, El Salvador believes that it is necessary
to ensure that its composition is diverse and that all
regional groups are duly represented in its overall
composition. We also believe that it is essential that
the Commission remain a relevant platform bringing
together experiences and good practices from global
peacebuilding initiatives. El Salvador recalls that,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1645 (2005),
which established the Commission in 2005, the
contributions of countries that have experienced postconflict recovery are crucial.
Concerning its working methods, my country
appreciates the recommendations made to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of the Commission. In
particular, we agree on the importance of increasing
its visibility by developing a communications
strategy, in consultation with the Department of
Global Communications.

A/77/PV.93

Owing to relevance of the Commission’s activities,
it is necessary to consider allocating additional
resources to ensure that it can meet the increasing
demand for cooperation with countries and regions.
El Salvador therefore fully supports the strengthening
of the Commission so that it can continue to carry out
its functions.
With respect to the future and its commitment to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, my country hopes
to contribute to the Commission’s important efforts.
That is why we submitted our candidature for elections
that will take place at the General Assembly at its
eightieth session.
The Peacebuilding Fund has continued to play a
relevant role in El Salvador’s efforts in sustaining peace,
making significant contributions to strengthening
national institutions, establishing public policies
for peacebuilding, transitional justice and providing
opportunities for decent work and social reintegration,
among other things. Furthermore, the Fund has
contributed to fostering inclusion by empowering
women and youth through initiatives to strengthen their
participation in decision-making processes, violence
prevention, social coexistence and the broadening of
civic space in El Salvador. The Fund has also supported
key cross-border initiatives to address issues of human
mobility, while facilitating the peaceful and sustainable
integration of migrants and host communities.
We appreciate the work of the Office of the Resident
Coordinator and of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in promoting initiatives that benefit our
country. We reaffirm our commitment to continuing
to ensure that those initiatives translate into tangible
improvements in the quality of life of the men and
women of El Salvador.
El Salvador takes this opportunity to express once
again its deep concern about the persistent challenges
in ensuring adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding for peacebuilding. My country is of the view
that the unanimous adoption of the first resolution of
the General Assembly on financing for peacebuilding
(resolution 76/305) was a milestone in Member States’
commitment to decisively addressing those challenges.
However, debates on the matter in the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
have been delayed time and again in many sessions. As
my country has said in the Commission, progress on the
resolution is a matter of political will. The lack of that

23-218049/15

A/77/PV.93

key component in reaching agreements has undermined
the adoption of a resolution that we believe is key to
expanding the impact of the Peacebuilding Fund. El
Salvador firmly believes that ensuring predictability
for the Fund would guarantee important sustainable
contributions and increase the range of benefits for
peacebuilding in various countries and regions.
My country reiterates that given the difficulties
in reaching an agreement that would enable us to
adopt the draft resolution in question, it is necessary
to turn our gaze towards the proposals that lie behind
the exchanges and are essential to them. That involves
looking at opportunities in the initial budget of the
Secretary-General so that contributions are calculated
based on half being applied according to the agreed
pro rata rates set for the regular budget, while the
other half is applied according to pro rata rates set for
peacekeeping operations.
Moreover, we believe that the outcome of
discussions will also be key in the eventual update of
the Secretary-General’s strategy for the Fund, which
is valid until 2024. The update should provide for its
revitalization with the use of resources mobilized from
those new contributions. My country reiterates its firm
commitment to continuing those conversations and
further strengthening our national efforts in actions
already under way within the context of the Fund.
In conclusion, El Salvador reaffirms its willingness
to continue contributing to strengthening the role of the
Organization to establish just and lasting peace.
Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund
(A/77/756).
At the outset, I must underscore that the
Peacebuilding Fund is an important instrument that
deserves to be strengthened. Indeed, the key projects
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund can make an effective
contribution to preventing crises in many regions of
the world.
In the specific case of my country, Mali, I would
like to commend the work carried out by the Fund.
Since 2019, Mali has benefited from its valuable support
through the funding of some 38 projects, including
several cross-border initiatives with neighbouring
countries. Those relevant projects cover issues, such as
conflict prevention and conflict management, inclusive
10/15

24/07/2023

governance, the empowerment of young people and
women and the negative effects of climate change.
The projects also allow for improved access for
women and young people to formal and traditional
justice mechanisms, while building the resilience of
those exposed to the risk of radicalization because of
the pernicious or regressive mindset and actions of
terrorist groups. As members know, since 2012, terrorist
groups have been exploiting people’s vulnerabilities
and potential conflict situations in our countries,
including poverty, which remains a breeding ground
for manipulation and terrorist propaganda.
As part of our national strategy to combat the
scourge of terrorism, the Government of Mali has
taken various measures, which, fortunately, have begun
to reap positive results on the ground. I welcome the
positive cooperation with the Peacebuilding Fund,
which supports the Malian authorities in their tireless
efforts to restore peace and stability in my country. In
so doing, over time and through actions and results
on the ground, including in the area of quick-impact
projects, the Peacebuilding Fund has proved its
usefulness across the board. That is why the delegation
of Mali fully supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation concerning financing the Fund with
assessed contributions in addition to voluntary funding.
Similarly, in the context of the ongoing withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the Government of Mali
stands ready to continue its cooperation with the Fund
to build on what has already been achieved.
Lastly, Mali calls for greater financial support for
the Peacebuilding Fund so that, in turn, it can support
peace initiatives around the world.
Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): I thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this important
debate on the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund, which are essential to supporting
conflict-affected countries such as South Sudan. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support and other
colleagues for their insightful remarks.
South Sudan is currently at a critical point in its
peace process, as it strives to implement the 2018
Revitalized Peace Agreement and address the root
causes and drivers of conflicts. Despite the challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
23-21804

24/07/2023

economic crisis and climate change, South Sudan has
made notable progress towards peace and stability. Some
achievements include the formation of the National
Unity Government, the establishment of the transitional
justice mechanism, the reform of the security sector, the
return and the reintegration of displaced populations,
local-level social unity improvement and preparations
for the general elections to be held in 2024.
Despite the progress made, significant challenges
remain. They include intercommunal tensions, limited
socioeconomic opportunities leading to frustration
among the youth, climate change and environmental
devastation affecting essential resources. In order to
address those challenges, South Sudan has identified
priorities, such as promoting inclusive governance
and participation, strengthening public financial
management reforms, enhancing disaster risk reduction
strategies and building capacities for conflict prevention
and early warning systems.
South Sudan requires more support and assistance
in the areas of mediation, capacity-building, financial
resources and political support and advocacy. We
appreciate the contributions from the international
community and the Peacebuilding Fund and appeal for
more predictable and sustainable financing, aligned
with national priorities and plans. We value the political
support of the United Nations and its partners and call
for more inclusive and participatory approaches to
peacebuilding, involving all segments of society, as
peacebuilding is a continuous process.
The value of peacebuilding is difficult to quantify,
but some ways to assess its impact include aligning with
national strategies and peace agreement provisions,
the timeliness and inclusiveness of projects and
contributions to peacebuilding at various levels. The
evaluation of peacebuilding’s impact faces challenges
and limitations, hence the need for multiple sources of
evidence and analysis designed for the unique needs of
South Sudan.
In conclusion, South Sudan is committed to
peacebuilding and welcomes collaboration with the
United Nations and partners. We appreciate the support
and solidarity in that shared goal.
Ms. Agaronova (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening today’s event. We are grateful
to the previous and current Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Bangladesh and Croatia, for their

A/77/PV.93

comprehensive briefings (see A/77/PV.92) and energetic
work in guiding its work.
We would like to acknowledge the expansion of the
geographical scope of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the past year, with the recent countries
of Timor-Leste and South Sudan and the Central Asian
region expressing their willingness to cooperate with
the Commission. The number of States willing to share
their experiences and seek recommendations from the
Commission has continued to increase this year. We
see that as a sign that international assistance aimed at
strengthening the capacity of States in accordance with
their self-defined priorities at the national level will
not go unnoticed. We also believe that it is important
to encourage the participation of post-conflict
countries, which are the main beneficiaries of the
Commission’s activities, and States cooperating with
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) at the Peacebuilding
Commission’s meetings.
A comprehensive and impartial approach that takes
into account country-specific and regional factors,
thorough analysis and the search for specific solutions to
meet national priorities is the surest way to successfully
achieve peacebuilding goals. We are convinced that such
working methods are more effective than expanding the
scope of thematic contexts to include generic issues,
such as climate change, health care, gender equality and
human rights, which are often already the subject of
discussion in other United Nations specialized forums.
We believe that the strength of the United Nations
system lies in the principle of the division of labour
among its main bodies, whereby all carry out their own
specific tasks without encroaching upon one another’s
mandates. Any ambiguity in their roles will otherwise
result only in the duplication of work and reduce the
overall effectiveness of the Organization.
We would like to note the PBC’s major potential
and willingness to fully coordinate efforts with the
international financial institutions. We hope that
finding ways to involve them in such cooperation will
be possible.
One of the key topics for 2022 was financing for
peacebuilding. A separate high-level meeting of the
General Assembly was devoted to that issue, and the
Commission prepared recommendations to that end. As
a result, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 76/305. As we consider the modalities for
replenishing financial resources for the Peacebuilding

23-2180411/15

A/77/PV.93

Fund from the United Nations budget, we must also
address the issue of how Member States define the
mandates for those resources to be used and the oversight
of their expenditure. We would like to point out that
we have always viewed the PBF as an instrument that
depends on voluntary contributions. It is precisely that
way of replenishing the Fund that has made it a flexible
mechanism enabling it to respond swiftly to any issue.
Despite various challenges, the past year was very
busy for the Peacebuilding Fund. A large share of its
resources was dedicated to promoting the participation
of women and young people in peacebuilding, but it
is encouraging that many projects were also aimed
at supporting national reconciliation, preventing and
resolving conflicts and promoting political dialogue
with the participation of all segments of the population.
In that regard, we would like to once again emphasize
the importance of strengthening cooperation between
the PBC and the PBF and linking their agendas, which
would contribute to enabling the Fund to increase
its focus on national priorities and the root causes of
conflicts in the countries on the agendas of both bodies
and would significantly increase the long-term results
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping work on the ground.
It is important to underscore that respect for the
sovereignty of the host country and the alignment
of assistance with its priorities remain at the core of
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well
as all peacebuilding and sustaining peace processes.
Experience has shown that international assistance in
peacebuilding is most effective precisely when it is
based on the principle of national ownership, whereby
the Government takes into account the needs of society
and identifies and implements the most urgently
needed peacebuilding strategies. As it is designed
to link efforts to maintain peace and security with
efforts to assist in reconstruction and development,
the PBC is a unique forum in which participants in
the peacebuilding process exchange views. As a result
of such discussions, the Commission is then able to
convey to the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council information on
the peacebuilding priorities of Governments, the views
and expectations of civil society and the assessments of
representatives of the United Nations system and other
national and international actors. We are convinced
that the Commission’s assistance, based on decisions
made by consensus among its members, could allow us
12/15

24/07/2023

to take further balanced positions and garner support
and respect at the international level.
Mr. Dibba (Gambia): I am delighted to make these
remarks at this very important annual joint debate of the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). At the outset, allow me to express my gratitude
to His Excellency Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President of
the General Assembly, and His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their commitment to this annual debate. I also thank in
particular Ms. Elizabeth Spehar, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support.
The Gambia is thankful for the excellent and
very informative Peacebuilding Commission report
(A/77/720) and the Secretary-General’s report (A/77/756)
on the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). Every year this joint
debate provides Gambia a unique opportunity to share
the successes and challenges of the partnership we have
been forging and fostering between the Government of
the Gambia, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund since 2017.
The Government of the Gambia is grateful for that
partnership, which continues to provide support and
guidance with a view to sustaining the gains we have
worked so hard to achieve. The continued partnership
with the Peacebuilding Commission has made it
possible for the Gambia to learn useful lessons that
have resulted into success stories worthy of sharing.
The critical political awareness and support that the
platform of the Commission continues to provide
is the oxygen that sustained our transitional justice
process to its completion and the implementation of
its recommendations.
The Government of the Gambia owes a debt of
unforgettable gratitude to the Commission for serving
as a tool, providing the Government the right platform
to raise political awareness and seek the much-needed
support to consolidate the peace gains to enjoy the
democratic dividend that our people are currently
enjoying and deserve.
The hope and aspiration of the people we serve to
sustain peace are renewed each time periodic briefings
by senior Government officials to the Peacebuilding
Commission are reported in the national news.
We therefore do not take our engagement with the
Commission lightly, for every opportunity to engage
with it provides stability and hope for our people.
23-21804

24/07/2023

The Peacebuilding Fund has been instrumental
as a catalyst to the sustained peace we enjoy today in
the Gambia. The Gambia has undergone a peaceful
democratic transition involving legal institutional
reforms, including to the justice and security sectors
and the civil service, as well as a significant opening
of the public space. The Peacebuilding Fund was one
of the earliest patrons of our transition, providing
essential early financing to address the most pressing
transition needs, including laying the foundation for
transitional justice and providing technical support to
the presidency to guide policy formulation coherence
within the Government. Following a formal request
by the Government in 2018, the Secretary-General
declared the country eligible for receiving PBF funding
through the Peacebuilding Recovery Facility until
the end of 2023. It therefore gives me great pleasure
to provide an overview of PBF support in the Gambia
since 2017.
The PBF has invested in a total of 16 projects,
including transitional justice processes, with dedicated
support to the establishment and the work of the
highly touted Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission. The completion of this national project
involved every Gambian, both locally and internationally.
The PBF’s ongoing assistance in the post-Commission
phase, which includes raising awareness about the
recommendations, supporting their implementation by
a range of stakeholders and monitoring progress by the
National Human Rights Commission, which was also
established and operationalized with the support of
the PBF. Women and youth empowerment, especially
in the area of political participation and hate-speech
prevention is another key focus area over the past five
years, thanks to the support provided by the PBF.
In addition to the above-mentioned tangible projects
to sustain peace in the Gambia, the PBF’s commitment
to sustaining peace in the Gambia saw four recently
approved projects, all geared towards supporting
the implementation of several forward-looking
recommendations of the Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission, such as the implementation
of a peace and reconciliation commission, hate-speech
prevention and social cohesion in conflict-prone rural
areas. PBF support is already providing the expertise
of the International Center for Transitional Justice,
aimed at enabling youth to actively participate in
the post-Commission process, notably by leading
intergenerational dialogue, both at the community

A/77/PV.93

level and with duty bearers, in order to ensure proper
awareness-raising on the recommendations of the
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission, in
addition to facilitating the localized implementation of
some of the recommendations.
In conclusion, the Gambia appreciates the
PBF’s recognition of the need for women’s political
participation through the provision of concrete support
with a view to improving several enabling conditions
for strengthening women’s political participation, such
as advancing legal frameworks related to the quota
system, capacity-building of candidates, as well as
advocacy work at the community level with influential
figures in order to increase the number of both elected
and nominated women leaders in local governance
structures and district tribunals. These will server
to level the playing field for the inclusive democratic
participation that we have long yearned for.
Mr. Bakary (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank the
President for convening this meeting, which gives us the
opportunity to share with the Assembly our experience
with the Peacebuilding Fund. My statement will
focus on facts that will enable us to better appreciate
the relevance of the Peacebuilding Fund in conflictaffected or post-conflict countries.
Our experience with the Fund began in 2012
through the High Authority for the Consolidation of
Peace, a Government institution tasked with stabilizing
conflict zones and restoring social cohesion. Our
collaboration began in 2012, and our first project was
financed in 2013. Four priority pillars were defined for
our 2021-2025 cooperation programme — preventing
and managing local conflicts; accessing natural
resources; bolstering the resilience of communities in
the face of the risk of violent extremism; and enhancing
community peace and security in border zones and
strengthening strategic partnerships for the analysis,
programming and coordination of peacebuilding actors.
Good collaboration between the High Authority and
the Peacebuilding Fund has facilitated and continues to
facilitate the commitment and alignment of resources
with community needs and supports the Government’s
efforts to restore social cohesion. Our current
cooperation portfolio consists of 13 projects, including
three cross-border projects in the amount of $30 million
and four projects in the amount of $8 million, which are
now in the process of being approved.
I will turn now to some of our achievements.

23-2180413/15

A/77/PV.93

In terms of empowering young people, who initially
had no livelihoods nor financial or material resources
and were therefore exposed to all kinds of illicit
activities, as well as to the phenomena of migration
and recruitment by terrorist groups, they have found
themselves able, thanks to the Fund’s activities, to
promote small businesses or receive training in which
they have acquired professional skills. Communication
campaigns are being conducted in civic spaces that
have become meeting places for young people in order
to bring about positive changes in behaviour and lasting
peace in the communities in which they are active.
Intergenerational dialogues are also being held in those
spaces. Young people, together with the facilitators,
identify issues to be discussed according to their needs
and exchange views with the elders and authorities
concerned in order to find appropriate solutions to their
concerns. More than 500 young people, 38 per cent
of whom are girls, are being supervised and coached
by 105 tutors on peace and security issues, as well
as on a range of other issues of primary concern to
young people. Former terrorist fighters have been
rehabilitated and reintegrated across 18 communities.
That experience is now being replicated throughout
the country.
On the prevention and management of conflicts
linked to natural resources, more than 10,800 members,
including 6,030 women and girls, are working in close
collaboration with community radio stations to broadcast
messages of peace and social cohesion in villages.
More than 600 women have been trained in a variety
of areas, including mediation, conflict prevention and
management and the culture of peace. They play a key
role in mediating and managing conflicts, particularly
between farmers and herders. A regional platform
has also been established for the prevention and
management of conflicts relating to access to and the
management of natural resources, which has enabled
a consensual agreement to be reached on a period for
freeing up fields, and considerably reduced conflicts
between farmers and herders.
With regard to migrants, more than 200 members
of the community — almost 50 per cent of whom
were women and girls — took part in socioeconomic
and cultural activities to promote cohesion between
migrants and host communities and to provide relevant
skills and opportunities, with a particular focus on
young people. Those actions have not only contributed
to a significant reduction in conflicts between migrants
14/15

24/07/2023

and host populations but have also enabled genuine
intermingling between them.
Finally, on community security in border areas,
mobile court hearings have allowed more than 500,000
civil status documents to be issued in conflict zones at
the time of the most recent elections, enabling people to
register and participate in the elections.
In conclusion, for the Niger, the Peacebuilding Fund
is a useful financial instrument for the Government, as
it is operational in the fields of both conflict prevention
and management.
Mr. Heartney (United States of America): The
United States extends its thanks to Secretary-General
Guterres for prioritizing peacebuilding within the
United Nations system, including in Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) and as an initiative as part of the
New Agenda for Peace. I also thank the Chair and
Vice-Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission for all
of their hard work in this critical area.
United Nations peacebuilding work supports
the enhanced alignment of humanitarian, peace and
developmental efforts to bolster complementarity and
increase the impact of donor funding. We look forward
to further strengthening United Nations peacebuilding
efforts, including as part of the New Agenda for Peace
and the related Summit of the Future. The Peacebuilding
Commission can play an important role in advancing
the outcomes of these key initiatives.
Over the past year, we have welcomed the
Commission’s growing scope and work. From expanding
its country- and region-wide lens and convening
more thematic engagements to fulfilling its critical
advisory roles in the Security Council and other United
Nations organs, we value the critical contributions
that the Commission is making to prevent conflict
and sustain peace. The Commission’s attention to
institution-building, transitional justice and the rule of
law, electoral processes, displacement, climate change,
socioeconomic development and partnerships for
peacebuilding creates opportunities to reflect on how
we can best support the core elements of lasting peace.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/77/756). The
United States supports using assessed funding for
peacebuilding, and we look forward to actively
engaging in the Fifth Committee in the fall to bridge
23-21804

24/07/2023

differences now that peacebuilding funding can be
assessed and administered.
In addition, I want to affirm that the United States
will also work closely with the United Nations as a
strategic partner over the next decade as we implement
the United States strategy to prevent conflict and
promote stability. We look forward to coordinating
with local, national and regional partners to promote
inclusive and sustainable peace, including through
diplomacy and development. Our efforts under this
strategy align with the priority windows identified by
the Peacebuilding Fund, particularly the importance of
regional approaches and fostering inclusion.

A/77/PV.93

In conclusion, the United States looks forward to
continuing its support for United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. We would especially like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support and her
team for its steady management of both the Commission
and the Fund, which makes all the work possible.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the joint debate on these items.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
28, 58 and 114?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

23-2180415/15
