74,

General AHembly-Tweaty-eeeond Sea■ioa

butions ; sums so advanced ·shall be reimbursed as soon
as receipts from contributions are available for the
purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 2364 (XXII) of 19
December 1967 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses ; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed $150,()(X),
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $150,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions ;
( d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, such sums as may be required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period
of insurance extends beyond the end of the financial
year in which payment is made; the Secretary-General
shall make provision in the budget estimates of each
year, during the life of the related policies, to cover
the charges applicable to each such year ;
( e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances
shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the
Tax Equalization Fund ;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove
inadeq_uate to meet the purposes normally related to
the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
authorized to utilize, in 1968, cash from special funds
and accounts in his custody, under the conditions
approved in General Assembly resolution 1341 (XIII)
of 13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans authorized by the Assembly.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2366 (XXIl). Emoluments of the members of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having Gonsidered the report by the SecretaryGenera188 and the report thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 87
Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1968, the
emoluments of the members of the International Court
of Justice shall bi:! as follows :
(US dollors)

President:
Annual salary . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .
Special allowance ............ .
Vice-President:
Annual salary . . . . ............ .
Allowance of $45 for every day on
which he acts as President, up
to an annual maximum of ....

30,000
7,200
30,000
4,500

88 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twnty-second.
SessiOfl, A.Mtxes, agenda item 74, document A/C.5/1113.
17 Ibid., document A/6861.

(US dollMs)

Other members:
Annual salary

30,000

Ad hoe judges referred to in Article 31 of the
Statute of the Court:
Fee of $54 for each day on which ad hoe judges
exercise their functions, plus, as appropriate,
a daily subsistence allowance of $28.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2367 (XXIl). Amendments to the Pemlon
Scheme llegulations for members of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral88 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,89

I
Resolves that the Pension Scheme Regulations for
members of the International Court of Justice, contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution
1562 (XV) of 18 December 1960, as amended by
General Assembly resolution 1925 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, shall be amended as follows:
ARTICLE III

(WidO'Ws pensicn)
Replace "one-third" by "one-half" wherever the term
appears in article III. The revised text will then read
as follows:
"1. Upon the death of a married member, his
widow shall be entitled to a widow's pension amounting to one-half of the pension which he would have
received had he become entitled to a disability pension at the time of his death, provided that the
widow's pension shall not be less than one-sixth of
the annual salary.
"2. Upon the death of a married former member
who was in receipt of a disability pension, his widow,
provided she was his wife at the date his service
ended, shall be entitled to a widow's pension amountting to one-half of the pension which her husband
was receiving, provided that the. widow's pension
shall not be less than one-sixth of the annual salary.
"3. Upon the death of a married former member
who was entitled to a retirement pension, his widow,
provided she was his wife at the date his service
ended, shall be entitled to a widow's pension calculated as follows:
"(a) If the former member had not begun, at the
date of his death, to receive his retirement pension,
the widow's pension shall amount to one-half of the
pension which would have been payable to him under
article I, paragraph 3, had he commenced to receive
such pension on the date of his death, provided that
the widow's pension shall not be less than onetwelfth of the annual salary;
" ( b) If the former member had begun to receive
his retirement pension, under article I, paragraph 3,
88 Ibid.,

document A/C.5/1113.

su Ibid., document A/6861.

Re1olntion1 adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

before he reached the age of sixty-five, the widow's
pension shall amount to one-half of the amount of
such pension, but shall not be less than one-twelfth
of the annual salary ;
" ( c) If the former member had reached the age of
sixty-five when he began to receive his retirement
pension, the widow's pension shall amount to one-half
of his retirement pension, but shall not be less than
one-sixth of the annual salary.
"4. A widow's pension shall cease on her remarriage."

7S

(US dollars)
(a) The President of the International

Narcotics Control Board . . .

2,500

(b) The Vice-Presidents . . . .
1,500
(c) Other members . . . .
1,000
( d) These payments shall, in accordance with the

decision of the General Assembly at its twelfth
session, be payable in the form of an annual
lump sum for any year during which the recipients attend the meetings of the Board.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

ARTICLE VIII

(Application and effective date)

Replace the present· text by the following :
"1. The present Regulations shall be applicable
as from 1 January 1968 to all who are members of
the Court on or after that date and to their eligible
beneficiaries.
"2. Former members of the Court who left office
prior to 1 January 1968, or their eligible beneficiaries,
shall continue to have their entitlements governed
by the Regulations approved in General Assembly
resolution 1562 (XV) or 1925 (XVIII), as the case
may be, except that the revised provisions of article
III and the consequential changes under article IV
shall be applicable as from 1 January 1968 to all
relevant entitlements regardless of the date on which
the said entitlements first became payable."

II
Desirous of protecting former members of the International Court of Justice and their eligible beneficiaries
from the rise in the cost of living that has occurred
since their pensions were first awarded,
Decides that, as from 1 January 1968, and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in
the Pension Scheme Regulations for members of the
International Court of Justice, pensions awarded prior
to 1 January 1964 and pensions awarded between 1
January 1964 and 31 December 1967, adjusted in
accordance with the revised provisions cited in article
VIII, paragraph 2, shall be raised by 33 per cent and
16 per cent respectively.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2368 (XXII). Payment of honoraria to members
of the International Narcoties Control
Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the reports of the Fifth Committee'0 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions0 on the question of the
payment of honoraria to officers and other members of
the International Narcotics Control Board ;
2. Decides to pay honoraria to the members of the
International Narcotics Control Board on the following
basis:

'° JIM., document A/C.5/1123.
,1 Ibid., document A/6878.

2369 (XXIl). Reorganization of the top echelon
in the United Nations Secretariatz amend•
ments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations
The_ General Assembly
1. Takes note of the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral for the reorganization of the top echelon in the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Decides that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended with effect from 1 January
1968 as follows :
(a) Replace the present text of regulation 1. 10 in
article I ( Duties, obligations and privileges) by the
following text :
"Regulation 1.10: The oath or declaration shall
be made orally by the Secretary-General, by UnderSecretaries-General and by Assistant SecretariesGeneral at a public meeting of the General Assembly
and by all other members of the Secretariat before
the Secretary-General or his authorized deputy" ;
( b) Replace the present text of paragraph (a) of
regulation 3.4 in article III ( Salaries and related allowances) by the following text :
"Regulation 3.4: (a) Staff members whose salary
rates are set forth in paragraphs 1 and 4 of annex I
to these Regulations shall be entitled to receive dependency allowances as follows :
" ( i) At $400 per year for a dependent wife or
dependent husband and $300 per year for
each dependent child ; or
" (ii) Where there is no dependent spouse, a single
annual allowance of $200 for either a dependent parent, a dependent brother or a
dependent sister" ;
( c) Replace the present text of the first sentence of
paragraph (a) of regulation 4.5 in article IV (Appointment and promotion) by the following text :
"Regulation 4.5: (a) Appointments of UnderSecretaries-General and of Assistant SecretariesGeneral shall normally be for a period of five years,
subject to prolongation or renewal";
(d) Replace the present text of paragraphs 1 and 2
of annex I by the following text :
"SALARY AND ALLOWANCES--UNDER-SECRETARIESGENERAL AND ASSISTANT SECRETARIES--GENERAL

"Annex I, paragraph 1
"An Under-Secretary-General shall receive a salary
of $US 33,500 per year and an Assistant SecretaryGeneral shall receive a salary of $US 30,000 per year
