United Nations

A/RES/67/254

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 June 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 130

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 12 April 2013
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/677/Add.1)]

67/254. Special subjects relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2012–2013
The General Assembly,
I
Information and communications technology: report of the Board of Auditors
on the handling of information and communications technology affairs
in the United Nations Secretariat
Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, its resolutions
62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 63/269 of 7 April 2009,
64/243 of 24 December 2009, section II of its resolution 65/259 of 24 December
2010 and its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011,
Having considered the report of the Board of Auditors on the handling of
information and communications technology affairs in the Secretariat 1 and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Board contained in its report, 2 as well as the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 3
Having also considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on information
and communications technology governance in United Nations system organizations, 4
as well as the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon, 5
Stressing the need to harness the potential of information and communications
technology to support the work of the United Nations in the areas of peace and
security, development, human rights and international law,
_______________
1

A/67/651.
A/67/651/Add.1.
3
A/67/770.
4
A/67/119.
5
A/67/119/Add.1.
2

12-49384

*1249384*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

1.
Takes note of the report of the Board of Auditors on the handling of
information and communications technology affairs in the Secretariat1 and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Board contained in its report;2
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;3
3.
Approves the conclusions and recommendations of the Board contained
in its report;
4.
Recalls paragraph 28 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
commends the Board for the continued high quality of its work, and welcomes the
recommendations issued by the Board to address the root causes and systemic
weaknesses hindering progress in the implementation of major business
transformation projects and management reform in the Organization;
Also recalls paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
5.
requests the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations of the Board as a
matter of priority;
Underlines the importance of information and communications
6.
technology in meeting the growing demands of the Organization as it becomes
increasingly reliant on its information and communications technology infrastructure;
Also underlines the importance of information and communications
7.
technology in strengthening oversight and accountability and in increasing the
availability of accurate and timely information to support decision-making;
Acknowledges that the lack of effective governance and leadership in the
8.
area of information and communications technology has resulted in a high level of
duplication and fragmentation of the information and communications technology
functions in the Secretariat;
Recalls paragraph 69 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
9.
stresses the need for improved oversight for the more timely detection of serious
issues in the implementation of major projects and initiatives such as information
and communications technology;
10. Notes that the post of Chief Information Technology Officer has been
vacant since 2012, and requests the Secretary-General to accelerate the filling of the
position without further delay in order to ensure the effective direction, planning
and management of information and communications technology activities;
11. Recalls paragraphs 42, 70 and 71 of the report of the Advisory
Committee and its suggestion of a sequential approach to the formulation of a new
information and communications technology strategy, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session a progress
report on the measures taken to address the priorities identified by the Board in its
report, in particular with regard to the implementation of the Umoja enterprise
resource planning project and information technology security;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to propose a revised information and
communications technology strategy, including lessons learned, by no later than the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, bearing in mind that the purpose of
information and communications technology is to support the work of the
Organization;

2/12

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

A/RES/67/254

13. Stresses that the revised information and communications technology
strategy should be based on a thorough analysis of the business environment and its
requirements and be aligned with the service delivery model of the Organization,
including ongoing and upcoming business transformation initiatives;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in the revised information and
communications technology strategy, a comprehensive performance management
framework based on well-defined concepts and effective mechanisms and tools for
monitoring, evaluating and measuring the results and impact of the activities
implemented; the lessons learned from the problems encountered in the
implementation of the current information and communications technology strategy;
and a detailed, workable implementation plan, as well as a fully justified costbenefit analysis;
15. Regrets the recent insufficient collaboration among the Umoja project
team, the Office of Information and Communications Technology and other
information and communications technology units of the United Nations Secretariat;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to identify and put into place the
measures required to ensure the successful implementation of all of the phases of
Umoja and to ensure that the Office of Information and Communications
Technology and other relevant departments, offices and units are able to support the
enterprise resource planning system autonomously in the post-implementation phase
in order to increase productivity and cost-effectiveness in service delivery;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to proceed with the implementation
of his action plan to strengthen information security as a matter of priority, to ensure
the adoption, without further delay, of the information security policy directive and
associated policy documents in a manner that assures accountability at all levels of
the Organization and to take prompt remedial action to address any hindrances that
may arise to the effective implementation of the action plan or the promulgation and
enforcement of information security policies throughout the Secretariat;
18. Invites the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015, an update on the status of
implementation of the actions taken to address information security issues,
including measures taken to guard against any threats of cyber attack;
19. Recalls paragraphs 53 and 55 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the
existing software applications and to plan for the necessary migration and
decommissioning of systems to enable a smooth transition to Umoja;
II
Organizational resilience management system:
emergency management framework
Recalling section II of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010 and section I of
its resolution 66/247 of 24 December 2011, as well as its decision 67/552 of
24 December 2012,

3/12

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the organizational
resilience management system, including the emergency management framework, 6
and the related report of the Advisory Committee, 7
Having also considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on business
continuity in the United Nations system, 8 as well as the note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination thereon, 9
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;6

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee,7 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Approves the organizational resilience management system approach as
the emergency management framework;
4.
Recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and, while
noting that the Secretary-General is not requesting additional financial resources for
the implementation of the organizational resilience management system, requests
him to provide a detailed accounting of the full cost of the initiative in the context
of the next progress report;
Emphasizes the importance of the organizational resilience management
5.
system in managing operational risks to the United Nations under an all-hazards
approach;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at the
6.
first part of its resumed sixty-eighth session, a progress report on the implementation
of the organizational resilience management system, including information on the
steps taken to expand the system to include the specialized agencies, funds and
programmes;
Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the report
7.
mentioned in paragraph 6 above, to present comprehensive information on the work
of the after-action review on storm Sandy, including the action taken to address the
shortcomings identified;
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant rules,
8.
regulations and resolutions are adhered to in the implementation of all aspects of the
organizational resilience management system;
III
Feasibility study on the United Nations Headquarters
accommodation needs 2014–2034
Recalling its resolution 60/282 of 30 June 2006 and section A of its decision
66/556 B of 9 April 2012,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the feasibility study
on the United Nations Headquarters accommodation needs 2014–2034 10 and on the
_______________
6

A/67/266.
A/67/608.
8
A/67/83.
9
A/67/83/Add.1.
10
A/66/349.
7

4/12

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

A/RES/67/254

expanded feasibility study on the United Nations Headquarters accommodation
needs 2014–2034, 11 as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee, 12, 13
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;10,11

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Committee,12,13 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Stresses the important role of the host countries in their support for
United Nations Headquarters and offices away from Headquarters;
4.
Underlines the historical and architectural significance of the United
Nations complex in New York and of the original design of the Board of Design
Consultants, without prejudice to the prerogative of the General Assembly to
consider all options with regard to the long-term accommodation of United Nations
Headquarters;
Notes that the information provided by the Secretary-General in the
5.
expanded study on United Nations Headquarters accommodation needs 2014–2034
is not precise and comprehensive enough to facilitate decision-making by the
General Assembly and does not give equal treatment to all options considered;
Recalls paragraphs 52 and 53 of the report of the Advisory Committee,13
6.
and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, as early as
possible in the sixty-eighth session, a new report on United Nations Headquarters
long-term accommodation needs with comprehensive information on all viable
options, including additional options not adequately considered or developed in the
report of the Secretary-General, ensuring that all options are treated equally, while
seeking the most favourable terms for the Organization in all cases;
Stresses that the new report mentioned in paragraph 6 above shall also
7.
cover factors including, but not limited to, total population requirements with and
without the staff of the participating funds and programmes and the financial
consequences of the cost-sharing arrangements with them, the impact of the
implementation of flexible work arrangements on the capacity of the buildings at the
Headquarters compound, the sequencing of United Nations construction projects,
the findings from the ongoing review of flexible workspace arrangements and
strategies in the Secretariat, the potential impact on the architectural integrity of the
United Nations compound, an analysis of the preferable ratio of owned versus
leased space for the Organization and possible developments in the planning for the
future of the Organization;
Recalls paragraph 48 of the report of the Advisory Committee,13 and
8.
emphasizes that the term “comprehensive information” in paragraph 6 above means
information including, but not limited to, short- and long-term financing alternatives
for each option, the direct and indirect costs of each option, the net present value of
each option, along with the residual value of new construction where relevant, and
the legal and other risks associated with each option;
Notes the initiative of the Secretariat to commission a report on the
9.
application of flexible workspace strategies and working arrangements in the

_______________
11

A/67/720.
A/66/7/Add.3.
13
A/67/788.
12

5/12

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

Organization, and looks forward to receiving the report of the Secretary-General at
the main part of its sixty-eighth session;
10. Decides that the pursuit of negotiations by the Secretary-General with the
intention of keeping option 3 viable shall in no way represent a commitment by the
Organization and shall be without prejudice to any decision by the General
Assembly, nor shall it entail legal or financial liability for the United Nations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly on a
regular basis information on the progress of the efforts referred to in the paragraphs
above;
12. Recalls paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee13 as well
as section VII, paragraph 4, of resolution 66/247, and reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to ensure that major capital expenditure projects are not
implemented simultaneously in order to prevent the need to finance them at the
same time;
13. Also recalls paragraph 59 of the report of the Advisory Committee13 and
section V, paragraph 29, of resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General for comprehensive information and options, as well
as financial implications, on the renovation of the South Annex Building and the
Dag Hammarskjöld Library Building, in the context of the eleventh annual report on
the capital master plan, ensuring that the commemorative value of the Dag
Hammarskjöld Library is respected;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure effective oversight and audit
coverage in all phases of the project, including the ongoing feasibility study;
IV
Revised estimates relating to section 34 of the programme budget
for the biennium 2012–2013 for remediation work
in the aftermath of storm Sandy
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates
relating to section 34 of the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013 for
remediation work in the aftermath of storm Sandy 14 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee, 15
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;14

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee,15 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Acknowledges the efforts made by the Secretariat during and in the
aftermath of storm Sandy, with a view to quickly restoring normal working
conditions for the staff and resuming the critical business of the Organization;
Recognizes the difficulties in communication faced by Member States
4.
and staff during and in the aftermath of storm Sandy, and in that regard requests the
Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly, at the first part of its resumed
sixty-eighth session, comprehensive information on the work of the after-action
review of storm Sandy, including the actions taken to address the shortcomings
_______________
14
15

6/12

A/67/748.
A/67/789.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

A/RES/67/254

identified, in order to reduce the vulnerability of United Nations Headquarters to
future flooding events and other emergencies;
5.
Affirms, as illustrated by the aftermath of storm Sandy, the importance of
accountability and oversight in the effective functioning of the emergency
management framework, particularly in the areas of governance, communication,
physical infrastructure and business continuity;
Welcomes the delineation of responsibilities among the various heads of
6.
departments and senior managers for the implementation of prevention, mitigation
and recovery measures;
Notes that without the timely implementation of the Secretary-General’s
7.
proposed remediation measures, the Organization runs the risk of significant,
uninsurable financial exposure;
Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in the
8.
biennium 2012–2013 of up to 6,063,400 United States dollars under section 34,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the programme
budget, for mitigation work, encourages all efforts to minimize costs within this
section, in the most efficient manner, and requests the Secretary-General to report
thereon in the context of the second performance report on the programme budget
for the biennium 2012–2013;
Recalls paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
9.
requests the Secretary-General to implement the remediation and mitigation work at
United Nations Headquarters in an immediate manner in order to avoid delays in the
implementation of the capital master plan and enable its completion within the
approved schedule;
10. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in the
biennium 2012–2013 of up to 131,421,300 dollars to enable remediation work, and
requests him to report thereon in the context of the second performance report on
the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013, to be submitted at the main part
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
11. Notes that the cost of the remediation work is expected to be reimbursed
under the terms of the insurance policies held by the United Nations up to an
estimated amount of 137,851,400 dollars;
12. Also notes the intention of the Secretary-General to submit the vast
majority of the insurance claims relating to storm Sandy by 31 December 2013, and
in that regard requests him to ensure the timely submission of all insurance claims
in order to expedite reimbursement and to report on the status of reimbursement and
the insurance claims process in the context of the second performance report on the
programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013;
13. Further notes that the total estimated amount of non-recoverable
damages may amount to a maximum of 11,069,900 dollars, and requests the
Secretary-General, subject to the outcome of the insurance recovery efforts and the
Secretariat’s prioritization of equipment and other content whose replacement is
essential, to make efforts to minimize expenditure by seeking efficiencies during the
course of the remediation work and to report on those efforts in the context of the
second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013;
14. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee and
authorizes the Secretary-General to use the Working Capital Fund as a cash flow
bridging mechanism to cover payments pending the receipt of insurance settlements,
7/12

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

and requests the Secretary-General to closely monitor the cash position of the
Organization so as to ensure that other operations are not put at risk and to report
thereon to the General Assembly on a regular basis within existing mechanisms;
15. Decides to establish a multi-year special account for insurance recovery
and expenditure relating to the damage in the aftermath of storm Sandy until
31 December 2015, with the possibility of extension beyond that date depending on
the status of the insurance claims process;
16. Recalls section X, paragraph 9, of its resolution 67/246, and requests the
Secretary-General to include information on the cash balance of the special account
in the forthcoming monthly informational update on the cash position of the
Organization;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to closely monitor the insurance market,
including all means of risk mitigation, with a view to securing adequate coverage at
a reasonable cost for all United Nations installations exposed to natural hazards and
emergencies and to report thereon at the first part of its resumed sixty-eighth
session;
V
Safety and security management system for the United Nations
Recalling section XIV of resolution 65/259, resolution 66/246, section A of
decision 66/556 B and decision 67/552,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the conclusions of
the High-level Working Group on Programme Criticality, 16 his comprehensive report
on the United Nations Department of Safety and Security 17 and his report on the use
of private security, 18 as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee, 19, 20
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;16,17,18

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Committee,19,20 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
Safety and security
3.
Reaffirms the importance of ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations staff, operations and premises;
4.
Welcomes the progress made in strengthening the security management
system for the coordination of security arrangements for the Organization;
5.
Stresses the importance of ensuring full accountability for compliance with
safety and security policies and guidelines and of monitoring managerial performance
throughout the United Nations system, and in that regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to report thereon in the context of his relevant reports;

_______________
16

A/66/680.
A/67/526.
18
A/67/539.
19
A/66/720.
20
A/67/624.
17

8/12

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

A/RES/67/254

6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen his cooperation
with host Governments in order to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel, premises and assets;
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue efforts to ensure the
7.
mainstreaming of safety and security in the implementation of mandated programmes
and activities of the United Nations system;
Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee,20 and
8.
requests the Secretary-General to provide information in that regard in the context
of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
Reiterates the principle that the United Nations Secretariat, organizations,
9.
funds and programmes share a common responsibility for the safety and security of
their staff and that funding for safety and security, based on cost-sharing
arrangements, should be clear, predictable and secure, and in that regard invites the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, to keep under review cost-sharing arrangements
with all participating entities;
Use of private security
10. Notes that the United Nations finds it necessary, as an exceptional
measure, to use armed security services from private security companies to secure
the premises and personnel of the Organization;
11. Stresses that such services should be used as a last resort to enable
United Nations activities in high-risk environments only when a United Nations
security risk assessment concludes that other alternatives, including protection by
the host country, support from the Member States concerned or internal United
Nations system resources are inadequate;
12. Also stresses the importance of ensuring that all measures necessary are
taken to avoid legal and reputational risks for the Organization in using armed
security services of private security companies;
13. Acknowledges the efforts of the Secretary-General to develop a policy to
guide the use of armed security services from private security companies, and
requests him to consider disseminating information on that policy as widely as
possible, in all six official languages of the United Nations, taking into account
relevant security considerations, to ensure the proper enforcement of the policy, and
to continue to report to the General Assembly on the use of armed security services
from private security companies;
14. Recalls section XIV, paragraph 7, of its resolution 65/259, and in that
context encourages the Secretary-General to continue to use armed security services
from private security companies as an exceptional measure and a last resort;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all appropriate
measures to ensure that, when using security and protection services from private
security companies, the selected companies operate in accordance with the national
legislation of the host country and the Charter of the United Nations and fully abide
by the relevant principles and rules of international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law;
16. Recalls paragraph 25 of the report of the Advisory Committee,20 and
acknowledges that the policy implications of the use of private security companies by
the United Nations may raise substantive and legal issues that may be of interest to
9/12

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

other Committees of the General Assembly, in addition to the Fifth Committee, and
in that regard requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the relevant
substantive bodies, to present a proposal for ensuring that such substantive and legal
issues are duly addressed by the relevant expert or intergovernmental bodies, as
appropriate, in the relevant reports to the Assembly;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide clarification on the operational
criteria for when the use of armed security services from private security companies
could be appropriate for United Nations operations at Headquarters and field
locations and to report thereon in the relevant reports to the General Assembly;
Programme criticality
18. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee,19 and
requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to submit for consideration and
approval at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, a report containing the
final conclusions of the High-level Working Group on Programme Criticality;
19. Acknowledges the programme criticality framework as an instrument to
assist managers in the field to take time-sensitive decisions to prioritize programme
activities in specific locations in response to changes in local security conditions;
20. Recalls paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee,19 and
emphasizes that the programme criticality framework shall not affect
intergovernmental oversight and accountability to the legislative bodies;
21. Also recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee,19 and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure coherence and consistency between the
proposed programme criticality framework and other related initiatives of the
Secretary-General and to report thereon in the relevant reports;
VI
Standards of accommodation for air travel
Recalling its resolution 42/214 of 21 December 1987, section IV, paragraph 14,
of its resolution 53/214 of 18 December 1998, section IV of its resolution 60/255 of
8 May 2006, section XV of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007, section II of
its resolution 63/268 of 7 April 2009 and section IV of its resolution 65/268 of 4 April
2011, as well as its decisions 57/589 of 18 June 2003 and 66/556 B,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on proposals for a
more effective and efficient utilization of resources for air travel 21 and on standards
of accommodation for air travel 22 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the comprehensive audit of all air travel activities and related practices, 23
as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee, 24, 25
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;21,22

_______________
21

A/66/676.
A/67/356.
23
A/67/695.
24
A/66/739.
25
A/67/636.
22

10/12

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

A/RES/67/254

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Committee,24,25 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Welcomes the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,23 and
encourages the Secretary-General to implement all the recommendations contained
therein and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
Looks forward to the successful roll-out of Umoja in air travel business
4.
administration of the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly, at the session immediately following the roll-out, a
comprehensive report on the effects of implementation of Umoja in travel
administration, including updated information, trends and analysis in all areas
relating to air travel in the United Nations;
Notes that the Secretary-General has not provided the information
5.
requested by the General Assembly in section IV, paragraph 13, of its resolution
65/268, and stresses the importance of the provision of accurate, complete and
comprehensible data as the basis for sound management and effective oversight of
all costs relating to air travel;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the
6.
beginning of the main part of its sixty-eighth session on the projected total
expenditure on air travel under the regular budget, by budget section, including
payments under lump-sum schemes, for the biennium 2012–2013, with
corresponding data for the bienniums 2010–2011 and 2008–2009;
Recalls paragraph 2 (e) of the annex to resolution 65/268, and requests
7.
the Secretary-General to continue to monitor industry best practices in the area of
frequent flyer miles and to report to the General Assembly on any new trend that
could be utilized to make use of frequent flyer miles to improve the administration
of travel;
Recognizes the efforts by the Secretary-General in initiating the 16-day
8.
advanced booking of tickets, requests him to make every effort to reduce shortnotice travel and to ensure that trips are booked as much in advance of the travel
date as possible, and also requests him to ensure that all managers in charge of air
travel administration, including those in the peacekeeping missions, are informed of
and comply with such provision;
Requests the Secretary-General to keep the option of full online booking
9.
under review in the context of the implementation of Umoja and to report thereon to
the General Assembly;
10. Recalls recommendation 17 contained in the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services,23 and requests the Secretary-General to strictly abide by
the rules and procedures governing the procurement process in the United Nations
system;
11. Recognizes recent efforts by the Secretary-General to use alternative
methods of procurement, which resulted in a reduction in costs in 2012, and
requests him to further explore other possible options for the procurement of air
travel services, taking into account the experiences of other organizations;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to maintain the use of preferred carrier
arrangements offering competitive rates;
13. Decides that, for official travellers below the level of Assistant SecretaryGeneral, the standard of accommodation for air travel will be business class if a
11/12

A/RES/67/254

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013

single-leg journey is 9 hours or more and will be business class for a multi-leg
journey if the combined travel time of the journey is 11 hours or more, including a
maximum of 2 hours of connection time, provided that the journey to the next
destination resumes within 12 hours;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to modify his administrative instructions
on standards of accommodation for air travel so that the duration of a journey shall
be determined based on the most economical route available, provided that the total
additional time of the whole journey does not exceed the most direct route by four
hours;
15. Decides that the Secretary-General shall, as an interim measure pending
the outcome of the review to be concluded in 2015, revise the provision for
determining the travel-related lump-sum payment to 70 per cent of the least
restrictive economy class fare, and requests the Secretary-General to include, in his
report on the standards of accommodation of air travel to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, an analysis of the impact of the
implementation of this provision and to make further proposals on modifying the
lump-sum scheme;
16. Notes the increasing frequency and costs of exceptions to the standards
of accommodation for air travel, and requests the Secretary-General to take action to
limit the use of exceptions, to conduct an analysis of the trends in the use of
exceptions and to present proposals for enhancing controls in this area no later than
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to review the use of exceptions for the
category of prominent persons and to report thereon in the context of the report
requested in paragraph 16 above;
18. Recalls paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee,24 and in
that regard requests the Secretary-General to clarify any proposals to encourage other
modes of transportation;
19.

Also recalls section IV, paragraph 4, of its resolution 65/268;

20. Decides that the changes set out in the present resolution shall not affect
the current standards of accommodation for air travel and daily subsistence
allowance of members of organs and/or subsidiary organs, committees, councils and
commissions of the United Nations.
73rd plenary meeting
12 April 2013

12/12
