S/PV.8854

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8854th meeting

Friday, 10 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason/Mr. Kelly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Cherif
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24775 (E)
*2124775*

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi, Deputy
Director of Operations, Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi,
Executive Director of the Ma’rib Girls Foundation
for Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I am honoured to have been
appointed the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Yemen, a position I started four days ago. I appreciate
the expressions of support from Yemenis and the
international community, including Security Council
members. I am also grateful to the previous Special
Envoys, who have made considerable efforts to end
the conflict.
I started working on Yemen over a decade ago.
Yemen is a country of massive potential, situated at the
gateway between Asia and Europe, between the Gulf
of Aden and Africa. Yemen’s impressive history of
commerce, cultural richness and diversity is something
I continue to admire.
However, my experience with Yemen also makes
me painfully aware of the complexities of this conflict.
Unfortunately, those complexities multiply as the
conflict drags on. I am therefore under no illusions about
the difficulty of the task handed to me by the Council.
Enabling a resumption of a peaceful, inclusive, orderly
and Yemeni-led political transition process that meets
the legitimate demands and aspirations of the Yemeni
people, as mandated by the Council, will not be easy.
There are no quick wins.
2/20

10/09/2021

The current armed conflict has continued unabated
for over six years. Civilians, including many children,
have been killed, displaced and impoverished. Civilian
infrastructure has been targeted. Armed actors
have detained, abducted and forcibly disappeared
people with impunity. Gender-based violence has
increased significantly.
The epicentre of the military confrontation has
shifted over time, with combatants taking turns on the
offensive. Since early 2020, the focus has been on Ansar
Allah’s sustained offensive on Ma’rib governorate, in
which thousands of young Yemenis have lost their lives.
Civilians, including the many internally displaced
persons who sought refuge in Ma’rib, live in constant
fear of violence and renewed displacement. The United
Nations and the international community have been
clear in its message — the offensive must stop.
In Al-Hudaydah, the city continues to experience
a noticeable decline in ceasefire violations, while
hostilities in the southern districts of the governorate
are of particular concern. The United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement continues its vital
work, including to urge the parties to come together
through joint dialogue in order to define a sustained
way forward.
The situation in the southern governorates, where
there have been regular flare-ups of violence, is also
deeply worrisome. Basic services and the economy have
deteriorated into a desperate state. The implementation
of the Riyadh agreement continues to face challenges,
and the Government is not performing its functions
from Aden. In that context, the impact of the conflict
on the diverse range of grievances and demands in the
southern governorates cannot be ignored. Peace in
Yemen is not sustainable in the long term if southern
voices do not play a part in shaping it responsibly.
The conflict in Yemen is also spilling across
borders, threatening regional security and international
waterways. I am particularly concerned about the
targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure inside
of Saudi Arabia. The fighting must stop; the violence
has to come to an end. In that regard, it is also vital
that external actors encourage de-escalation. Their
involvement should be based on supporting a Yemeniled political settlement. A peaceful and stable Yemen is
essential for the stability of the entire region.
From unrelenting violence to fuel and electricity
shortages to surging food prices, every detail of daily
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

life in Yemen is somehow tied to difficult political
questions that demand a comprehensive resolution. State
institutions have split apart, hobbling the economy and
leaving citizens and businesses to navigate dizzying
and often contradictory administrative requirements.
Economic warfare by all sides is sowing devastating
long-term consequences for the Yemeni State and its
people. Yemenis all over the country live with severe
limitations on their freedom of movement and of the
movement of essential goods due to ongoing fighting,
checkpoints and road, port and airport restrictions.
The Organization’s position remains unchanged — the
freedom of movement of people and goods in and out, as
well as throughout the country, should be guaranteed.
Roads must be opened to allow people and goods to
move in and out of Taiz. Sana’a airport needs to be open
for commercial traffic. Restrictions on the import of
fuel and goods through Al-Hudaydah port must end.
There is a continuous need for close coordination
among all members of the United Nations family, the
broader international community and the parties to the
conflict to appropriately address those issues.
By now it should be obvious that the peace process
has stalled for too long. The parties to the conflict have
not discussed a comprehensive settlement since 2016.
That has left Yemenis stuck in an indefinite state of war
with no clear way forward. It is therefore long overdue
for the parties to the conflict to engage in peaceful
dialogue with one another, under United Nations
facilitation, the terms of an overarching settlement, in
good faith and without preconditions.
The United Nations approach to ending the conflict
must be inclusive. To define the best way forward, I
intend to assess past efforts, identify what has worked
and what has not, and listen to as many Yemeni men and
women as possible. The way forward must be guided by
the aspirations of the Yemeni people.
My Office and I will do our utmost to ensure the
meaningful participation of women in all aspects of our
engagement and to integrate gender perspectives across
all issues. As we will also hear from my colleague from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the rights of Yemeni women and girls are overlooked,
if not ignored. The United Nations is obligated to strive
for a peace that not only ends the violence, but also a
sustainable peace that protects the full range of their
civil and political, as well as economic, social and
cultural rights. A peace that ensures accountability,

S/PV. 8854

good governance and State institutions that serve all
citizens equitably.
We are clearly a long way off from that today.
Nonetheless, I will spare no effort in trying to bring
together actors across conflict lines to engage Yemenis
from all political perspectives and societal components
and from all parts of the country to discuss, under
United Nations auspices, how they can find common
ground and resolve their differences without resorting
to force. I will be guided in that effort by the mandate
given to me by the Security Council through its
relevant resolutions.
We all have a shared responsibility in our different
capacities for ending the conflict in Yemen. The
beginning of my tenure should therefore be used as a
moment to reassess our respective responsibilities. The
initiatives from Yemen’s neighbours and members of
the Security Council in support of the United Nations
efforts have been appreciated and will need to be
stepped up.
My first consultations with Yemeni, regional
and international actors will soon start. I will shortly
travel to Riyadh to meet with President Hadi Mansour
and other members of the Government of Yemen.
I also look forward to meeting with the Ansar Allah
leadership and other Sana’a-based actors, as well as
other political actors throughout Yemen. And I plan
to meet with regional leaders in Riyadh, Muscat, Abu
Dhabi, Kuwait, Tehran, Cairo and elsewhere. My
Office and I stand ready to spend as much time in
Yemen and with Yemenis as possible. I will return to
the Security Council each month to reflect frankly and
openly on those discussions. And I will seek Council
members’ tangible and coordinated support to take my
mandate forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.
Ms. Mudawi: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council.
As Hans Grundberg just described, conflict is
raging across many parts of the country, especially in
Ma’rib, where fighting has again become particularly
fierce. As always, it is civilians who are paying the
highest price.

21-247753/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

During Under-Secretary-General Griffiths’s last
briefing to the Council, two and half weeks ago (see
S/PV.8840), he outlined the many ways in which the
war in Yemen is compounding people’s suffering. We
see it in the country’s crumbling economy. We see it in
the disintegration of essential services. And we see it in
the faces of the millions of men, women and children
who, despite their extraordinary resilience, are being
forced deeper into desperation.
Today I wish to speak about what the humanitarian
community is doing to mitigate some of those terrible
consequences and what more needs to be done.
As the Security Council well knows, Yemen is home
to the world’s largest humanitarian aid operation. That
is of course a distinction no country or people would
wish upon themselves, but it speaks to the commitment
of the international community to stand by the people
of Yemen in their hour of need.
Over the past few months, we have seen a surge
in donor funding. The Yemen humanitarian response
plan is now one of the best-funded appeals in the world,
having received more than $1.9 billion so far this year,
which is 50 per cent of its total requirement. That
support has enabled the United Nations and its partners
to scale up life-saving assistance across the country.
Together, we managed to prevent famine during the first
eight months of this year. Humanitarian organizations
are active in all of Yemen’s 333 districts. In June, we
provided life-saving assistance to 12.8 million people;
that is a full 3.3 million more people than we were able
to reach the month before.
Those achievements are significant, but they are
also fragile and uneven. The threat of famine is not over
in Yemen. It will require our continued efforts unless
we are ready to sacrifice the important gains we have
made and invite famine back again into the country
after we have fought so hard to keep it at bay. A lot of
this comes down to donor support. A number of sectors
remain gravely underfunded, including some that are
critical to addressing food insecurity.
Health, for example, as well as water, sanitation
and hygiene, have received only a tenth of the funding
required for this year, threatening to shut down those
vital services at a time when Yemen is grappling with
multiple disease outbreaks, including cholera, dengue
and diphtheria. A deadly third wave of the coronavirus
disease is putting the country’s population and its
fragile health-care system at further risk.
4/20

10/09/2021

Even food security and agriculture — one of the
better-funded sectors in the appeal — currently faces a
$750 million funding gap. Without additional support,
we could see cuts in that assistance as soon as in the
coming weeks.
Another sector facing critical shortages in the
humanitarian response is protection. In the first six
months of this year, protection partners were able to
reach only a fraction of people in need of protection
owing to lack of funds. This is extremely serious in a
country where protection needs are so high.
Yemen is an incredibly difficult place to live for
women and girls. Gender-based violence is rampant
across the country. Early marriage and pregnancy,
including child mothers, are commonplace. Women
and girls are often the last to eat, see a doctor or go
to school.
I want to take a moment to salute the courage
of women-led and women’s rights organizations in
Yemen. We are very fortunate to have with us today
Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi, Executive Director of Ma’rib
Girls Foundation for Development. The extraordinary
efforts of those organizations are helping to amplify the
voices of women and girls across Yemen and to create
better conditions for current and future generations.
Yemen is the world’s fourth-largest internal
displacement crisis, with numbers rising by the day
as people flee violence, as well as flooding and
other climate-related disasters in various parts of the
country, including in Ma’rib, Taiz, Ad Dali’, Lahij and
Al-Hudaydah. Many internally displaced persons find
refuge in schools, religious sites or abandoned buildings.
Others are forced to take shelter in overcrowded
settlements, where clean water, food, electricity and
other essential services are in extremely short supply.
Yemen’s protection crisis affects many other
population groups. As a result of the conflict, children
face horrific threats to their physical, emotional and
mental well-being, including being killed or maimed,
recruited into armed groups or exposed to sexual
violence. People with disabilities, refugees, migrants
and other marginalized groups are also highly
vulnerable to many of these risks. These are just a few
of the perils many civilians face on a daily basis in
Yemen. The list is, of course, much longer.
There is one additional protection risk I wish to
touch upon: landmines and explosive remnants of war.
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Since 2018, landmines, improvised explosive devices
and unexploded ordnance have killed or injured more
than 1,400 civilians in Yemen, many of them children.
In addition to causing direct and deadly harm, these
explosive weapons, which are littered across large
swathes of the country, instil terror in communities and
have a deeply negative impact on people’s livelihoods
and the wider economy. Many farms and fishing
communities in Yemen are standing idle owing to the
presence or fear of landmines and sea mines. This
represents a further hit to domestic food production and
to people’s incomes, when Yemen is already facing dire
levels of food insecurity and poverty.
I urge all parties to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by refraining
from using weapons that are by nature indiscriminate
and by taking constant care to spare civilians and
civilian objects throughout their military operations.
I also call for practical steps to be taken. Scaling
up humanitarian mine clearance and support for it,
including by letting in and expediting the passage of
demining equipment into the country, would go a long
way towards protecting civilians.
On 22 September, a high-level side event on Yemen
will take place at the margins of the high-level week
at the General Assembly. It will be co-hosted by the
European Union, Sweden and Switzerland, and it will
be a key opportunity to discuss protection challenges
and galvanize support for the country’s most vulnerable.
During the event, donors will be able to announce the
new contributions they have made since the high-level
pledging conference in early March. As I mentioned
earlier, donors have demonstrated tremendous
generosity this year. I strongly encourage them to
continue to do so by increasing their contributions to
the humanitarian response plan. Ensuring adequate
funding across all sectors is essential to protecting the
delicate gains we have made this year. This is not the
moment to slow down, unless we are ready to see record
humanitarian suffering come roaring back in Yemen.
The President: I thank Ms. Eltahir Mudawi for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Qadhi.
Ms. Al-Qadhi (spoke in Arabic): My name is
Entesar Al-Qadhi, and I represent the Ma’rib Girls
Foundation for Development, which promotes an
agenda for women and peace and security. I am very

S/PV. 8854

grateful for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council today about what is happening, especially in
Ma’rib governorate.
Much has been said about the cruelty of war, but
we have lived it on a daily basis. The continuous Houthi
aggression against Ma’rib terrorizes civilians, impedes
humanitarian assistance and leads to spread of fighting
in neighbouring governorates. Nearly 233,000 persons
have died thus far due to the continuous conflict. I
myself recently lost two of my nephews, both under the
age of 15, in a Houthi attack that targeted our area. Loss
of loved ones has become a norm for us, the people
of Ma’rib.
We are facing a humanitarian crisis in Ma’rib that
will only worsen unless there is an immediate ceasefire.
Over the past two weeks, at least 200 families from
Rahabah district fled from their homes to escape the
attacks. Three members of those families are my own
relatives. More than a quarter of Yemen’s displaced
people now live in Ma’rib, 80 per cent of whom are
women and children. I visit them regularly through
my work at the Ma’rib Girls Foundation, and I listen
to their testimonies, which make me sad. I have met
many families that have been displaced more than once,
sometimes up to five times.
Even in the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
camps families continuously risk death from drones
and ballistic missiles. A woman mourning the loss of
her son who was killed by a missile, lamented, “we left
everything, and the Houthis are still chasing us to the
tents. When will they stop?”
Beyond the threat of missiles, the conditions in
IDP camps are dire, and we lack sufficient assistance
and services. People are battered by wind, floods and
the heat of the desert, without sufficient shelter. Public
services in Ma’rib have collapsed, depriving people of
clean water, sanitation and sufficient health care.
The Al-Jufainah camp, the largest displacement
site in the country, has 12 classrooms, while it hosts
more than 7,000 students, a number that keeps growing
with the ongoing displacement. Consequently, many
children have dropped out of school.
Women and girls face very difficult conditions in
the camps, such as lack of hygiene supplies, the risk
of abuse when visiting the latrines and a dearth of
services for pregnant women. Women prefer to stay
home because of those threats.

21-247755/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

Amira, who is 8 years old, recently told me, “I
dream of a latrine that is not far away from our shelter,
where my family and I have some sense of privacy
and feel safe.” Girls whom we meet now dream only
of safety.
The Ma’rib Girls Foundation is working to address
protection issues and help women find sources of
income for their families. But our work is complicated
by limited resources and the fact that people have to
keep fleeing violence. It is impossible to expect the
humanitarian situation to improve before there is a
nationwide ceasefire. Women and girls continue to
be affected by the ongoing conflict, although they
play a critical role in the struggle for peace. They are
excluded from representation in the Government and in
decision-making processes.
Yemeni women have played a critical role in the
struggle for peace, negotiating directly with parties to
the conflict, acting as mediators, securing the release
of prisoners and keeping humanitarian corridors and
critical roads open. Yet we are not even consulted in
decision-making, which means that our prospective
contributions and concerns will continue to be ignored.
There is clearly a trend against women’s participation
in decision-making.
I will now present the humanitarian perspective.
We see that the Houthis have enshrined religious
sectarianism in the educational curriculum and are
imposing segregation between sexes in public places.
Meanwhile, for the first time in two decades, the
newly formed Government has excluded women from
positions, despite the 30 per cent quota that was agreed
upon in the National Dialogue Conference outcome.
We welcome the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen. I thank him for calling
for a ceasefire. For him to succeed, he has to work with
a wide sector of the Yemeni society, especially women.
We urge him to prioritize the interests and concerns of
all Yemenis, especially those living in the country, and
not only the parties to the conflict. He must give priority
to a comprehensive peace process, not one imposed by
regional agendas and international interests. He must
also consult regularly and transparently throughout
the entirety of the peace process with all Yemenis,
especially women and young people. He must stress the
participation of women representatives directly in all
steps, from shaping the agenda to drafting a ceasefire
agreement and engaging in negotiations.
6/20

10/09/2021

In conclusion, an immediate halt to the Houthi
attacks is an economic, humanitarian and political
necessity. Ma’rib is strategically important. It is a major
source of electricity for most of the Yemeni governorates,
and its gas production meets approximately 80 per
cent of Yemeni needs, more than half of which goes to
Houthi areas on a daily basis. Ma’rib city is also home
to more than 1 million displaced people. Is securing
petroleum products more important than ending the
bombardment against us?
I urge the Security Council, first, to take all the
measures necessary in demanding the cessation of
Houthi attacks against Ma’rib, including by the adoption
of a draft resolution on a ceasefire that neither side will
be able to take advantage of. A Ma’rib ceasefire should
pave the way for a Yemen-wide ceasefire cessation
of hostilities that would create necessary conditions
to protect civilians, especially women and girls. We
must learn from past mistakes. We need accountability
mechanisms for non-compliance with such a ceasefire.
We must also be clear that a failure to implement the
resolution would lead the Council to take decisive action.
Secondly, the Council should support an inclusive
peace process and ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all their diversity, as well
as youth and civil society groups from every political
background and every region in Yemen, on all
diplomatic tracks and stages of the peace process.
Thirdly, urge all parties to the conflict to allow full,
unimpeded, sustained and secure humanitarian access
and to facilitate the work of humanitarian organizations
to deliver aid to civilians in need.
Fourthly, call on Member States to meet the
$1.9 billion funding gap in the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Yemen and coordinate
with them to provide a long-term economic rescue
package for Yemen. That would help stabilize the
economy and strengthen the financial system to
prevent further increases in food prices and improve
living conditions.
Fifthly, the Council should call on Member States
to support women’s civil society organizations through
the provision of core, flexible and long-term funding.
I thank you, Madam President, and all the members
of the Council for giving me this opportunity to convey
my own convictions and those of the civil society
organization that I represent.
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Ms. Al-Qadhi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking all of our briefers
today. I welcome Mr. Grundberg, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen. He brings a great depth of
knowledge to the role, and we look forward to working
with him and supporting his efforts. His appointment
comes at a critical time and, as he said, is a moment to
reassess. The resumption of inclusive peace talks that
represent all of Yemeni society, including minorities
and women, is essential to ending the war. I welcome
his plans to travel throughout Yemen and the region
and listen first. That will also be an opportunity for
the Yemeni parties to demonstrate their commitment to
peace and move beyond their existing positions to meet
with him without preconditions and facilitate his travel
within Yemen.
Secondly, I would like to thank Ms. Entesar
Al-Qadhi for her poignant briefing and courage. The
bleak picture that she painted today for women and
girls in Yemen, particularly in Ma’rib, underlines
the necessity of peace. As members of the Security
Council have said repeatedly, the Houthi offensive
in Ma’rib must end. We condemn the reckless crossborder attacks by the Houthis facilitated by Iran.
They have resorted once again to launching missiles
and explosive-laden unmanned aerial vehicles. Most
worrisome is the indiscriminate nature of those actions.
On 31 August shrapnel wounded eight civilians and
damaged a commercial aircraft at Abha airport, and, on
4 September, another two civilians — children — were
wounded by more shrapnel.
Thirdly, we continue to be concerned about
the situation in the south. The Riyadh agreement,
facilitated by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, needs to be
implemented so that stability returns to the south. The
Government of Yemen and the southern groups must
work together to that end. In addition, the Southern
Transitional Council must facilitate the return of the
entire Cabinet of the Government of Yemen to Aden.
Lastly, we remain alarmed by the deteriorating
economy and increasing risk of famine. That must
remain a key priority for the United Nations-led
peace process. Last month, the Yemeni rial passed
the symbolic mark of 1,000 rial to the dollar for the
first time, making food and basic services increasingly

S/PV. 8854

unaffordable for millions of people. The Government
of Yemen must therefore implement reforms to open
up the possibility of greater financial assistance, with
support from the international community and the
relevant international financial institutions.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg, Deputy Director
Mudawi and Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi for their briefings. I
especially welcome the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen in his new role.
Recently, there has been no sign of letting up in the
Yemeni conflict, and the security situation continues
to worsen. Within the international community, there
has been a pervasive sense of dissatisfaction and
concern about the status quo in Yemen. High hopes
have therefore been placed on the Special Envoy to
play an active role. China stands ready, together with
all other Council members, to support the Special
Envoy in objectively and impartially carrying out his
work, based on his mandate, with a view to securing a
political solution to the current Yemeni crisis. In that
regard, I would like to make the following points.
First. the current priority is to achieve a cessation
of violence and hostilities without delay. The monthslong conflict in Ma’rib has further exacerbated the
confrontation among the parties, hampering efforts
towards achieving a political solution. China condemns
all forms of violence against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including the Houthis’ attack against the
Abha International Airport in Saudi Arabia. The parties
to the conflict must comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians,
especially vulnerable groups, including women and the
children. We hope that the Special Envoy will begin to
engage with the parties concerned as soon as possible
and convince them to abandon the military option and
return to negotiations to resolve their differences.
Resolving the Yemeni issue is in the common
interests of the countries of the region. China is in
favour of the Special Envoy’s visit to the countries of
the region and encourages them to continue playing
their part in facilitating peace negotiations.
Secondly, the level of humanitarian assistance
provided must be increased further. Yemen has been
gripped by a humanitarian crisis for many years, on
which Ms. Mudawi has provided detailed information.
What is most worrisome is the fact that, as fuel is
running out, some power plants in Aden have ceased to

21-247757/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

operate, depriving the population of basic services. Due
to the onslaught of the pandemic, the health sector in
the country is facing collapse. The Ministry of Health
recently announced that the country had entered into
the third wave.
We hope that the Special Envoy and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will strengthen
coordination with the parties concerned and, in the light
of the situation on the ground, deliver humanitarian
assistance to the country in a targeted manner.
China welcomes the announcement by the
International Monetary Fund of $665 million in special
drawing rights to Yemen and supports the Yemeni
Government in making good use of those funds to
stabilize the local currency and ease economic hardship.
Thirdly, it is necessary to address concrete issues
and promote a comprehensive solution in a gradual
manner. After years of conflict, there is a serious lack
of mutual trust among the parties. The Special Envoy
could start by tackling concrete issues, such as the
exchange of prisoners of war and the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, in a focused manner so as to consolidate some
visible progress as soon as possible, thereby creating
positive momentum.
On that basis, and fully taking into account the
political, security and humanitarian issues faced by the
country, the Special Envoy could then work out a feasible
solution to break the political stalemate, improve the
situation on the ground and ease the people’s suffering.
China is confident that, once the Yemeni parties
can build more political will and mutual trust, with
the United Nations deploying good offices and playing
a primary role, accompanied by the international
community offering its support, by working together
it will be possible to find a political solution to
accommodate the concerns of all the parties.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg, Ms. Eltahir Mudawi and Ms. Al-Qadhi
for their briefings.
It has been seven years since the conflict in Yemen
began. On the ground, there is no prospect of an end
to the crisis. Since the beginning of the conflict, we
have stated repeatedly that the military option will not
lead anywhere, as the reality on the ground reminds
us every day. The clashes continue, but the situation
remains deadlocked.
8/20

10/09/2021

The appointment of a new Special Envoy represents
an opportunity to relaunch the peace process, which
is currently at a stalemate. The parameters required
to end the crisis are well known: a comprehensive
ceasefire, the reopening of Sana’a airport and the
port of Al-Hudaydah and negotiations among the
various actors to reach a comprehensive and inclusive
political solution.
As a prerequisite, it is imperative that the Houthis
stop their unacceptable actions, both in the Ma’rib area
and against Saudi territory. We condemn such acts, as
well as the refusal to allow the United Nations inspection
mission access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, in the
strongest terms. The Houthis’ use of blackmail is also
unacceptable. It is essential that they allow the United
Nations inspection mission immediate access without
preconditions, otherwise they will be responsible for a
major environmental disaster.
I would also like to reiterate France’s commitment
to the territorial integrity of Yemen. Yemen must
remain unified, as its sovereignty depends on it. In that
respect, we are concerned about tensions in the south
of the country and call for the return of the Yemeni
Government to Aden. The impasse in the conflict will
lead to the fragmentation of the country, which will push
it further into the grasp of terrorism and extremism.
For seven years now, the Yemeni people have
continued to suffer the consequences of the absence
of a political solution. The status quo on the ground
has dramatic consequences for the people of Yemen,
who are paying the heaviest price for the political
stalemate. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. Nearly 70 per cent of the population is in
need of humanitarian aid, which is equal to four out of
every five children. Only half of the country’s health
infrastructure is operational.
We need to intensify efforts to address the risk
of large-scale famine and to counter the spread of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, including by accelerating
the vaccination campaign. That includes ensuring full
humanitarian access to all people in need. We call for
the immediate removal of all bureaucratic obstacles in
the country, particularly in Houthi-controlled areas.
The protection of civilians must remain an absolute
imperative. Respect for international humanitarian law
is an obligation for all. The perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
must not go unpunished. Furthermore, indiscriminate
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8854

air strikes, which do not respect the principles of
distinction, proportionality or precaution, must
be stopped.

are perpetuating the conflict and undermining our
collective efforts to facilitate a path towards peace
for Yemen.

France remains determined to support all efforts
to resume a peace process in Yemen. The new Special
Envoy can count on our full support to that end.

As our briefers detailed, millions of Yemenis
are suffering the effects of the conflict. The dire
humanitarian situation includes, as we heard, starvation,
abuse of children and women and the rampant spread of
disease, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The United States urges the international community
to contribute to the United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Yemen. As part of the United States
effort, we have provided 151,000 doses of the Johnson
& Johnson COVID-19 vaccine to Yemen. We want to
thank UNICEF and the World Health Organization for
working with the Yemeni Government to distribute
those life-saving vaccines.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank our briefers for their remarks, especially
Special Envoy Grundberg, whom I join others in
welcoming to the Security Council. The United States
delegation looks forward to working with him and
his team.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of the
conflict in Yemen, namely, the Houthi attacks, which,
are undermining peace efforts; the country’s dire
humanitarian needs; and addressing the underlying
economic drivers of the conflict. The international
consensus is clear: the violence in Yemen must stop. A
broad and inclusive political process must resume, and
we need to alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
The appointment of Special Envoy Grundberg
can help lend new momentum to those efforts, but the
parties must engage seriously with the Special Envoy
and without preconditions. The parties must choose to
lay down their arms and sit across the table from other
Yemenis and discuss what Yemen will look like after
the war.
Sadly, the Houthis continue to undermine those
efforts. On 29 August, the drone and missile attack on
Al-Anad Air Base killed at least 30 people. That strike
bore all the hallmarks of a Houthi attack. Two days
later, on 31 August, the Houthis executed yet another
drone attack against the airport in Abha, Saudi Arabia,
which wounded eight civilians.
The United States strongly condemns those
attacks, but those are only the latest attacks by a group
that claims to want peace. In 2021 alone, the Houthis
have launched more than 240 attacks into Saudi Arabia,
endangering civilians throughout the country, including
the 70,000 American citizens who reside there.
The Houthis have also continued their prolonged,
unnecessary and dangerous stalling of negotiations
with the United Nations on the assessment and repair of
the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The environmental, public
health and economic risks that are associated with the
FSO SAFER are too grave and too expansive to be
used as a political bargaining chip. Such provocations

Finally, we need to address the underlying economic
drivers that leave so many Yemenis unable to meet
their basic needs. We urge Saudi Arabia, the Yemeni
Government and the Houthis to take steps to ensure that
fuel is adequately imported and distributed throughout
Yemen at fair prices. We also want to welcome the
recent allocation by the International Monetary Fund of
$665 million in special drawing rights to Yemen, which
presents an opportunity to start reversing the decline
in Yemen’s economy. While this work is important and
it is needed, only a durable peace agreement can begin
to help reverse the dire humanitarian crisis, which is
the result of seven years of war and the erosion of the
economy and basic services.
Let me end by saying that despite the dire situation,
the United States believes that we have reason to be
hopeful. The Yemeni people want peace and an end
to the ravages of war. The Houthis and other parties
to the conflict still have the opportunity to change
their behaviour, engage seriously with Special Envoy
Grundberg and create a brighter future for Yemen. We
call on them to choose that path — the path of peace
and hope.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada
Eltahir Mudawi for their briefings. We also listened
closely to Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi.
Mr. Grundberg began work on an extremely
complex brief; we hope that he will without delay begin
working to establish a substantive dialogue among
the parties to the conflict in the interests of a rapid
de-escalation. We will actively support the efforts of

21-247759/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

the Special Envoy, taking into account our position on
the central role of the United Nations in the political
settlement process in Yemen. We are convinced that
United Nations mediation will be able to reconcile the
numerous competing players on the Yemeni landscape.
A significant role could also be played by the States
of the region, whose constructive contribution we are
always ready to support.
We can see that the faltering progress on the path to
peace has already led to a further escalation on the front
lines, including in Ma’rib, as well as an intensification
of air attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia. We call
upon all parties to show restraint and to cease hostilities
primarily to avoid casualties from among the civilian
population. As we have always said and will reiterate
once again, there is no alternative to negotiations
that take into account the interests of all Yemeni
stakeholders. For our part, we intend to continue to
encourage the Yemeni authorities and the Ansar Allah
movement to adopt a constructive approach and to show
a willingness to compromise when considering their
disagreements. The international community is united
on the Yemen file. The main goal is a comprehensive
and long-term settlement of the conflict, which is
having a negative impact on the entire region.
We remain particularly worried by the dire
socioeconomic situation in the country. We support
calls for the full lifting of the maritime, land and air
blockade of Yemen and of restrictions on the delivery
of food, medicine and other vital goods to all parts
of the country. The Yemeni people are in dire need
of humanitarian assistance that is provided on a
depoliticized and non-discriminatory basis.
We are also seriously concerned by the ongoing
attacks on civilian objects. We strongly urge
the parties to the conflict to strictly respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law and to
immediately and fully refrain from combat operations,
which result in civilian casualties and destroy
non-military infrastructure.
We are convinced of the importance of the Security
Council supporting the Special Envoy in holding a
balanced line in the interests of a rapid settlement in
Yemen. We trust that as he gets down to the nuts and
bolts of his dossier, he will without delay be able to
identify the main barriers preventing the parties from
returning to the negotiating table and chart a course
towards peace in the country. One useful aid for the
10/20

10/09/2021

Special Envoy could also be resolution 598 (1987), as
well as other initiatives, including the updated Russian
concept for collective security in the region.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to start by congratulating Mr. Hans
Grundberg on his appointment and to assure him
that he can count on Mexico’s full support. I thank
Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Al-Qadhi for their briefings, and
I welcome the presence of the delegation of Yemen here
in the Chamber.
My delegation echoes the concerns about the tragic
situation in Yemen and the ongoing violence there. As
Ms. Al-Qadhi noted, the situation in Ma’rib is terrible;
it is only one of the many fronts of the conflict, with
devastating humanitarian consequences. Mexico urges
once again the establishment of a national ceasefire and
calls on all parties to exercise maximum moderation. In
that regard, we condemn the attacks against targets in
Saudi Arabia.
Given that the political process remains at an
impasse, the mistrust between the parties continues to
further deepen the geographical and social divisions
in the country. That is why the ceasefire is essential
to move towards political and social reconciliation.
Without a national ceasefire, it will be impossible
to meet people’s most basic needs for food, housing
and security.
The progress in the political process and the
ceasefire are mutually reinforcing and complementary
processes. We hope that the appointment of the Special
Envoy will help in achieving both aims.
We urge the Houthi leadership to participate with
no preconditions and in a constructive and committed
way in the dialogue facilitated by the Special Envoy. We
also call for an inclusive, broad-based political dialogue
that is led and owned by the Yemenis themselves. In
particular, we underscore the importance of the full,
equal and significant participation of women, who have
contributed to many local initiatives.
On the economic front, regrettably, the approval
by the International Monetary Fund of special drawing
rights and the cash injections from Saudi Arabia have
not been sufficient to prevent the exchange rate from
continuing to fall, leading to inflation and decreased
purchasing power. In addition, there are restrictions on
imports of basic commodities, which is the main cause
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

of food insecurity, and the risk of famine that prevails
in the country.
Mexico calls on Ansar Allah and the Government
of Yemen to eliminate all kinds of restrictions on and
bureaucratic procedures that hamper the import of food
and essential goods and to allow for unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance.
As Ms. Mudawi noted, while the contributions
made by the international community have allowed for
the partial financing of the humanitarian response, the
armed conflict, the pandemic, the risk of famine and
heavy rains have severely impacted vulnerable groups,
leading to a significant increase in humanitarian needs.
The funding currently available will cover humanitarian
operations for only a few more months. We hope that
the financial pledges made will be duly fulfilled in a
timely manner.
We also note with deep concern that a new wave
of infections is affecting a significant portion of the
population in a country where the capacities of the
health system are already limited. We welcome the
announcement, as referenced by the representative of
the United States, of the recent donation of 150,000
vaccine doses, and we hope for the speedy arrival of
additional doses and the efficient and expeditious
deployment of the vaccination campaign.
I would like to conclude by referring once again
to the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
That vessel is not merely an environmental threat;
a spill would also affect humanitarian operations
and navigation in the area. Mexico urges the Houthi
leadership to allow its immediate inspection and repair.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I should like to start by
thanking all of our briefers today, and I join others
in congratulating Mr. Hans Grundberg on having
assumed the post of Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen. I believe that he will build upon
the important work of his predecessor and bring new
momentum to the ongoing efforts for a comprehensive
solution to the conflict in Yemen.
I also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen in our meeting today.
We join others in condemning the attacks against
Saudi Arabia and share their concerns about the recent
military escalation in a number of areas in Yemen,
especially in Ma’rib. More than 200 people from all
sides were killed in the heavy fighting over the past

S/PV. 8854

two weeks. The continued hostilities, with no end in
sight yet, will put the lives of millions of Yemeni people
at risk and undermine the peace efforts of regional
partners and the international community.
Against that backdrop, we reiterate our call for all
parties concerned, especially the Houthis, to cease all
military operations, resume dialogue and cooperate
fully with the new Special Envoy, with a view to soon
achieving substantive progress in negotiations.
The international community should redouble its
efforts to avoid further deterioration in Yemen and
help create favourable conditions for talks among
the parties concerned. In that process, it is important
that any solution ensure respect for the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen,
as well as the meaningful participation and adequate
representation of women and youth. At the same time,
the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement
should be fully implemented.
While striving for an ultimate solution, we should
continue efforts to address the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. Protracted conflicts, food
insecurity, the lack of basic services in many areas and
the coronavirus disease pandemic continue to take an
increasing toll on the country’s population. Food prices
and hunger continue to increase. Although the recent
arrival of funding has improved the work of the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Population
Fund, millions of people, including women and girls,
still lack food to get them through the day and, at the
same time, have only limited access to the essential
services, especially health care and water.
More than 2 million children cannot go to school and
are at heightened risk of child labour and other forms of
exploitation. Approximately 6.1 million women require
protection services. Therefore, additional financial
contributions are urgently needed so that critical
life-saving programmes can be scaled up and sustained
until the end of this year and beyond.
It is compulsory to provide safe and unhindered
passage for humanitarian work, including humanitarian
workers, so that aid could be delivered in a timely
manner to those in need. All parties must also comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, protect civilians, including women and children,
and implement resolution 2573 (2021), including
protecting civilian infrastructure. Furthermore, we
reiterate our call to remove import restrictions through

21-2477511/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

10/09/2021

Al-Hudaydah ports. That would help sustain the supply
of essential goods, reduce inflation and fuel shortages
and ease economic hardship for Yemen.

as Al-Qaida, to thrive and expand their networks. We
must remain acutely alert to those emerging threats and
take pre-emptive measures.

Any progress on the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue,
in that connection, will help alleviate the potential
difficulties that the Yemeni people may face. We urge
the parties concerned to work constructively with the
United Nations in that regard.

We continue to remind all Yemeni stakeholders that
the time has come for them to reconsider their hardline positions and agree to engage constructively in an
inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned process, with
the support of the United Nations, as well as regional
and international partners. We urge them, in that regard,
to engage, under the auspices of the United Nations, led
by the Office of the Special Envoy, in good faith and
without preconditions.

Let me conclude by reiterating our full support for,
and strong commitment to, efforts by the international
community, regional partners and those of the United
Nations to address the myriad issues that the Yemeni
people now face.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me join others in
congratulating and welcoming Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg. I assure him of Kenya’s support for his
efforts towards a political solution to the conflict
in Yemen.
I would also like to thank Deputy Director of
Operations in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi,
and Executive Director of the Ma’rib Girls Foundation
for Development, Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi, for their
informative briefings. We were particularly touched
by the testimony of Ms. Al-Qadhi and thank her for
her courage.
We would also like to welcome the representative
of Yemen to today’s meeting.
As we have said before, there is no military solution
to the conflict in Yemen. Indeed, the pursuit of a solution
by military means has a net loss result, with the greatest
brunt borne by the most vulnerable — children, youth,
women and the elderly, whose daily wish is for an end
to the ravaging civil war, a return to peace and, with
it, the opportunity to rebuild their lives and regain the
ability to fend for themselves.
It is deeply worrisome that, since our previous
meeting two weeks ago (see S/PV.8840), there have
been reports of an escalation of fighting in a number of
areas. Of particular concern is the renewed violence in
Ma’rib, which has claimed more than 80 lives since the
beginning of this week alone. Kenya strongly condemns
the deadly violence, including the recent drone attack
on Al-Anad Air Base, which killed at least 30 soldiers
and injured many others, further undermining the
prospects for a ceasefire. The chaos along front lines
creates the ideal conditions for terrorist groups, such
12/20

Kenya welcomes the actions of international
financial institutions and development partners to inject
much-needed foreign reserves into Yemen’s economy.
However, those measures will yield only short-lived
solutions if the armed conflict persists. It is up to the
parties to make the necessary compromises to break
the existing stalemate, agree on a working nationwide
ceasefire within an agreed time frame and intentionally
work towards a negotiated political solution that would
ultimately usher in an environment of hope for sustained
economic recovery.
The humanitarian situation remains fragile, with
the heightened risk of famine still affecting more than
20 million people. Kenya commends the efforts of the
international community to increase funding for the
humanitarian response plan. Those efforts will go a
long way in mitigating the suffering of many families
and communities in need, including those affected by
the recent flooding in parts of the country. We continue
to support calls for not only increased humanitarian
assistance, but also guarantees for humanitarian access,
in line with international humanitarian law.
With a third wave of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) unfolding Yemen, we urge the international
community to assist with an increased supply of
COVID-19 vaccines. We encourage the Yemeni
authorities to promote vaccination that addresses
misinformation and disinformation.
Kenya notes the ongoing discussions on the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. We once again call on the
authorities handling the ship to urgently engage
constructively in finding a solution and thus avoid an
environmental catastrophe.
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8854

I conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s solidarity with
the people of Yemen in their quest for sustained peace,
security and political stability.

immediately. Norway will participate in the upcoming
high-level event later this month, which will be important
in order to address the current humanitarian challenges.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to extend a very
warm welcome to Special Envoy Hans Grundberg. We
are encouraged by his statement today and stand ready
to support his work in any way possible.

Finally, there is an urgent need to focus on the
protection of civilians. The Yemeni conflict has had
a severe impact on the civilian population. We note
with concern the conclusions drawn by the Group of
Eminent Experts on Yemen in their recent report. We
would like to reiterate that all perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
violations and abuses, including conflict-related sexual
violence, must be held accountable for their crimes.
Over 24,000 people have been displaced so far this year
in Ma’rib, and children remain the most vulnerable in
this conflict.

I would like to also thank all the briefers for
their important remarks, and especially Ms. Entesar
Al-Qadhi for highlighting the need for women’s
participation in the peace process. I welcome as well
the representative of Yemen and reiterate our support to
the Yemeni Government, as expressed during the visit
of the Yemeni Foreign Minister to Norway last week.
I would like to raise four key points today.
First, there is an urgent need for military
de-escalation. We are deeply concerned that the
offensive by the Houthis in Ma’rib has intensified
for the second week, as has fighting in other areas.
Furthermore, the security situation in the south of
Yemen continues to deteriorate. We are also concerned
by the escalating cross-border attacks into Saudi
Arabia, including on Abha International Airport on
31 August. Those attacks serve to underline the clear
need for de-escalation.
Secondly, it is essential that we seize every
opportunity to move the peace process forward. The
political process between the Yemeni parties needs to
restart, and we urge them to fully cooperate without
delay. We must acknowledge that there will be no rapid
political solution and that the political process will
require the parties’ willingness to compromise.
We are encouraged by Mr. Grundberg’s commitment
to an inclusive approach that is Yemeni-owned and
-led. The full, equal and meaningful participation and
leadership of Yemeni women is their right, as well as a
prerequisite for a sustainable solution. We encourage
Mr. Grundberg to consider the recommendations from
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security in that regard.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need to reverse the
current humanitarian crisis. We would like to echo
calls for lifting the restrictions that have prevented food
and fuel from entering the port of Al-Hudaydah. We
are concerned about reports of increasing bureaucratic
impediments inside Yemen. We call on all actors
to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access

Yesterday was the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack. Yet in Yemen UNICEF reports
that 2,500 schools have been damaged, used as shelters
or occupied by armed groups. Moreover, it is estimated
that 8.1 million children need emergency education
assistance across Yemen. We would like to reiterate
that the Safe Schools Declaration and its guidelines are
key instruments for protecting schools and universities
from military use during armed conflict.
There is an urgent need for a revitalized United
Nations-led peace process in Yemen. I will therefore
conclude by repeating our support for the approach
presented by Mr. Grundberg and encourage all parties
to the conflict and all Security Council members to
cooperate with him in good faith.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing and wish him every
success in his new role. I also thank Ms. Ghada Eltahir
Mudawi and Ms. Entesar Al-Qadhi for their briefings.
My delegation is following with great concern
the continuing hostilities in the conflict in Yemen, in
particular the violent clashes around the province of
Ma’rib, the attack on 29 August against the Al-Anad
Air Base, as well as the attacks on 31 August targeting
Abha International Airport, in the southern Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.
My country condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated attacks on Saudi territory, which endanger
the lives of thousands of civilians and threaten peace
and security in the region. The trend of widening the
spectrum of violence in Yemen must end, as it will only

21-2477513/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

make the situation more complex and delay the way out
of the crisis.
We call on the Ansar Allah authorities to act
responsibly by putting an end to their deadly offensives
in Yemen and beyond its borders.
We also call on all parties to act responsibly by
putting an end to this tragedy, which has lasted too
long, and to engage constructively in a sincere dialogue,
under the leadership of the new Special Envoy, for a
comprehensive political settlement of their dispute.
We call on the international community, regional
actors and members of the Security Council that can
influence the parties to the conflict to continue to exert
the necessary pressure to revitalize the discussions
for a way out of the crisis that will allow Yemenis to
reconcile and once again move towards the rebuilding
and development of their country.
In addition to the untold number of deaths, the
main consequence of the war in Yemen remains the
severe humanitarian crisis into which the country has
been plunged in recent years. We therefore call on
donor countries, and in particular those in the region,
to be more generous and compassionate towards the
suffering people of Yemen. Improving the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen also requires the lifting of blockades
on the delivery of humanitarian aid to the country,
including through the ports of Al-Hudaydah and the
Sana’a airport.
In conclusion, the Niger reaffirms its full support
for all initiatives encouraging the resumption of
dialogue between the Yemeni parties and the return of
peace in the country.
Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We thank our briefers for their insightful remarks and
efforts to find a durable solution to the conflict in
Yemen. The work being undertaken by Ms. Al-Qadhi,
including through the Ma’rib Girls Foundation for
Development and the Women Peacemakers initiative,
is crucial to advance the safety and security of Yemen’s
youth and is indispensable to the long-term prosperity of
the country. We also extend congratulations to Special
Envoy Hans Grundberg on his recent appointment
to that position and welcome his presence with us
this morning.
We once again call for an immediate lasting ceasefire
among the parties involved in the Yemeni conflict. The
recent launch of attacks into Saudi Arabia from Houthis
14/20

10/09/2021

in Yemen only underscores the urgent necessity for all
sides to truly commit to a ceasefire. We condemn these
most recent attack, as well as indiscriminate air strikes
and shelling of civilians, as well as objects critical
to civilians, which have characterised the war in
Yemen. Even before the dust settles, we ought to have
an open and frank conversation about reconciliation
between the parties, an indispensable component of
which is accountability. Our role as a Council and as
individual Council members is to do our utmost to
facilitate the warring parties reaching a settlement and
to act responsibly when providing support to one party
or another.
The impact of the protracted conflict is evident in the
collapse of Yemeni institutions and the fragmentation
of the social fabric. The brunt of that is borne primarily
by those most vulnerable — women and children.
Hostilities and displacement threaten millions of people,
and we are all acutely aware that fighting on many
front lines across the country continues to destabilize
an already fragile situation. The overall humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, in parallel with the
economy, as many Yemenis lack the purchasing power
needed to afford food and basic necessities.
In that regard, we recognize the need for unhindered
passage of humanitarian aid, particularly against the
backdrop of a third wave of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and an active rainy season that
triggered, for the second time this year, the nationwide
flood preparedness plan, as Yemen faces the climate
crisis from a very vulnerable position.
In that context, we recall the relevant provisions
under international law to which the parties to
the conflict are legally bound. We also call on the
international community to sustain and increase its
support for the humanitarian response plan. We hope
that the humanitarian event to be organized by Sweden,
Switzerland and the European Union this month will
be seized as an opportunity for the international
community to renew its commitment to the people
of Yemen. However, we note that humanitarian aid
is merely palliative. The only viable solution to the
conflict is an inclusive Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned
and Yemeni-focused political solution that reflects
the complexities on the ground and addresses the root
causes of the conflict.
Any reference to the political process will be
incomplete without recognizing the role of women, who
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

make up a significant portion of the Yemeni population.
Women are present and active on the ground in Yemen,
including on the front lines, and were some of the first
to call for a ceasefire in Yemen to respond to COVID-19
pandemic. Women in Yemen have demonstrated their
resilience, strength and determination, and a peace
process that marginalizes this group is destined for
failure. Women must be included in all aspects of the
peace process, not only when dialogue commences.
We urge the Special Envoy to work with women’s
groups and leaders in Yemen, and for the Security
Council to continue inviting women briefers to enrich
our meetings.
Before concluding, we stress the need for concrete
progress to be made on the issue of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. Its dilapidated condition increases the risk
of a disaster, the occurrence of which has the potential
to cause irreparable damage to the environment and
the livelihoods of many in the Red Sea region. In that
context, we recognize that a lack of trust can act as a
barrier to compromise, and we encourage the parties to
undertake confidence-building measures that can open
the path to a pragmatic solution.
We reaffirm our support to Special Envoy
Grundberg and the people of Yemen and reiterate our
commitment to work constructively towards a solution
that ensures long-term peace, stability and prosperity
in Yemen.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg for his briefing and wish him every success
in his new role. I also thank Deputy Director Mudawi
and Ms. Al-Qadhi for their briefings.
Estonia is deeply concerned about increased
military activity in Yemen during recent weeks,
especially in Ma’rib, which has caused further
civilian casualties and displacement. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure have also been targeted in
Houthi attacks against Saudi Arabia, including Abha
International Airport. We urge all parties to refrain
from indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects, as
they are a violation to international humanitarian law.
We also call upon all parties to engage constructively
with the new Special Envoy and to show willingness to
compromise and agree to a sustainable ceasefire and a
resumption of an inclusive political process, with the
participation of women and youth.
Echoing the messages by Ms. Al-Qadhi, we call for
full, equal and meaningful participation by women in

S/PV. 8854

the peace efforts, as well as an increased role for women
in Yemen’s political life and humanitarian response.
We also call upon the Government of Yemen
and the Southern Transitional Council to resume the
implementation of the Riyadh agreement and to refrain
from actions that will further increase tensions in an
already volatile situation.
The fighting in Yemen must stop immediately, as
it has a devastating effect on peoples’ lives. Besides
direct impact in the form of casualties, there are also
strong interlinkages between the protracted conflict
and the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, as
well as violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
The absence of a long-term agreement between
the parties to the conflict on the import of fuel and
commercial imports through Al-Hudaydah port
contributes to the increase in food prices, and thus to
the exacerbation of food insecurity. In that context, we
welcome the upcoming pledging event, to be co-hosted
by Sweden and Switzerland, aimed at supporting the
humanitarian aid efforts in Yemen.
Due to the worsening socioeconomic conditions
caused by the conflict, children are forced into early
marriage or recruited. As recently reported by the Group
of Eminent Experts on Yemen, the parties to the conflict
have committed sexual and gender-based violence and
have engaged in enforced disappearances, arbitrary
detention and torture, in violation of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
That calls for more attention to the vulnerability of
women and children to the protection risks related to
the worsening economic and humanitarian conditions.
We repeat our call to all parties to refrain from such
violations and abuses, ensure accountability and
cooperate with the Group of Eminent Experts, which,
regrettably, for the third consecutive year was not able
to access Yemen or other coalition countries.
Finally, we repeat our call upon the Houthis to
ensure immediate and full access for the United Nations
team to the FSO SAFER oil tanker for an assessment
and light repairs mission.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Hans Grundberg,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and wish him every success in his new tasks. We look
forward to working with him to achieve comprehensive

21-2477515/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

and lasting peace in the brotherly country of Yemen.
I also thank Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Al-Qadhi for their
valuable briefings on the situation in Yemen. I would
also like to welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen at this meeting.
The Special Envoy’s assumption of his duties and
the letter that he sent to the Yemeni people represent
a clear message from the international community to
the parties to the conflict to effectively engage in a
political settlement, declare a comprehensive ceasefire
and ensure that the interests of Yemen and its people
prevail above any other consideration.
In that context, we once again stress that there is no
alternative to a negotiated solution that puts the interests
of the people of Yemen above all other considerations
and avoids them further miseries and pain. We also
stress that military options to impose a fait accompli by
force would only exacerbate a complex situation, cause
more victims, jeopardize the lives of millions of people,
worsen the dire humanitarian situation and undermine
opportunities for peace in Yemen.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the United Nations
efforts and the contributions of the international
community to put an end to the conflict and relaunch
the political process with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, peaceful solution that brings about an
end to the suffering of the Yemeni people, preserves
the sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen and
restores peace and stability to the country. We also call
upon the parties to the conflict to respect the provisions
of international humanitarian law and protect civilians
and civilian installations.
In the same vein, we reiterate Tunisia’s condemnation
of repeated attacks targeting the territories of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and civilians. We call upon
the Houthis to cease those violations.
The deteriorated humanitarian situation in Yemen
is a source of grave concern, particularly in the light
of the continued worsening of the economic and living
situations, owing to the continued military operations
and the stall in the relief and humanitarian operations.
That is compounded by the effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. According to United Nations reports,
80 per cent of the Yemeni population are in need of
humanitarian assistance, and more than 20 million
people are suffering from food insecurity and the
collapse of health services.
16/20

10/09/2021

We once again call for the delivery of humanitarian
and medical assistance to those in need without
obstacles, the lifting of the restrictions imposed on
ports, the reopening of airports, the provision of the
necessary financing for the humanitarian response
programme and meeting the urgent needs of the
Yemeni people.
Regrettably, according to UNICEF, a Yemeni child
dies every 10 minutes for avoidable reasons, such as
malnutrition and diseases that could be prevented
through vaccination. Furthermore, children are
suffering from serious psychological effects as a result
of the continued hostilities, which have an impact on
their education. Two million children in Yemen are no
longer going to school. One in every six schools can no
longer be used. That is unacceptable by any standard.
For that reason, we call upon all parties to respect the
rights of children in Yemen and to spare no effort in
saving children from such serious consequences.
It is urgent that the situation of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker be addressed. It represents a serious threat
that could lead to an unprecedented environmental,
economic and humanitarian disaster in the region. We
therefore reiterate our call to facilitate processes that
would allow United Nations experts to visit the site,
conduct a technical inspection of the oil tanker and
make the necessary repairs as quickly as possible.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I join other colleagues in
congratulating Mr. Hans Grundberg on his appointment
as the new United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen
and welcome him to today’s meeting. I thank him for
his briefing and assure him of India’s full support for
his efforts aimed at restoring peace in Yemen.
I also thank the Deputy Director of Operations of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi, and Ms. Entesar Al-Qhadi
for their briefings, and welcome the Permanent
Representative of Yemen to today’s meeting.
This month marks the completion of seven years of
the current conflict in Yemen. Yet the situation in the
country remains precarious. We are deeply concerned
at the intensification of fighting in various parts of
the country in recent weeks, in particular between
Yemeni Government forces and the Ansar Allah in
Ma’rib. The number of fatalities has been mounting,
and the escalating levels of violence in the conflict is
jeopardizing the chances of a ceasefire. We are also
concerned by the deterioration of the security situation
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

in Aden and the southern governorates. Progress on
the implementation of the Riyadh agreement remains
vital to addressing these tensions, and we encourage
the Government and the Southern Transitional Council
to resume the dialogue facilitated by Saudi Arabia for
resolving the issues related to the implementation of
the agreement.
We call on all parties to renounce military
confrontations and work towards protecting lives and
establishing enduring peace. The aspirations of the
Yemeni people and their hopes for peace, stability, and
prosperity should be the focus of these efforts.
India views with concern the continued cross-border
missile and drone attacks into Saudi Arabia, which
undermine security and stability in the Gulf region as
well as the supply and security of global energy flows.
The deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure is
also a flagrant violation of international law.
Three Indians were among the eight civilians who
were injured in the recent attack on Abha airport. We
call for a strict implementation of the arms embargo
envisaged in resolution 2216 (2015) and its effective
monitoring to eliminate such attacks in future.
The chaotic security situation in Yemen and the
recent developments in the region could provide fresh
impetus to the revival of activities of such terrorist
groups as Al-Qaida. It is important for the Security
Council to keep its focus on the activities of these
groups in Yemen and their linkages with the global
terrorist network.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, India
remains extremely concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Yemen. The unprecedented humanitarian
crisis is an indicator of the human toll of conflict
and the suffering of the Yemeni people. Children in
particular have been the most affected. India urges all
parties to the conflict to permit the free, regular, and
unimpeded passage of food, fuel, medicines and other
humanitarian relief.
Peace and stability in Al-Hudaydah is also essential
to ensuring the smooth flow of humanitarian aid and
other essential commodities into Yemen. In this regard,
I call on all parties to fully implement the Stockholm
Agreement. I express our support for the efforts of
the United Nations Mission to support the Hodeidah
Agreement under the leadership of General Abhijit
Guha towards implementing that Agreement.

S/PV. 8854

Nearly 50 per cent of the funding requirement
for human humanitarian response plan is still unmet.
Without additional funding, humanitarian agencies
may be forced to scale down or shut down programmes,
starting this month, especially in the health,
humanitarian and sanitation sectors. The consequences
for such a reduction would be borne by millions of
Yemenis. In this regard, the humanitarian conference
on Yemen co-organized by the European Union,
Sweden and Switzerland later this month is a welcome
development. We hope it will provide an opportunity to
address the crisis with new funding.
An urgent solution to the FSO SAFER issue
is required to avoid any imminent environmental
catastrophe and ensure uninterrupted international
maritime passage through the Red Sea. Unfortunately,
the discussions between Ansar Allah and the United
Nations have not brought about the desired results so
far. I reiterate our call for immediate and full access to
the FSO SAFER oil tanker for the United Nations team.
We strongly believe that the meaningful participation
of women in decision-making substantially strengthens
and deepens the effectiveness of peacebuilding and
developed stability in this society. I commend the
efforts undertaken by various Yemeni women’s groups
to advance women’s participation in the political process
and welcome their active leadership in peacebuilding in
Yemen. I also appreciate the close engagement of the
United Nations with these groups.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the only sustainable
solution to the conflict is a peacefully negotiated
Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political settlement
that is inclusive, fair and prioritizes the well-being of
all Yemenis. The nationwide cessation of hostilities
is the starting point for such a settlement. I urge all
relevant parties to engage constructively with the new
Special Envoy to secure an early political solution to
the conflict.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I want to thank our briefers for their briefings, and
in particular Ms. Entesar Al-Qhadi for her frank and
eloquent contribution today. We should never forget
the tragic human consequences of this conflict. I
salute Ms. Al-Qhadi’s courage and her commitment to
carrying out such vital work on the ground in Ma’rib.

21-2477517/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

I want to welcome the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg.
He can be assured of Ireland’s full support for him and
his team as they embark on the challenging task ahead.
We call on all actors to engage constructively and in
good faith with the Special Envoy. I shall make three
points today.
First, the fighting in Yemen needs to end — and end
now. The Houthi offensive on Ma’rib is unacceptable.
Its impact on the people of Ma’rib, particularly its
women and girls, is horrific. Thousands of Yemenis
have been uprooted and displaced, as Ms. Al-Qhadi has
so vividly described today.
Cross-border attacks on civilian infrastructure in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia must end, and escalating
violence elsewhere in the country, including in Ta’iz,
and Al-Hudaydah, is deeply concerning. Constructive
engagement by all parties on a nationwide ceasefire is
urgently needed now to allow for a political dialogue to
take place under the auspices of the new Special Envoy.
Secondly, Yemen continues to struggle with
the devastating humanitarian consequences of the
protracted conflict. As we heard earlier, famine-like
conditions are a reality for many Yemenis and pose
a genuine threat to millions of others. The conflict
has far-reaching economic consequences, such as the
inadequate passage of fuel through Yemen’s Red Sea
ports, which compound the ongoing crisis and undermine
the humanitarian response. The long-standing issue of
irregular salary payments for civil servants has left
millions of doctors, nurses and teachers struggling to
feed their families. Let us be clear. Yemenis are not
starving because there is no food; they are starving
because they cannot afford it. We urge the parties with
the power and means to do so to ensure that an adequate
flow of fuel and commodities reach those who are in
such desperate need of them.
Lastly, the consistent pattern of women’s exclusion
from the political process in Yemen cannot continue.
Entesar Al-Qadhi exemplified today why women
belong at every table, during peace talks and within the
Government. Day in and day out, women are working
to build peace in Yemen. From enhancing the role of
political parties in local peacebuilding to developing
local conflict-resolution mechanisms with tribal actors,
Yemeni women like Ms. Al-Qadhi are waging peace,
not war. Her work with children, who are suffering
18/20

10/09/2021

enormously as a result of the conflict, is essential to
building sustainable peace.
All Yemenis, regardless of gender, age or
background, need to be given the chance to play a
substantial role in shaping their future. That requires
full respect for human rights as well as accountability
for human rights abuses. The latter include conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence and violations
of international humanitarian law. This is not rhetoric.
Such violations are weaponized to prevent ordinary
Yemenis, women in particular, from participating fully
in political and public life.
In sitting around this table, we have a responsibility,
collectively and individually, to act in the face of such
immense suffering. Today we heard clarion calls to
action. Let us not just hear these calls, but rather heed
them. We owe that, at the very least, to the millions of
Yemenis, who have already clearly suffered too much.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
wish you and your friendly delegation every success.
I would like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of India, for his able leadership of the
Council last month. I also thank Mr. Grundberg and
Ms. Mudawi for their briefings, and I thank Ms. Entesar
Al-Qadhi for hers, which reflected the dire humanitarian
situation in Ma’rib governorate as a result of the
continued Houthi offensive against the city and crimes
committed against civilians and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), particularly women and children.
The offensive against the city must stop immediately
to avoid exacerbating the humanitarian situation.
The Yemeni Government once again welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Grundberg as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen. We stand ready to
cooperate with him and support his efforts to reach a
lasting and comprehensive peace in Yemen. We call for
continued efforts to end the suffering of the Yemeni
people. There is no time to lose. As Martin Luther King
said, “There is only so much one can bear. Humans are
crying out, and I cannot tolerate that any longer”.
Under the leadership of President Hadi Mansour,
the Yemeni Government is continuing its efforts to end
21-24775

10/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

the absurd war being waged by the Houthi militias and
achieve lasting peace in line with the political terms
of reference agreed, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015), and the outcome of the
Comprehensive National Dialogue. They are the only
guarantee to reaching a political settlement.
The appointment of the new Special Envoy,
who will lead United Nations mediation efforts, has
renewed hope for Yemenis that the end of the conflict
is near. It will have been seven years this month since
the Houthis carried out their coup after Yemenis had
agreed through the Comprehensive National Dialogue
on establishing a new federal Yemen. The Yemeni
Government has repeatedly expressed its support to
all United Nations and international efforts to end the
conflict by constructively engaging in every initiative
proposed by previous Special Envoys.
However, the Houthi militias have continued
to insist on war instead of peace. They continue to
target civilians and refuse to cooperate with United
Nations Envoys and the international community. The
Council must support Mr. Grundberg in adopting a
firmer approach on dealing with the Houthi militias
and compelling them to choose peace. The Houthis
have always stalled for time by creating new front
lines, continuing its unjust war, killing Yemenis
and committing crimes against civilians, detaining
journalists, torturing detainees, committing sexual
violence against detained women, recruiting thousands
of children, sending them to the battle fronts and
threatening international navigation.
The Houthi militias have continued their offensive
on Ma’rib and have resorted to inflammatory rhetoric,
while they declared that they intended to attack all
Yemeni governorates to subdue them by force and
attack civilians and civilian infrastructure in Yemen
and the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That is how
those militias welcome the new Special Envoy. The
Houthi militias attacked Abha International Airport,
and recently Najran and Jizan, in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. They have escalated their military operations
upon instructions from their sponsor and supporter
the Iranian regime to undermine regional stability and
security with the aim of replacing regular armies. That
demonstrates what the Houthis truly think about the
international community’s calls for peace. We call on
the Council to condemn those crimes and pressure the

S/PV. 8854

militias and the Iranian regime to end their efforts to
destabilize Yemen and the region.
The war continues to exacerbate the human
suffering of Yemenis. The Houthis have repeatedly
carried out indiscriminate attacks against residential
areas and IDP camps in Ma’rib, forcing civilians to
be displaced in order to escape the crimes of those
militias. Last week, the Houthis also carried out
systematic and intentional shelling against Rahabah
directorate, south of Ma’rib governorate, which led
to injuries and deaths among civilians, IDPs and
members of host communities, as well as damage to
their properties and homes. The shelling also led to the
forced displacement of more than 505 families made
up of 3,535 people to different places in an attempt to
escape the Houthi shelling who used various kinds of
weapons and missiles. In addition, the Houthi militias
are hindering humanitarian deliveries. They continue
to divert and loot humanitarian aid. The humanitarian
community must draw the Council’s attention to those
crimes in order to put pressure on the Houthi militias to
end their interference in humanitarian affairs.
As detailed in various briefings by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Security
Council is aware that the weak purchasing power of the
citizens is the main reason behind the threat of famine
for millions of Yemenis in the country. Consequently,
the Yemeni Government calls on the international
community to provide generous support to Government
plans and programmes to ensure stability and economic
recovery and to support development projects, as well
as humanitarian assistance.
We also call for capacity-building for State
institutions and for promoting their role in providing
services, in particular by creating a mechanism to
channel humanitarian donor funds through the Central
Bank of Yemen to support the national currency
and improve the living conditions of citizens and
alleviate their suffering. We call as well for integrating
development priorities and needs in all humanitarian
interventions so as to achieve early recovery.
In conclusion, the FSO SAFER oil tanker continues
to pose a threat to the environment, security and safety
of the Red Sea. It threatens the livelihoods of fishers
and food security for millions of people in Yemen and
the countries of the region. The Council has repeatedly
taken up this issue, including in two meetings held
on 15 July 2020 (see S/2020/721) and 3 June 2021

21-2477519/20

S/PV.8854

The situation in the Middle East

(see S/PV.8786), and agreed on the need for an urgent
technical assessment of the tanker and necessary
repairs to avoid a disaster. It is unacceptable that the
Houthi militias continue to blackmail the international
community and refuse access for United Nations experts
to the tanker. They have used the issue as leverage for
political gains without taking into consideration the
threat posed by the tanker to Yemen and the region.
We hope that the Council will shoulder its
responsibilities and put further pressure on the Houthi

20/20

10/09/2021

militias to force them to end their intransigence and
allow the United Nations team to immediately access
the tanker without any preconditions in order to avert
an imminent disaster.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the Council
can continue its discussion in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

21-24775
