73

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

which it established a Special Committee of seventeen
members on the implementation of the Declaration,
Conscious of the fact that the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
and the subsequent establishment of the Special Committee have raised great hopes everywhere, in particular
among peoples which have not yet attained independence, for the elimination of all forms of colonialism
and foreign domination without delay,
Having considered the report of the Special
Committee, 21
Noting with profound regret that, in spite of the
efforts of the United Nations, the provisions of the
Declaration have not been fully implemented in a large
number of territories and that, in certain cases, even
preliminary measures have not yet been taken to realize
its objectives,
Deeply concerned by the negative attitude and the
deliberate refusal of certain administering Powers to
co-operate with the Special Committee,
Reaf]irming its conviction that any delay in the implementation of the Declaration constitutes a continuing
source of international conflict, seriously impeding international co-operation and creating in many regions of
the world increasingly dangerous situations likely to
threaten international peace and security,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for the work it has
accomplished;
2. Takes note with approval of the methods and
procedures which 1:he Special Committee has adopted
for the discharge of its functions ;
3. Solemnly reiterates and reaffirms the objectives
and principles enshrined both in the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV) and in resolution
1654 (XVI);
4. Deplores the refusal of certain administering
Powers to co-operate in the implementation of the
Declaration in territories under their administration;
5. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to cease forthwith all armed action and repressive
measures directed against peoples who have not yet
attained independence, particularly against the political activities of their rightful leaders ;
6. Urges all administering Powers to take immediate steps in order that all colonial territories and
peoples may accede to independence without delay in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of the
Declaration ;
7. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Special Comm_i~tee established by resolution 1654 (XVI)
by the add1t10n of seven new members to be nominated
by the President of the General Assembly ;
8. Invites the enlarged Special Committee:
(a) To continue to seek the most suitable ways and
means for the speedy and total application of the
Declaration to all territories which have not yet attained independence ;
( b) To propose specific measures for the complete
application of the Declaration ;
21 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/5238.

( c) To submit to the General Assembly in due
course, and not later than its eighteenth session, a
full report containing its suggestions and recommendations on all the territories mentioned in paragraph 5
of the Declaration ;
( d) To apprise the Security Council of any developments in these territories which may threaten international peace and security ;
9. Requests all Member States, especially the administering Powers, to afford the Special Committee
their fullest co-operation ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with all the facilities
and personnel necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.
•

•*

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 7 of the above resolution, appointed seven additio11al
members of the Special Committee on the Situation 'With
regard to the Implementation, of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples as
follows: Bulgaria, Chile, Denmark, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast
and Sierra Leone.22
Accordingly, the Special Committee is composed of the folio-wing Member States: AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CAMBODIA,
CHILE, DENMARK, ETHIOPIA, INDIA, !RAN, IRAQ, ITALY, IVORY
COAST, MADAGASCAR, MALI, POLAND, SIERRA LEONE, SYRIA,
TANGANYIKA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.

1811 (XVII). Question of Zanzibar
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter VI of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,21
concerning the situation in Zanzibar,
Having conside1·ed the views of the petitioners submitted to the Special Committee,
Taking note of the statements made by the representatives of the administering Power before the
Special Committee,
Guided by the provisions of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960 and by resolution 1654
(XVI) o{ 27 November 1961,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the political
achievements of the people of Zanzibar ;
2. Takes note further of the declared policy of the
administering Power with respect to the independence
of Zanzibar ;
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediate steps for the implementation in Zanzibar of the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, and requests
all concerned to make arrangements for the holding of
elections on the basis of universal adult suffrage;
4. Appeals to all the people of Zanzibar to achieve
national unity, having in view the independence of
Zanzibar at the earliest date ;
22 See

A/5397.

74

General Auembly-Seventeenth Se11ion

5. Requests the administering Power to make every
effort, including the promotion of harmony and unity
among the political elements of Zanzibar, to bring that
Territory to independence at the earliest date in accordance with the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1812 (XVIl). Question of Kenya
The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation in Kenya,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0,
Having taken note of the statement made by the
delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland on 10 August 1962 at the 99th
meeting of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Bearing in mind the declared policy of the United
Kingdom Government to lead the people of Kenya to
full independence,
Having studied the evidence of the petitioners,
Noting further the negotiations which have taken
place between the political parties concerned and the
administering Power,
1. Affirms the validity, with respect to Kenya, of the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Affirms further the inalienable right of the people
of Kenya to freedom and independence, and urges the
administering Power to make every effort to organize
national elections without further delay on the basis
of universal adult suffrage;
3. Requests the administering Power and all concerned to make every effort, including the promotion
of harmony and unity among the people of Kenya, to
bring the territory to independence at the earliest date
in accordance with the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples ;
4. Expresses the hope that Kenya will become an
independent and sovereign State and join the community of nations in the shortest possible time.
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1817 (XVII). Question of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
which it established a Special Committee to examine
the implementation of the Declaration,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 21
relating to the question of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland,

Having heard the petitioners,
Noting that the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, has not yet implemented the Declaration in these Territories and has not taken steps
to transfer all powers to the peoples of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland,
Noting that the constitutional provisions now contemplated for these Territories and the electoral legislation in force are discriminatory, do not meet the
wishes of the peoples and are not consistent with the
Declaration,
Deploring the particularly alarming economic and
social situation prevailing in Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland after several decades of colonial
rule,
Expressing its profound concern at the declared intention of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa to annex these Territories, and condemning any
attempt to jeopardize the right of the peoples of these
Territories to establish their own independent States,
Taking note of the statement made by the administering Power to the effect that these Territories are
politically completely independent of South Africa
and that the United Kingdom Government adheres to
this policy, and that there is no question of that Government agreeing at this stage to the transfer of these
Territories to the Republic of South Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to selfdetermination and independence ;
2. Invites the administering Power immediately to
suspend the present constitutional provisions and to
proceed without further delay to hold elections in the
three Territories on the basis of direct universal adult
suffrage;
3. Invites further the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
abrogate the present constitutional provisions and to
convene immediately a constitutional conference with
the participation of the democratically elected political
leaders of the three Territories, with a view to setting,
in accordance with their wishes, the date on which
each of the Territories will attain its independence;
4. Considers that a serious effort should be made
to provide economic, financial and technical assistance,
through United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and the specialized agencies, in order to
remedy the deplorable economic and social situation of
the three Territories;
5. Urges the administering Power to take immediate steps to return to the indigenous inhabitants all
the land taken from them, whatever the form of, or
pretext for, such alienation;
6. Declares solemnly that any attempt to annex
Basutoland, Bechuanaland or Swaziland, or to encroach upon their territorial integrity in any way, will
be regarded by the United Nations as an act of aggression violating the Charter of the United Nations.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1818 (XVII). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of
