Re110lutiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Reca/,ling further the resolution adopted on 16 October 1964 by the Special Committee,28
Reafjirming its resolution 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
N oting that the Spanish Government, as the administering Power, has not as yet applied the provisions of
the Declaration,
H aving regard to the decision taken by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held_ at
Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, concermng
the Territories under Spanish administration,
N oting the decision of the administering Power to
apply in full the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2072 (XX),24
N oting further the statement of the administering
Power on 7 December 1966 relating to Spanish Sabara,
in particular with regard to the sending of a special
United Nations mission to the Territory, the return of
exiles and the free exercise by the indigenous population of its right to self-determination,211
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Ifni and Spanish Sabara to self-determination in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sabara, and endorses the resolution adopted by the Special Committee
on 16 November 1966,26
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government of
Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of the indigenous population, procedures for the transfer of
powers in accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
4. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sabara and
in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania
and Morocco and any other interested party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum under United
Nations auspices with a view to enabling the indigenous
population of the Territory to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and, to this end :
(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis, by permitting, inter al,ia, the retum of exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum ;
(e) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sabara;
( d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to par28 /bid., Nineteeñth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part 1)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter IX, para. 112.
H /bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapter X, annex.
25 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Fourth Committee. 1660th
meeting, paras. 1-4.
26 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter X, para. 243.

73

ticipate actively in the organization and holding of the
referendum ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately a special mission to be
sent to Spanish Sahara for the purpose of recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and in
particular for determining the extent of United Nations
participation in the preparation and supervision of the
referendum and submitting a report to -him as soon as
possible for transmission to the Special Committee ;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territories of Ifni
and Spanish Sabara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2230 (XXI). Question of Equatorial Guinea
The General, Assembly,
Having considered the question of Equatorial Guinea,
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,
H aving a/,so heard the statement of the representative of the administering Power,
H aving considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Equatorial Guinea, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2.067 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
RecaUing the Basic Law of 1963 which recognized
Fernando Póo and Río Muni as one entity thereafter
to be called Equatorial Guinea, and the declaration by
the administering Power of its intention to grant independence to Equatorial Gui11ea as a single entity,
Taking into account the declarations of the administering Power that it would accede to the desires of the
people of the Territory for independence whenever they
so requested,
N oting the desire of the overwhelming majority of
the people consulted that the Territory should become
independent not later than July 1968,
Having noted the statement of the representative
of the administering Power that a constitutional conference will be convened early in 1967,
Recognizing the need for further measures to promote the economic, social and educational advancement
of the people of the Territory,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Dedaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Equatorial Guinea, and endorses the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein ;28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Grant27 /bid., chapter IX.
28 /bid., diapter IX, annex, paras. 286-310.

74,

General Assembly-Twenty-firat Session

ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Spain for having invited the Special Committee to visit
the Territory and for the co-operation rendered to the
Sub-Committee on Equatorial Guinea of the Special
Committee during its visit to the Territory;
4. Invites the administering Power to implement as
soon as possible the following measures :
(a) Removal of all restrictions on political activities and establishment oí full democratic freedoms;
( b) Institution of an electoral system based on universal adult suffrage and the holding, before independence, of a general election for the whole Territory on the
basis of a unified electoral roll ;
(e) Transfer of effective power to the government
resulting from this election ;
5. Requests the administering Power to ensure that
the Territory accedes to independence as a single political and territorial unit and that no step is taken which
would jeopardize the territorial integrity of Equatorial
Guinea;
6. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the wishes of the people of Equatorial Guinea, to
set a date for independence as recommended by the
Special Committee and, for this purpose, to convene a
conference in which the various political parties and
all sections of the population would be fully represented;
7. Further requests the administering Power to establish in law and in practice full equality of political,
economic and social rights ;
8. Urges the administering Power to take effective
measures, including increased assistance, to ensure the
rapid economic development of the Territory and to
promote the educational and social advancement of the
people, and requests the specialized agencies to render
all possible assistance towards this end ;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering Power
and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the
United Nations in the Territory for the supervision of
the preparation for, and the holding of, the election
envisaged in paragraph 4 ( b) above, and to participate
in any other measures leading towards the independence
of the Territory;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation;
11. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1500th Plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2231 (XXI). Question of Gibraltar
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Gibraltar,
H aving heard the statements of the administering
Power and the representative of Spain,
H aving heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 2070 (XX) of 16 December
1965, and the consensus adopted by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementa-

tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples on 16 October 1964,29
Recalling further its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Taking into account the noted willingness of th~ administering Power and of the Government of Spam to
continue the present negotiations,
Regretting the occurrence of certain acts w~ic~ had
prejudiced the smooth progress of these negot1at1ons,
1. Regrets the delay in the process of decolonization
and in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) with regard to Gibraltar;
2. Calls upon the two parties to continue their negotiations, taking into account the interests of the people
of the Territory, and asks the administering Power to
expedite, without any hindrance and in consultation with
the Government of Spain, the decolonization of Gibraltar, and to report to the Special Commit!ee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementat10n of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples as soon as possible, and in any
case before the twenty-second session oí the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2232 (XXI). Question of American Samoa, Anti,rua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice lslands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hehrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Is■
lands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert :md Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
H aving examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories,80
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII)
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2069 (XX)
of 16 December 1965 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the continuation of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of sorne of these Terri29 !bid., Nineteenth Session, Anneres, annex No. 8 (part 1)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter X, para. 209.
so !bid., Twenty-first Session, Anneres, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapters XIV-XIX and XXII.
