S/PV.7564

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7564th meeting

Friday, 20 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Špokauskas
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Bosah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Briefing on the Secretary-General’s report: The future of United Nations
peace operations
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2015/846)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-38225 (E)
*1538225*

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Briefing on the Secretary-General’s report:
The future of United Nations peace operations
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2015/846)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/846, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I very warmly welcome His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to join
members today. I am grateful to the presidency of
the United Kingdom for organizing this important
meeting. This is the first time the Security Council will
consider the recommendations of the High-level Panel
on Peace Operations and my recommendations in the
implementation report (S/2015/682). I hope this will be
the start of sustained dialogue and action to strengthen
United Nations peace operations.
I launched the peace operations initiative out
of profound concern over the scale and intensity of
conflict today. The human, political and financial
costs of conflict continue to mount. Political failures
are resulting in insecurity, injustice and deprivation for
millions of people today and fuelling the conflicts of
tomorrow.
The demands of conflict are also putting enormous
burdens on our peace and security tools, particularly
United Nations peace operations. Peacekeeping and
special political missions are deployed for more
places, in more configurations, than ever before. They
are struggling to implement complex mandates. Our

2/22

20/11/2015

systems are straining at the scale of operations. We are
not always responding with the speed and effectiveness
required. We have difficulty in keeping pace with the
evolution of each conflict. We are finding it harder to
end conflicts and to sustain peace.
That is why I asked an eminent Panel chaired by
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, former President of Timor-Leste,
to look at how the full range of United Nations peace
operations could be adapted to meet today’s challenges.
Strengthening peace operations is a collective task
that will require the collaboration of many actors. In
my implementation report, I identified those areas
where the Secretariat can take concrete actions. I also
signalled those areas where the engagement of Member
States, the General Assembly and the Security Council
is essential. I also highlighted the importance of
partnership to achieve our goals.
The focus of the meeting today is on the role
that the Security Council can play in strengthening
peace operations. The Panel offered a number of
recommendations, and I put forward concrete proposals
for their implementation. The recommendations cover
three broad areas: first, political engagement; secondly,
the design and implementation of United Nations peace
operations; and, thirdly, reinvigorated partnerships. Let
me briefly address each.
First, on political engagement, peace operations
are political tools. They are deployed by the Council to
advance and support a political settlement to a conflict.
They are the signal of international commitment to
help find and sustain political solutions. The Council’s
political engagement even before authorizing a peace
operation is critical and remains essential throughout
the life of a mission.
A central finding of the review is that prevention
is the most effective means of tackling the escalating
costs of conflict. It is also the best way of supporting
national and regional partners who are and must be the
front line of prevention.
Committed efforts among Council members to
unite around a shared political strategy to de-escalate
tensions can have a powerful effect. The Council’s public
statements and private messaging to the parties shape
perceptions and actions on the ground. The Council’s
engagement with regional and other stakeholders and,
where appropriate, the use of sanctions, can change the
incentives of key parties and play a role in reducing
the flow of arms and money that fuel conflicts. The

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council’s engagement can help prevent a conflict from
spreading and enhance the support provided to affected
civilians. Such early engagement is most effective
when it is collective, when it is done in partnership with
regional players and when it is sustained over time.
The engagement of the Council with host
Governments is also critical to ensure that they fulfil
their obligations with regard to the safety, security and
freedom of movement of uniformed peacekeepers and
civilian staff. Time and again, we have seen missions
prevented from performing their mandated tasks by an
array of administrative obstacles and other restrictions.
In order to act early, we need timely information. I
have committed to provide the Council with frank and
timely briefings on situations of escalating concern,
particularly those situations where civilians are at
grave risk. Regional offices and my Special Envoys are
invaluable in supporting early and effective political
engagement. My Rights Up Front initiative seeks to
focus the attention of the United Nations system on
the prevention of serious and large-scale violations of
human rights.
Where missions are deployed, we need to devote
greater attention to the political strategies that they
support. I will encourage my Special Representatives
to focus their briefings on the status of political efforts
and to identify risks, challenges and opportunities for
progress. We will be more forthright on the role that the
Council itself can and should play. That could include
engaging members’ representatives in the countries
that host our missions who can project the Council’s
collective determination in their engagement with all
parties.
A second area where Security Council action can
strengthen peace operations is in better design and
implementation of our mandates. Mandates need to
be better tailored to a specific conflict environment,
and able to adapt as conflicts evolve. Good progress
is being made to prioritize mandates so that missions
are given realistic and achievable tasks. I also endorse
the Panel’s recommendation for sequenced mandates.
A sequenced approach can reinforce efforts to focus
on urgent protection and political tasks. It can provide
greater opportunity for the Security Council and peace
operations to engage with national actors and regional
partners, and better direct efforts towards national
priorities. A sequenced approach can also better match
capabilities to tasks and exposes gaps.

S/PV.7564

Sequenced and prioritized mandates will depend
on the Council receiving better and more regular
assessments from the Secretariat. I am putting in place a
range of measures to strengthen United Nations analysis
and planning at Headquarters, in our field missions
and across the United Nations system. I have directed
my own Office to take on additional responsibility to
help improve the way we develop — and ultimately
provide the Council with — timely, high-quality
analysis, options and proposed courses of action. We
are also strengthening the quality and timeliness of our
reporting.
The Council has a responsibility to ensure that
peacekeepers are equipped to carry out their tasks.
That means ensuring that we have the range of
capabilities required for increasingly complex and
dangerous modern peace operations. High operational
readiness, standby arrangements, agile field support
and high-quality medical care are essential. Troop and
police contributors need support in generating critical
enablers, and United Nations administrative practices
need to be streamlined and adapted.
Equally, we need members’ engagement when
things do not go well. Where United Nations peace
operations have a mandate to protect civilians, they
must use all tools, including, where necessary, the use
of force. But that does not replace the search for political
settlements; it makes the engagement of the members
of the Council more critical. Likewise, when there is
a failure to act in the face of threats to civilians, I will
inform the Council. I request, in turn, that members
engage, politically and operationally, to help redress
such situations. I am making a similar request on
issues of misconduct, including sexual exploitation and
abuse. If the Security Council demonstrates that it will
remain engaged in the conduct of a mission and actions
by its personnel, that can be a powerful performance
incentive.
The third key set of recommendations focuses
on strong dialogue with partners, which is crucial for
devising more tailored mandates and strengthening the
Council’s political engagement. Deeper engagement
with regional partners is a must. We need to
institutionalize consultation and dialogue and, where
appropriate, collaborate in planning and conducting
peace operations. We need to provide effective support
to our partners, and that must start with the African
Union, our key regional partner today.

15-382253/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

Similarly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop and police contributors is
fundamental to effective peace operations. We need
deeper understanding of our respective expectations,
capacities and constraints. We need to engage well
before a peace operation is mandated on what is
required and what is available. I welcome the Council’s
recent dialogue with contributing countries, and I
encourage members to consider my proposals for
further strengthening triangular consultation.
The recent adoption of resolution 2242 (2015)
sets out an agenda for stronger implementation of the
Council’s landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Women
and peace and security considerations have been
fully mainstreamed throughout the peace operations
initiative. My report on peace operations has also
drawn upon and integrated recommendations from the
Advisory Group of Experts on peacebuilding to ensure
strong linkages. In that connection, consideration could
be given to strengthening collaboration between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Taken together, those efforts can enable us to
renew the instruments of the United Nations to address
conflict, protect people and help countries find durable
paths of peace. I hope that our discussion today will
mark the first step in a continued engagement with all
members of the Council in support of more effective
and efficient United Nations peace operations. I stand
ready to work with the Council in the months ahead.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General very
much for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening this briefing, as
well as for its concept note (S/2015/846, annex). I also
thank the Secretary General for his briefing.
While we take note of the reports (S/2015/682)
of the Secretary-General and of the High-level
Independent Panel (see S/2015/446), we understand that
this is one of several meetings to be held in conjunction
with the membership, especially with countries
contributing troops and police. In that connection, we
recall the central mandate of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations when it comes to such
operations.

4/22

20/11/2015

Turning to the particular issues requested by the
President in his concept note, we endorse the use of
the term peacekeeping operations proposed by the
Independent Panel and endorsed by the SecretaryGeneral, denoting the broad spectrum of work of the
Organization on peace and security while also including
tools and flexible instruments such as groups of experts
and peace and security advisers.
We agree with the observations in the reports
that the Council must exercise its collective political
influence for the benefit of political solutions. They
must be at the centre of peacekeeping operations.
The Council has the responsibility to detect early the
emergence of conflicts and seek response mechanisms
to avoid and overcome cycles of violence. Issues that
are potentially disruptive to international peace and
security must be considered under “Other business”
in order to monitor crises and to make known to the
countries involved the Council’s concern about the
situations they face. Timely awareness on the part
of the Council can be a powerful tool for deterrence
and facilitate preventive work — sometimes elusive
to date owing to the lack of collective action. The
political role of the Council should be complemented
by strengthening the mediation of the United Nations,
where possible, through its various mechanisms.
Peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council
must be part of a comprehensive strategy drawn up in
support of the political process. We agree with the need
for a sequential approach in developing mandates. In
that regard, it is necessary to design medium- and longterm political objectives, including field verification
mechanisms and implementation strategies. Mandates
must be developed with consensus from the parties
involved in the conflict, along with the Secretariat and
the Council.
All those aims must be able to respond to structural
change that promotes peace, democracy and inclusive
development. Revisiting the functioning of the Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to
maximize its links with troop- and police-contributing
countries could also contribute to that goal. We also
have to better address their contributions when drawing
up mandates, because they have information on the
situation on the ground and assessments of what can or
cannot be achieved.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that,
in planning peace missions, we also have to address,

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

from the very start, the incorporation and participation
of gender advisers and advisers to protect women,
children and human rights, as independent categories
in order to ensure that people in vulnerable situations
are protected.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the President for having convened
such an important meeting and also for the concept
note (S/2015/846, annex) that he has circulated. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.
The concept note focuses on two very specific
recommendations, which were formulated in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and taken up by the
Secretary-General in his implementation report
(S/2015/682). First, peacekeeping mandates should
be subject to sequenced authorization and be specific
to the context on the ground. Secondly, the Security
Council must use its collective political leverage to
achieve political settlements.
Venezuela welcomes an approach based on the
sequenced authorization of mandates and, in that
respect, we believe that that process must consist of
three stages. First, determine whether conditions on
the ground are suitable for the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. Secondly, if that is
the case, deploy an operation with a mandate limited
to offering protection and security, and thirdly, extend
the mandate of the operation to other multidimensional
areas.
As part of the first stage, the Secretariat must
deploy on the ground and carry out a thorough analysis
of the context of the conflict, as well as the priorities
and intentions of the parties and other relevant
stakeholders. It must also determine the specialized
military and police requirements for the implementation
of the mandate, including options for rapid deployment
and force generation. In issuing its considerations, the
Secretariat must consider whether or not the conditions
on the ground are suitable for the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. In that respect, we
would like to echo the concerns expressed by the Highlevel Panel regarding the deployment of peacekeepers
in situations where there is no peace to keep nor even a
political process under way.
It must also be clear that peacekeeping operations
were not established to begin or revive political
processes, manage conflicts where there is no peace,

S/PV.7564

participate in military operations against terrorist
groups or assume the residual tasks of counterterrorist operations or other types of offensives carried
out by ad hoc coalitions or regional or subregional
forces that have given up ground. In that regard, we
highlight the precedent set out in the joint report of the
African Union/United Nations on benchmarks for the
deployment of a peacekeeping operation of the United
Nations in Somalia. It determined that the security
conditions on the ground were not yet suitable for the
deployment of such an operation. Regrettably, as the
report of the High-level Panel points out, the same
precautions were not taken in other cases in which
operations were deployed without a prior study of the
political or security context on the ground and without
an appropriate assessment of the physical and material
requirements necessary for the success of the mission.
As part of the second stage, and only if the
Secretary-General has determined that the political
and security conditions on the ground are suitable
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, then the Security Council could consider
an initial, temporary mandate that emphasizes the
security, political and protection dimensions. With
that provision, the Secretary-General could keep the
Security Council abreast of the progress made on the
ground.
As part of the third stage, once the SecretaryGeneral has determined that conditions are appropriate
for the establishment of a broader multidimensional
mission, then the Security Council could consider
expanding the mandate to other areas, including
the promotion of human rights and gender equality,
security-sector reform, monitoring the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons and the coordination of
efforts for capacity-building and the development of
local institutions, among others.
With respect to the use of the collective leverage
of the Security Council in favour of achieving political
solutions, Venezuela expresses caution. According to the
concept note prepared by the President and in line with
the contents of the report of the Secretary-General, in
situations in which there are very few possibilities for a
short-term political solution or if commitment from the
host State is weak, it is hoped that the Security Council
will use its political muscle to begin the process on the
ground. In his note, the President proposes the use of
the entire set of instruments and tools available to the
Security Council, from the issuance of press statements

15-382255/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the imposition of sanctions and the deployment of
troops on the ground.
Venezuela is well aware of the importance
of preventing and mitigating conflicts and of the
fundamental role played by the Security Council in that
context. However, we cannot help but reiterate what
was expressed by the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Future of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490), namely, that the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, has not yet understood
how to adapt its tools to the international context,
and often prefers military solutions. In other words,
Venezuela would consider the use of non-coercive
elements in the set of instruments available to the
Security Council, such as press statements, presidential
statements, open debates and closed consultations.
But we are deeply concerned about the frequent use
of coercive and military solutions for conflicts — a
tendency that the Security Council has shown over the
years.
The Security Council should opt to use peaceful
dispute settlement mechanisms in its role to strengthen
international peace and security. In that respect, the
Council must use more non-coercive measures more
assertively and effectively, and employ the use of
force and sanctions only as a last resort when all the
other options have been exhausted and when there is a
genuine chance for the latter to have a positive effect
in achieving the objective of finding a solution to the
conflict.
In conclusion, as we have already done during the
negotiations on the presidential statement currently
under way, we would like to highlight the need to
bear in mind that, although the Security Council
plays a fundamental role in developing the mandates
for peacekeeping operations, the Special Committee
for Peacekeeping Operations, which is a subsidiary
organ of the General Assembly, is the body authorized
to design policies and doctrines in that area. An
intergovernmental process is also under way in several
of the Committees of the General Assembly to consider
the recommendations of the report of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations and the report of the
Secretary-General and to define the path to be followed
for the implementation of the recommendations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing today. We have read very carefully the reports
prepared by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
6/22

20/11/2015

Operations and on Special Political Missions (see
S/2015/446) and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/682) with his vision for the implementation
of the recommendations of the High-level Panel.
Those documents will be a good starting point for
a comprehensive and careful analysis by Member
States of ways to further develop the peacekeeping
architecture of our global Organization.
We agree that today’s threats and challenges,
as well as the changing nature of today’s conflicts,
require appropriate adaptation on the part of the United
Nations. We fully agree with the approach taken in the
reports that there is a need for change in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in particular with regard to
the political tools for resolving crises. Good quality and
painstaking political and mediation efforts should be a
priority for us. The experience of conflicts in various
parts of the world has shown that such an approach is
what helps to eradicate the root causes of conflicts and
not just treat the symptoms. Otherwise, even after a
temporary lull, crises are likely to re-emerge.
We support the observation that there is a need
to strengthen global and regional cooperation in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
role of the United Nations and its significant authority
in terms of peacekeeping potential is unique. However,
it is also important that the degree of involvement of
the Organization be carefully balanced depending on
the situation in each specific country. Furthermore,
the interests and needs of the people of the country
must be taken into consideration as much as possible,
through the organization of close dialogue with local
Governments and communities. We are still convinced
that the United Nations presence must seek to assist the
host country only on the basis of the priorities identified
by its Government. In that context, it is crucial to have
constructive regular cooperation between peacekeepers
and the local authorities of the host country, along with
efforts to strengthen the capacities of the receiving
State.
We have paid particular attention to the ideas in
the report stating that United Nations peacekeepers
should not be used to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The international community has other
tools at its disposal for that purpose. In that regard, it
is encouraging that the recommendations confirmed
the basic principles of peacekeeping. We cannot
agree with the idea, which is being increasingly put
forward at the United Nations, that there should be a

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

flexible interpretation of peacekeeping. The protection
of civilians is and remains one of the main aims of
peacekeeping, but it cannot be the ultimate aim of the
operation, because the need to protect civilians is a
result of the conflict, not the cause. We must not forget
that the responsibility to protect civilians should be
borne by the States themselves. They alone ultimately
can ensure the quality and stability of such protection.
In that regard, one of the main aims of peacekeeping
operations is to lend a hand during difficult times to
the host country, when it is not able to assume that
responsibility on its own. That assistance must be
impartial and based on the consent and understanding
of the host State. At the same time, we must not forget
that, in any case, it is a temporary measure that is
needed in order to allow time to find a political and
diplomatic solution.
We believe that it is important to be careful with
regard to the excessive focus in peacekeeping on human
rights issues, including the Human Rights Up Front
initiative of the Secretary-General, and gender issues.
We are not trying to undermine the importance of those
issues, but we urge a responsible and rational approach
to them. Otherwise, it may affect the execution of the
primary peacekeeping tasks. There is also a need on
the part of the various departments of the Secretariat
to carefully respect their mandates and curb the
practice of assuming others’ mandates and duplicating
efforts. Such modern words as “links”, “coherence”,
“coordination” and “flexibility”, which one encounters
in nearly every United Nations decision, must not lead
to everyone doing everyone else’s work. The inevitable
result of that would be that no one does anything and
no one assumes responsibility for anything. As a side
effect of such an approach, we have seen a growth
in the number of offices and increased costs and
expenditure. United Nations mechanisms, including
in the area of ​​peacekeeping, need to be cut back, and
additional mechanisms should not be established to
do so. Furthermore, we must not artificially restrict
the number of troop-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat must not have too broad a remit over staffing
policy, including in the areas of early deployment and
civilian personnel management.
It is imperative that the United Nations cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations and
countries in the region and find other forms of
cooperation. That cooperation could operate along
various tracks: from an exchange of information and best
practices to joint activities on the ground and providing

S/PV.7564

resource support in order to quickly and effectively
respond to existing and emerging challenges. We see
great potential in developing that type of cooperation
in almost all regions of the world.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the whole
range of issues, including those related to preventive
measures, the principles of peacekeeping, structural
changes in the Secretariat, as well as the use and
redistribution of human and financial resources, demand
significant and substantive consideration by Member
States. That work should be carried out primarily within
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly and the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing on his vision of
the future of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
a vision that we fully share. France fully shares the
conceptual framework proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the future of United Nations
peace operations (S/2015/682), based on the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, led by Mr. Ramos-Horta. Those
excellent reports call for a dynamic, engaged and
sometimes, when necessary, robust peacekeeping that
supports national political processes. The fine line that
has been drawn in that regard is, in our view, good.
In the context of this debate, I would like to highlight
three aspects.
First of all, within his prerogatives, the SecretaryGeneral has the right and the duty to ensure that the United
Nations is more effective, responsive and exemplary
on the ground. Those needs can be addressed through
simple and inexpensive measures for reorganizing and
reforming procedures and can be carried out on his own
initiative. With regard to effectiveness, we believe that
the parties on the ground must be given responsibility
and be empowered. The remits and capacities must be
decentralized from Headquarters to the field. We are
counting on the Secretariat to follow through with
that. Along the same lines, we feel that the internal
procedures of the Secretariat should be the focus of an
in-depth analysis. Some rules for recruiting civilian
personnel appear to us to be too cumbersome and
slow. Finally, in terms of setting an example, France
supports the proposals to strengthen the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual abuse committed by Blue Helmets,
and all efforts must come together towards its concrete
implementation. Beginning in 2016, in line with the

15-382257/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

comprehensive training organized by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we want to launch a
training of trainers initiative for the specific purposes
of peacekeeping operations, which will be conducted in
French and open, of course, to a multinational audience.
Secondly, France wants certain issues to be given
fuller consideration. That can also be carried out by
the Secretary-General with our full support. For our
part, we are mobilized to provide the Council with
our military expertise in the following priority areas.
The first area is that of protecting Blue Helmets, who
are called on to intervene in increasingly complex
situations in which they often become targets
themselves. Strengthening their security is a crosscutting objective that is related to force generation
and the smooth implementation of security measures,
including the deployment of measures for protection
against improvised explosive devices. Another area is
the use of new technologies to improve reconnaissance,
surveillance and information capacities, which should
make it possible to better anticipate threats, bolster the
activities of peacekeeping operations, ensure the safety
of the staff and protect civilians. Similarly, some rules
governing operational logistics could be improved in
order to be even more responsive and better adapted
to the needs in the theatres of the operations. Finally,
there must be an improvement in medical care in
peacekeeping operations, where, in the absence of
any standards, the basic principles of transparency,
accountability and performance evaluation have not,
in our opinion, been sufficiently implemented, which
exposes United Nations staff to risks that should be
unacceptable.
As a member of the Security Council and a
penholder on a number of resolutions, we plan to do
all we can in those efforts. That is why we intend to
implement or to support the implementation of several
initiatives in particular. They include strengthening
consultations with regional players and neighbouring
countries. That objective is in the Secretary-General’s
report and we fully endorse it. Therefore, before we
start negotiations on establishing or renewing the
mandate for peacekeeping operation, we will bring
regional players together to hear their views.
We want there to be more dialogue with troop- and
staff-contributing countries. Without those countries,
and without triangular cooperation among them, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, there can be no
effective peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General has

8/22

20/11/2015

said, mandates must be well understood and accepted
in order to be implemented. France therefore intends to
bring together the main troop- and staff-contributing
countries on a regular basis to hear their views on
the implementation of mandates. Those consultations
should be conducted over and beyond the work that
precedes the renewal of mandates, thereby enabling
mandates to be better targeted and prioritized. That
is another area in which we plan to focus our efforts,
in line with the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral.
Finally, the negotiation of compacts with host
States is something we feel should be encouraged, over
and beyond the mandates conferred by the Security
Council. We believe that reciprocal commitment leads
to a common vision of what should be done. France will
continue its wholehearted participation in, and support
for, United Nations peacekeeping operations and will
do all it can to help make them more effective and more
relevant.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today’s briefing and for
your concept note (S/2015/848, annex), and I thank the
Secretary-General for attending today and for giving
us his briefing.
Today’s topic and the Secretary-General’s briefing
address the role and effectiveness of some of the
Council’s most powerful tools for maintaining peace and
security. We welcome the reports and recommendations
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) and the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446). Both provide an important basis and
opportunity for change. The reports set out useful
recommendations to address long-standing challenges,
including the growing mandate resource gap and the
need for enhanced political strategies and engagement
and more timely deployments, together with innovative
and flexible support and financing arrangements, a
number of which the Secretary-General touched upon
this morning.
Today I wish to focus on several issues New
Zealand considers to be of particular importance. First,
we support the calls for a much stronger investment
by the Security Council and the wider United Nations
system in conflict prevention, and for a way to better
harness the Organization’s collective political leverage
in pursuit of political settlements. New Zealand sees
merit in making greater use of timely missions by the
Council, including mini-missions to the field. They
15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

are both a concrete demonstration of the Council’s
interest in a situation and a means for the Council
to both influence and obtain a better understanding
of conditions on the ground. Such missions should
work with the relevant regional organizations. In our
view, there should be standing arrangements for such
missions so that funding is not at the expense of the
on-the-ground operation.
Secondly, the Council needs to put into practice its
commitment to clear, focused and realistic mandates.
We agree with the High-level Panel that we should use
two-stage mandates for missions being established or
reconfigured and allow for operations to be built up
and drawn down according to clear priorities and the
situation on the ground.
Thirdly, the Council needs to consider changes to
the way it develops, considers and approves mandates.
In particular, there needs be more consistent and
meaningful engagement among the Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the affected States,
as well as with the Secretariat. As the concept note
indicates, New Zealand has been active in promoting
informal discussions along these lines with positive
results. Such interaction should be part of everyday
Council and Secretariat culture and practice. Moreover,
to be useful, the conversations need to focus on the
practical and avoid formality. Formalistic and formulaic
consultation is not useful for any us.
Fourthly, we need to enhance the ability of the
United Nations to ensure the safety and security of
United Nations peace operations personnel. Countries
will not make soldiers and police available if they feel
their people may be exposed to unacceptable risk.
As a recent International Peace Institute-organized
workshop that New Zealand co-hosted with Chad and
Uruguay, there was discussion about that method. It was
concluded that there is no single answer to the issue.
Rather, safety and security need to be key concerns in
the development and review of mandates, along with the
training and equipping of peace operations personnel,
access to information, and the Secretariat’s planning
and management practices.
Fifthly, in order to be effective, mandates need to
fit the real-world context. Understanding that context is
critical to effectiveness. That means we need to enhance
the Council’s access to the information necessary for
making sound decisions. New Zealand has proposed
options for addressing that issue. We have requested

S/PV.7564

more regular informal briefings for Council members
on specific missions, beginning with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That has already proved
valuable in providing operational-level information and
insights. The Secretariat briefings provided in informal
triangular consultations on specific mandate renewals
have also been similarly useful, but we believe there is
scope for a more systematic approach.
We would see merit in the Council receiving regular
situational awareness briefings, led by the United
Nations Operations and Crisis Centre and supported by
other United Nations stakeholders. That is consistent
with what is called for in the High-level Panel’s report,
several of the Secretary-General’s reports and resolution
2171 (2014). We understand that such a practice used to
exist. It would provide Council members a more regular
and relevant flow of information on key points across
all United Nations peace operations to assist mandate
implementation, safety and security, and the protection
of civilians.
Finally, we need to get much better at addressing
ongoing allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeepers. We must get past
ritualistic expressions of condemnation and zero
tolerance. We think that a key missing piece of the
puzzle is implementation of the recommendations of
the 2005 report (see A/59/710) by His Excellency Prince
Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein for a more independent and
confidential process to receive and register complaints
in place in missions.
The Secretary-General’s report and the report
of the High-level Panel provide clear analysis of key
problems facing United Nations peace operations and
a wealth of useful proposals to address them. But the
debate has never suffered from a dearth of problem
definition or proposed solutions. What we need is a
sustained commitment to fixing things in a real-world
sense and to set aside narrow interests and fixations
with doctrinal purity to make the changes that can
make a practical difference.
Pragmatism and practicality underlay the original
conception of peacekeeping. It is important that they
continue to inform our responses to modern realities.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the British presidency for having organized today’s
meeting. By way of general comment, I would like to

15-382259/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

say that Spain fully supports the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/682) and all its recommendations.
The report comes at a particularly momentous time,
just after we have thoroughly reviewed the women and
peace and security agenda and as we are considering
the review process of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Therefore, the moment chosen by the United Kingdom
President could not have been more timely. I will try to
summarize the Spanish position in four main points.
First, we particularly value the centrality of the
political element in peacekeeping operations and the
strengthening of prevention and mediation. The focus
on prevention based on a thorough analysis of the
local context, clearly indicates the path to be followed.
Secondly, as the Security Council has acknowledged in
its recent resolution 2242 (2015), we need to improve
the integration of the recommendations on women and
peace and security in the work of the various bodies
of the United Nations system. The Secretary-General
mentioned that point in his briefing. Thirdly, the
protection of civilians must remain at the heart of our
concerns. That is why we are pleased to see the progress
made by introducing periodic assessments of the
missions. The fourth main principle of Spain’s position
concerns the need to improve peacekeeper training
and to improve the accountability of our mandates.
Mandates must be clear, coherent and realistic.
I will now comment briefly on sequenced mandates.
Such mandates must have better adaptation to the reality
on the ground as an objective. Better sequencing does
not lead to mandates of greater economy, but rather to
mandates of greater efficiency. We must prioritize the
goal sought through sequencing. Sequencing cannot
sacrifice essential priorities, such as defending and
promoting human rights or protecting civilians, which
are crucial conditions in preventing conflict, and
therefore in building lasting peace.
The final objective guiding our work must be the
implementation of inclusive political solutions and
translating the ground-based, people-centred approach
into reality, as called for by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. The prioritization of ongoing
tasks initiated by the Council, such as in the Central
African Republic, is very useful in terms of focusing our
future work. It would be suitable to increasingly make
use of the potential granted by periodic mandate reviews
in order to increase progress in that area. With respect
to periodic mandate evaluations, the responsibility of
the penholders is particularly important.
10/22

20/11/2015

I would now like to say a few words on the
transparency of the Council and its mandates. To ensure
the success of all of those initiatives, transparency in
the Council’s functioning needs to be improved. First,
as Spain stated on previous occasions, we support
greater openness in the penholder system, with, as a
general rule, the sharing of the that function among the
elected members. We believe that would be a step in
the right direction, in that it would facilitate the flow
of information.
Secondly, we believe it is important for the process
of selecting mission penholders to be rigorous and,
moreover, transparent.
Thirdly, as proposed by New Zealand, we believe it
would be suitable for the Council to be able to regularly
receive briefings on the situation on the ground, in
which the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre
would participate.
With regard to special political missions, the report
of the Secretary-General includes a recommendation
to establish new regional offices, and notes the
appropriateness of special political missions to
strengthen the political element of peace operations.
Spain of course supports those recommendations.
I wish to conclude my statement by reiterating once
again Spain’s commitment to United Nations peace
operations, which has been steadfast in the past and
will continue to be so in the future.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): This
morning many of us in New York woke up to the news
of yet another terrorist attack, in yet another city,
targeting yet another group of innocents. On behalf of
the United States, I extend our condolences for those
whose lives have been taken and offer our prayers for
those whose lives still hang in the balance. We stand
with the Government and the people of Mali and the
nations and peoples of the world that are unwilling to
bend to fear and will not flinch in the face of cowardly
acts of terrorism. It does not scare us, it will not deter
us, it only unites us.
In Mali, the Security Council has deployed
a peacekeeping mission, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), mandated with carrying out critical
tasks that are essential to advancing peace. Today’s
tragic attack serves to further illustrate the dangerous
environment in which MINUSMA is deployed. While
the nature of the threats they confront may be different,
15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

operating in dangerous environments is not new to
United Nations peacekeeping.
United Nations missions around the world are
carrying out robust mandates designed to advance
peace and protect peoples. Peacekeepers are operating
in environments where terrorists operate freely, where
host Government hostility is so pitched that it sometimes
resort to tactics like denying United Nations troops food
and rations, and where armed groups control territory
and terrorize civilians each and every day. Those
challenges are real and require us to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping and peacekeepers have the right
equipment, the right training and the right support to
perform their mission safely and effectively.
Peacekeepers operating in such environments
require active engagement from the Security Council,
even when it means that we, as the Council, must stand
up to those who are willing to play politics with food
and access and cooperation. Those tactics endanger
civilians’ lives, imperil the peacekeepers that we have
deployed and frustrate the cause of peace. It requires
leadership and commitment on the part of this body and
Governments around the world. It requires clarity on
how better to support the peacekeeping endeavour.
It has been 15 years since the Brahimi report (see
S/2000/809) was issued. The world has changed, and
so, too, has what the world needs of peacekeepers.
That is why the Secretary-General’s proposal on
the implementation of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/682) is so important. All the more critical
is our response to it. If, after receiving the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Panel, we end up
repeating the same words and doing the same thing
as we did before receiving it, then we will have not
progressed very far. We need to make progress, we
need to take decisions, we need to pony up resources
and we need to engage. That is why I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his commitment to undertaking reforms of the United
Nations peace operations that should significantly
enhance the accountability, transparency, performance
and responsiveness of those life-saving operations
around the world. Reforms are needed because we need
United Nations peacekeeping to succeed.
This is not a challenge for the Secretariat in New
York alone, it is a challenge for each of our Governments.
That is why President Obama co-hosted a leaders’

S/PV.7564

summit here in September on the issue on peacekeeping,
to help muster new contributions, new capabilities and
new tools, to allow peacekeepers to do their job more
effectively and safely. In connection with the summit,
President Obama issued a policy to all agencies of my
Government, the first policy of its kind in over 20
years, in which he directed us to do more in three areas:
building partner capacity to support United Nations
peace operations, including contributing United States
diplomatic support; providing enabling capabilities
and personnel to peace operations; and supporting the
Council’s efforts to achieve peacekeeping reforms. I
would like to make just a few brief points about the
third area, namely, peacekeeping reform.
First, the United States welcomes efforts to improve
the analysis and planning of peacekeeping operations,
including through the Strategic Force Generation
and Capabilities Planning Cell. Our analysis and
planning must not only take into account, but also be
guided by, protecting human rights and countering
threats to civilians, including responding to the most
extreme forms of atrocity. Analysis and planning
must be followed by action. Where peacekeepers fail
to act, the Security Council must be engaged early
and often. Only in that way can the Security Council
ensure that civilians who are relying on United Nations
peacekeeping for protection are in fact protected.
In addition to more robust reporting and
strengthened analysis, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the Security Council to re-energize
its efforts to prioritize and sequence peacekeeping
mandates so that capabilities are matched with the
situation at hand, and ultimately lead to operations
that are effective and efficient from mission start-up to
mission exit.
Secondly, when peacekeeping operations are
deployed in environments with asymmetric threats
that pose a risk to United Nations personnel or
civilians, we must redouble our efforts to maintain
sustained cooperation and dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries. We owe it to the women
and men who wear blue helmets to ensure that they
arrive in theatre fully trained and fully equipped
to confront the threats. When the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations tells us that advanced
technologies are needed to keep troops safe and able to
perform their mandates, the Council should support the
use of advanced technologies, not allow parties to play
politics with them.

15-3822511/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are pleased that the leaders’ summit on
peacekeeping, which drew together more than 50
countries, including some of the largest contributors of
troops and police, helped to generate new capabilities
for peacekeeping operations such as MINUSMA, where
42 peacekeepers have been killed and 168 injured. But
to better enable them to operate both effectively and
safely, we encourage Member States that have pledged
support to follow through on those commitments
rapidly.
Thirdly, we need to recognize that when the
Security Council establishes a new peacekeeping
mission, the Security Council’s work has only just
begun. We have a responsibility to monitor the
performance of our missions, including our personnel
and uniformed presence. When underperformance
results from a lack of training and equipment, we
have a responsibility to work with the Secretariat and
troop- and police- contributing countries to build those
capabilities. When peacekeepers opt not to carry out
mandates because of caveats from capitals, the people
whom they are there to serve suffer. Civilians relying
on United Nations peacekeeping for protection do
not appreciate the distinction among commitments
negotiated between New York and a troop-contributor’s
capital. They see a blue helmet, and they appropriately
expect help. It is incumbent on us to deliver. We must
take steps to ensure clarity and accountability when
there is a question of conduct and discipline, refusal
to follow command and control or failure to implement
mandated tasks, especially when they call for the robust
use of force to protect civilians.
Every week, we are learning of more cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping
personnel. That demands a swift and urgent response
from the international community and the United
Nations leadership. When peacekeepers victimize the
very individuals and communities they are deployed to
protect, it is nothing short of horrific and undermines
the credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations. The
Security Council must do more, and the United States
remains committed to working with the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that we are fully able to implement
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse. We welcome the call on
the Security Council to include issues of misconduct,
including sexual exploitation and abuse on its agenda
so that the Council can review follow-up action on all
reported allegations. Leadership is, of course, essential.
The success or failure of our peacekeeping missions
12/22

20/11/2015

hinges on the experience and qualifications of their
senior leaders and the support they receive from United
Nations Headquarters. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to improve and enhance the selection
of senior leadership for peacekeeping missions globally.
Fourthly, the United States recognizes the
importance of developing new and deeper relationships
among the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. With nearly 63 per cent of United
Nations peace operations and 87 per cent of all
uniformed peacekeepers serving in Africa, we view our
partnerships with regional organizations — in particular
with the African Union — as critical to ensuring that
we are structuring missions with the requisite support
and oversight to be effective.
Fifthly and finally, we welcome the emphasis of
the Panel on the need to redouble efforts to achieve
political solutions. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that political settlements that promote peaceful
and inclusive societies and help advance human rights
are key to preventing conflict and interrupting cycles
of violence. We have a vested interest in ensuring that,
in those places where we have deployed peacekeeping
missions, we are equally engaged in advancing the
political process.
The challenges before us are serious, but so
too are the opportunities. We need United Nations
peacekeeping to succeed, and together, by pursuing the
reforms that we have discussed today, we can do much
to advance the ability of the United Nations and the
community of nations to advance peace and security.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for the concept note
(S/2015/846, annex) provided to guide our discussions.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing.
We commend the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) for consulting widely with
Member States, regional organizations and the United
Nations committees in the course of its work. That, we
believe, has led to the broad acceptance of its report (see
S/2015/446). We note the broad themes under which the
Panel examined the challenges faced by United Nations
peace operations, namely, partnerships, politics,
prevention and people. Nigeria welcomes the Human
Rights Up Front action plan, proposed by the SecretaryGeneral to implement the Panel’s recommendations,
which renew focus on prevention, mediation and

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

stronger regional and global partnerships. Those entail
new ways of planning and conducting United Nations
peace operations to make them faster, more responsive
and more accountable to the needs of countries and
people in conflict. In prioritizing areas of the HIPPO
report for implementation, it is pertinent to proceed
from identifying propositions to providing immediate
and enduring solutions to targeted challenges and
United Nations peace operations.
We underscore the vital needs to address evolving
challenges of peacekeeping in the context of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In that connection, we emphasize the importance
of strengthening triangular cooperation among the
Secretariat, troop- and police- contributing countries
and the Security Council to foster common acceptance
and appreciation on the part of all stakeholders for
the effective implementation of the United Nations
peacekeeping initiatives.
We welcome HIPPO’s recommendations aimed
at enhancing the cooperation relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
Partnership is the cornerstone of Africa’s efforts to
stabilize its conflict zones and to shoulder its share of
the global responsibility to maintain peace and security.
In that regard, it is important to highlight the funding
challenges faced by the AU, and the need for the United
Nations to assume primary responsibility for AU-led
operations initiated as bridging measures. That should
not be misunderstood as unwillingness on the part of
the AU to manage its own operations. Rather, it is an
acknowledgement that resolving armed conflicts in the
world of today often requires complex, nuanced and
high-technology responses that demand a particular
level of infrastructure that the AU might not be able
to immediately make available. The need for support
does not amount to dependency. Rather, it should be
viewed as a necessary element of the vital partnership
for maintaining international peace and security.
We welcome the Panel’s proposal regarding
the use of United Nations assessed contributions to
support Security Council-authorized African Union
peace-support operations, including the causes
associated with deployed uniformed personnel to
complement funding for the African Union and all
African Member States. We also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to prioritize the implementation
of the Panel’s recommendation regarding developing
stronger and original global partnerships. That

S/PV.7564

would require improving institutional collaboration
between the United Nations and original bodies that
would go beyond context-specific to more predictable
mechanisms for cooperation. In that regard, we look
forward to the early finalization of the joint African
Union-United Nations framework for an enhanced
partnership in peace and security.
Nigeria supports the proposal for tailoring and
sequencing mandates for peacekeeping missions.
That will enable planners to take into consideration
realities on the ground when reformulating mandates
and assessing the resources needed to achieve the
required tasks. Sequencing also helps to ensure that the
dialogues among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop- and police- contributing countries are not
limited to the predeployment phases of missions, but
sustained as an integral and periodic component of the
mission’s work.
The United Nations peace operations have, since
their inception, been a vital part of the global security
architecture. They are a source of inspiration and
hope for the victims of conflicts. Ensuring that peace
operations remain relevant now and in the future will
require the collective efforts of United Nations Member
States to surmount existing and emerging challenges.
As we consider the HIPPO report and that of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/682) and seek a way forward,
the Security Council is again charged primarily with
the maintenance of international peace and security
and must demonstrate leadership by expediting action
on recommendations directed to it.
I would like to conclude by offering our deepest
condolences to the families, friends and Governments
of peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the line of
duty. I also would like to express our commiseration
with the families of those who have been affected by the
recent terrorist attacks in France, Lebanon and Mali.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the presidency of the United Kingdom for convening
this meeting. China strongly condemns the terrorist
attack that took place in Mali. Terrorism is the common
enemy of all humankind. The international community
must strengthen coordination and cooperation and fight
together against terrorism.
China thanks Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing and welcomes his implementation report,
submitted on the basis of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations

15-3822513/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

(S/2015/682). Peacekeeping operations are an important
means for maintaining international peace and security.
They should both remain faithful to principles and also
progress with the times. In that connection, China
wishes to stress the following four points.
First, peacekeeping operations should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the three principles of peacekeeping.
They should respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned and their wishes. They should help the
countries concerned, on the basis of their specific
needs, in realizing peace and stability and enhance
capacity-building in the sphere of peace and security.
Secondly, the Security Council should strengthen
the macromanagement of peacekeeping operations to
ensure that the mandate is practical and feasible, with
clear goals, focus and priorities. The Council should be
able to adapt the scale and mandate of peace operations
in accordance with the developments on the ground and
to formulate an exit strategy at the appropriate moment.
Thirdly, the United Nations should enhance
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations, expedite
force generation and deployment, optimize logistics
capabilities and improve the effectiveness of the use
of peacekeeping resources. The United Nations should
strengthen the training of peacekeepers and reinforce
discipline and monitoring procedures so as to safeguard
the image of peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, the United Nations should strengthen
coordination
and
cooperation
with
regional
organizations in peacekeeping, giving full play to the
latter’s unique advantages so as to form synergies. In the
long term, the United Nations should increase support
to the African Union and other regional organizations
to enhance Africa’s own capacity for peacekeeping, so
as to help Africans settle African problems in African
ways.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and the largest developing country, China has been
a firm supporter of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and is one of the major troop contributors
and donors to peacekeeping operations. China has
announced that it will join the new United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, take the
lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police
squad and build a peacekeeping standby force of
8,000 troops. China will deploy more personnel with
engineering, transportation and medical expertise. In

14/22

20/11/2015

the next five years China will train 2,000 peacekeeping
personnel for various countries and implement 10
demining assistance projects, including providing
training and equipment. China will provide the African
Union with a total of $100 million of free military
assistance and deploy the first helicopter squadron to
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
Some of the resources in the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund will be used to support
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
China is making every effort to implement the
above-mentioned initiatives. We are willing to work
with all those concerned to put into practice the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and contribute further to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement by expressing Jordan’s
strong condemnation of the terrorist attacks that took
place in Mali today, and by extending our condolences
to the families of the victims.
Allow me to express my thanks and appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing and tireless efforts in peacekeeping. This
discussion is taking place at an important time.
The Secretary-General’s report on the future of
peacekeeping operations (S/2015/682) and the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) have acquired a high degree of
importance in view of the exacerbating conflicts
around the world. Those conflicts have changed in
nature over the years and have spread to the extent
that now they threaten areas that used to be safe. They
are not confined geographically and have developed
faster than the ability of the United Nations and the
international community to deal with them.
What we seek now is not only to limit those conflicts
and alleviate their efects, but also to deal with their root
causes and prevent them from erupting in the first place.
Jordan appreciates the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations, welcomes their reports and agrees with
most of the recommendations contained therein. They
have looked at the future of peacekeeping operations
from a new and vital perspective. I would like to focus
on the four most important recommendations in the
reports, which we deem to be of the utmost priority for
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first of these is the promotion of mediation,
prevention and support of political processes.
Peacekeeping operations are not an alternative to
national political settlements but rather pave the way
for the establishment of a conducive environment for
a peaceful settlement among the conflicting parties
in a manner that takes the interests of everyone into
consideration and bridges the differences between them.
Such a settlement cannot be achieved unless it reflects
the true will of the parties to the conflict. Therefore,
mediation can play a major part. The Security Council’s
role in that regard is extremely important owing to its
political leverage and its mandate to support political
processes in many different ways, including through
mediation and communication with the parties to the
conflict. We believe that we could establish a mediation
panel composed of experts and consultants that have
wide-ranging relations with the parties to the conflict,
or with the local communities in the host countries, and
that such a panel should be one of the elements taken
into consideration in the design of future peacekeeping
operations.
The advisability of sequenced mandates is the
second important recommendation in the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Panel. This recommendation
should be given consideration in the context not only of
new peacekeeping operations but of current ones as well.
Developments on the ground should serve as the compass
by which the Security Council determines the type of
response that is suited to the particular requirements
of each conflict. We believe that sequenced mandates
will help the Security Council to save time and effort
in dealing with emerging conflicts and preventing their
eruption in the first place, particularly in the case of the
two most dangerous phenomena: violent extremism and
terrorism, and diseases such as Ebola.
Sequenced mandates can also play an important
role in identifying ways and means of providing
protection to civilians, such as increasing the police or
military component, or of assisting political processes
that require further support or further participation by
women. The second phase of any sequenced mandate
should include exit strategies that would avoid leaving
a security vacuum in the host country. We therefore
support the idea that peacekeeping operations should
be designed in such a way as to be commensurate with
the threats they face.
To reach the necessary level of preparedness,
peacekeepers must be adequately trained and equipped,

S/PV.7564

particularly when they are required to deal with crossborder conflicts that exposes them to extremely
dangerous and potentially explosive situations. We
believe that the Secretariat and the Security Council
should later on determine the steps to be followed in this
regard, such as increasing the number of specialized
consultants in peacekeeping operations who could
provide analyses and recommendations to the Security
Council to help in the formulation of future mandates.
Thirdly, deepening cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the European
Union, the African Union and the League of Arab
States, is also extremely important for bridging
divisions among nations and furthering international
and regional responses to the conflicts in the Middle
East and Africa that have been deteriorating over the
past few years. We encourage the Security Council to
promote and expand its cooperation with the League of
Arab States in dealing with crises in the Middle East.
Fourthly, with respect to accountability for human
rights violations resulting from violence or sexual
exploitation, we should not allow a few individuals to
disgrace peacekeeping operations. We should make
sure that necessary and firm measures are adopted so
that violations can be investigated and perpetrators
brought to justice.
Lastly, we stress the importance of coordination
and cooperation between the Security Council, all
relevant United Nations entities and the troop- and
police-contributing countries. This would make for
better-prepared peacekeeping operations and the
enhanced prioritization of their tasks. Countries with
broad experience would be particularly helpful in this
exercise, which would further the implementation of
the recommendations of both the Secretary-General
and the High-level Independent Panel.
Jordan takes pride in its participation in
peacekeeping operations, which proceeds from its moral
and humanitarian commitment to the United Nations,
the prevention of conflicts and their settlement. We rank
first among police-contributors and have contributed
1,580 officers so far. We salute all those who work in
peacekeeping operations and appreciate their sacrifice
in extremely difficult and dangerous conditions. They
have shown the highest level of professionalism,
dedication and courage in the interests of international
peace and security.

15-3822515/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to begin my statement with a firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks against innocent
civilians in Mali. On behalf of Chad, I would like to
express our deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and to the Government and the people of Mali.
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for
convening this meeting on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the future of United Nations peace
operations. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
Seventy years after the founding of the United
Nations, the world seems still to be far from the goal
of a world without war, given the increasing number of
conflicts and the difficulties deterring their prevention
and resolution. Chad takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the priorities set out therein
(S/2015/682). I will make some brief observations in
this regard.
We agree that United Nations peace operations,
including special political missions and peacekeeping
operations, should give priority to finding political
solutions to conflicts. In this respect, my country
supports the call of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations for the Security Council to draw
upon its collective political influence to promote
these solutions. However, for a political solution to be
successful, it is important that the priorities and needs
of the host State be taken into account and that its
cooperation and that of other relevant actors be a given.
Pursuing political solutions should not exclude
the proportional use of force when it is necessary. In
some situations, non-State actors, such as armed or
terrorist groups, deliberately undermine peace efforts
and threaten the lives of civilians. In such cases, the
use of force cannot be ruled out. In this respect, we
welcome the experiences of the Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which are successes
that many people recognize.
If the United Nations is not equipped to impose
peace, the regional and subregional organizations that
are willing to intervene for the sake of peace must be
able to receive the support needed from the Security
Council and the General Assembly. This is particularly

16/22

20/11/2015

necessary, given that the current nature of conflicts
is such that that type of intervention is required
sometimes, and also because of the rigid approach of
traditional United Nations peacekeeping.
Chad is in favour of the better prioritization and
sequencing of tasks in peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, the Security Council should conduct meaningful
consultations with the host States and subregional and
regional partners and also with neighbouring countries.
Chad strongly supports the request formulated by
New Zealand and France that peacekeepers be better
protected. In this regard, we urge the Security Council
to address the issue of safety and security as a highly
strategic issue. Like other countries, Chad has lost
many of its soldiers deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
Despite its experience and substantial resources,
the United Nations cannot meet alone the numerous
challenges it faces in terms of peace and security,
particularly in Africa. It is therefore essential that the
United Nations strengthen its strategic partnership
with the African Union (AU). There is no need to recall
that the overwhelming majority of United Nations
peace operations, including uniformed personnel, are
deployed in Africa. The African Union is a key strategic
partner that needs to be supported in its efforts. It must
be closely associated, in particular, with all United
Nations initiatives on peace operations on the African
continent.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
makes provision for regional organizations to play
a role, and the African Union performs such a role
brilliantly. As an illustration, it should be noted that
the African Union is currently operating in the Sudan
as part of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur, in Somalia and elsewhere. Recently,
the AU first deployed in Mali and in the Central
African Republic, facilitating the later deployment of
MINUSMA and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in those countries, respectively. Furthermore,
the comparative advantages of the African Union, such
as geographical proximity, legitimacy, knowledge of
the root causes of conflict and the ability to respond
quickly in crisis situations, are well established.
With respect to burden-sharing, the United Nations
should support the AU, particularly by financing its

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, as recommended by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the Secretary-General
in their respective reports.
In conclusion, we express our gratitude to the Highlevel Independent Panel and the Secretary-General
for their reports replete with recommendations. Chad
supports all the relevant recommendations contained
therein, in particular those on the issue of financing
the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
authorized by the Security Council.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his views on the
future of United Nations peace operations, which we
have heard with much interest. I also wish to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/682), which we find comprehensive and forwardlooking. We consider today’s meeting very timely and
we thank the United Kingdom presidency for producing
a detailed and useful concept note (S/2015/846, annex),
which could help guide our deliberations towards a
productive end.
Malaysia has been a regular troop contributor to
United Nations peacekeeping since 1960, three years
after achieving its independence in 1957. That is proof
of our belief in multilateralism and the principle of
collective action. Since then, we have seen the scope,
role and functions of United Nations peacekeepers
evolve tremendously, certainly going much further
than was envisioned in the Charter of the United
Nations. In the context of ongoing peace operations,
particularly those with aspects of so-called frozen
conflict, we believe the Security Council could do
more to capitalize on its political leverage with a view
to accelerating political settlements among belligerents
on the ground. In certain situations, such as Lebanon,
the Sudan and Western Sahara, for example, we believe
that there is room for the missions on the ground, as
well as the Council, to improve and build on relations
with the parties concerned, with a view to moving the
political procses forward.
We are also seeing an increasing number of instances
where conflict settlement processes occur outside
the Council, with regional actors and organizations
playing a leading role. That is an encouraging trend,
and we believe that the capacity and capabilities of
regional organizations to continue doing so should be
supported and reinforced. That said, mindful of the
role and responsibility entrusted to the Council in the

S/PV.7564

maintenance of international peace and security, and
in the context of such processes, it is important that
the full Council, and not just some of its members, be
involved. The Security Council cannot be reduced to a
rubber-stamping authority. That would only weaken its
credibility and diminish its political leverage.
As rightly noted in the concept note, the Security
Council has an array of tools it can deploy to ensure
that it fulfils its mandate. More important, perhaps,
is that it needs a shift in thinking from a conflictmanagement mode to a problem-solving one. At the
same time, the Council could refresh its existing tools,
in the way that, for example, New Zealand has given
new meaning to consultation between the Council and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), which we fully
support. In our view, such informal engagement does
add value, and it is worth considering whether it could
be institutionalized. And by institutionalized, I do not
mean formalized.
With regard to the issue of mandate sequencing,
Malaysia is not opposed to the idea in principle and
could readily support it. That said, we believe that
several prerequisites must be met before such operations
could be deployed. In essence, such prerequisites
mean more comprehensive treatment of all the issues
outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General and of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446). From an operational perspective,
areas such as logistics support, force generation and
deployment and mandate design, among others, must
be given due priority while at the same time a keen eye
must be kept on aspects of practicality such as mission
footprint and, of course, financial costs.
Mandate design is particularly important. In our
view, it should be focused and tailored specifically to the
situation. Missions must be able to interpret and apply
their mandates at the technical level on the ground. At
the same time, troops must be deployed with assets that
are adequate and appropriate to effective execution of
their duties. In the context of the increasingly complex
nature of the situations in which peace operations are
deployed, another key issue that must be addressed
when considering the issue of mandate sequencing is
that of caveats. In our view, if peace operations are to
effectively implement their mandates, more clarity is
needed on how caveats imposed by specific TCCs can
either help or hamper a mission’s success. In that regard,
a focused discussion involving TCCs on the subject of
caveats and the protection of civilians, leading to a

15-3822517/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

complete and agreed-on understanding, would be highly
useful. On a related issue, we would like to emphasize
that proposals for consolidating missions, particularly
their civilian components, should not compromise the
roles of protection advisers, particularly of women and
children.
In conclusion, we greatly appreciate today’s
opportunity for the Security Council to discuss the
implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations
peace operations review exercise. We hope that in
future similar discussions can be convened that take
up other areas and aspects touched on in the review.
In that regard, we welcome the presidential statement
currently being negotiated on the issue and look
forward to its adoption soon. We owe nothing less than
a full consideration of such issues to the brave men
and women who risk their lives every day in some of
the world’s most deplorable and dangerous conflict
situations, which we, as the Council, have a duty to
address.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to begin by
paying tribute to the victims of the terrorist attack in
Mali today. We strongly condemn such criminal acts.
We commend the United Kingdom presidency
for organizing today’s meeting, which affords us an
opportunity to assess the proposals for enhancing peace
operations at a time of unprecedented challenges to
international peace and security. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for introducing his report (S/2015/682) on the
future of United Nations peace operations and the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446). We commend him for his review of reform
efforts with a view to strengthening the effectiveness
of the United Nations system and specifically its
peacekeeping operations. We also commend the Highlevel Panel for the expeditious and admirable manner in
which it carried out its comprehensive review of peace
operations, and for its far-reaching recommendations.
In the Security Council’s recent open debate
on the prevention of conflict, its root causes and
building peaceful societies (see S/PV.7561), Member
States dwelled extensively on the growing insecurity
around the world, which is characterized by civil
wars, asymmetric conflicts, terrorism, intolerance
and hatred, as well as on how to prevent conflicts and
transition to peacebuilding.

18/22

20/11/2015

The assessments of the High-level Panel and the
Secretary-General’s report form the basis for today’s
discussion of the review and the future of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the near future,
the entire membership will focus its attention on the
Panel’s recommendations and on the priorities and
key elements outlined in the Secretary-General’s plan
for translating them into action, centred on the three
pillars of prevention and mediation, regional and global
partnerships and the planning and conduct of United
Nations peace operations.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General on
the advantages of ensuring the Security Council’s
early involvement as one of the most effective tools
we have for preventing and mediating conflicts. We
agree with the Panel’s recognition of the impossibility
of effectively responding to the multiplicity of
crises and of the problems of overstretching conflict
management, and with its call for renewed efforts in
conflict prevention and mediation as a core United
Nations function. We also agree with its recognition
of the need for Member States’ support as a signal of
our global determination to reduce armed conflicts.
To that end, the report identifies a range of tools and
capacities for strengthening and creating faster and
more cost-effective responses to conflict through early
action, including envoys, regional offices, good offices,
standby mediation experts and support to United
Nations country teams.
Originally, after an outbreak of conflict, a
political settlement was traditionally seen as the
fundamental prerequisite for the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation, since it would mean having
an actual peace to keep, with a political agreement
and the consent of the parties as a basis. Currently,
however, most peacekeeping operations are deployed
in environments where all-out conflict is raging, with
egregious violations of human rights, a scenario that
radically contradicts our traditional understanding of
the deployment of peacekeeping operations. The Panel
quite rightly insists on the need for political solutions as
a central part of such operations, based on the premise
that United Nations engagement must be designed and
implemented to help the parties to a conflict reach and
sustain a political settlement, given that the use of force
is not at the core of United Nations peace operations
and in our view should be used only when civilians are
subjected to violence and abuse.

15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The establishment and strengthening of regional
and global partnerships is another pillar identified
as a critical element for the future of peacekeeping
operations,
through
further
institutionalized
cooperation and enabling consultation on early warning
and conflict analysis. Since most peace operations are
deployed in Africa, the African Union must be a key
partner of the United Nations. Thus Angola reiterates
the Panel’s call for sustained, predictable and flexible
funding mechanisms in support of African Union peace
operations, even as more resources for these operations
should be mobilized by the Africans themselves.
Moreover, the African Union should continue to
receive technical and planning expertise in conflict
prevention, military and police planning, and financial
and logistics management, as well as in integrating
human rights issues into African Union operations.
Taking into account the recent experience of United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations,
it is essential to institutionalize a consultative process
and joint mechanisms.
The planning and conduct of United Nations peace
operations is the third pillar prioritized in the report,
which recommends — and we fully subscribe to this — a
sustained dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional partners for a better understanding of the
prospects, expectations, capabilities and constraints of
a given peacekeeping operation.
On the role of the Security Council, we share the
view that this organ should pursue a more critical
prioritization when evaluating mandates and reviewing
peacekeeping operations and, where appropriate, should
consider with rigor sequenced or phased mandates or
establish new peacekeeping operations.
Before concluding, we deem it necessary to call
for concerted action in the implementation of the areas
identified as critical in the United Nations capacity
to sustain peace, among which the prevention of
conflict assumes primacy. Concerning peacekeeping
operations, we reiterate the key importance of pursuing
political solutions to conflicts and the non-imposition
of solutions by coercive means or violence; the need
for political and operational support for peacekeeping
missions, particularly in cases of attacks and violence
against civilians; and, finally, the need for increased
partnerships and the strengthening of cooperation with
regional organizations, the African union in particular.

S/PV.7564

The comprehensive process of reviewing peacekeeping
operations, the peacebuilding architecture and the
women and peace and security agenda are crucial
initiatives in order to strengthen the effectiveness of
the United Nations in the quest for world peace and
security. The Summit that took place on 28 September
on the margins of the General Assembly, where
more than 30 countries reaffirmed their support and
made specific pledges of assistance to peacekeeping
operations, was an excellent opportunity to reflect on
and seek new ways of addressing the growing threats to
peace and security that the world is facing.
Mr. Špokauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
report on the future of United Nations peace operations
(S/2015/682), in which he proposes ways forward to
implement the recommendations submitted by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
appreciate the presidency’s efforts to focus this briefing
on a few specific recommendations and hope that this
will contribute to a more streamlined conversation
among Council members.
The need to refocus the efforts of the United
Nations on prevention is a constant refrain in our
discussions. However, the gap between declarations
and actions remains wide. The Panel has hit the nail on
the head by describing the United Nations as focused
more on bringing ambulances to the bottom of the cliff
rather than trying to prevent the actual fall. Preventive
measures are manifold and include early-warning and
alerts capacity, the Council engaging early to address
emerging threats, mediation and good offices, and
better partnerships with regional organizations and
with their respective early-warning mechanisms.
We are aware that at times proactive United Nations
engagement may not be enough to stop a conflict from
erupting, as evidenced by the unending human tragedy
in Yemen. However, the risk of failure is not an excuse
for not trying. The Council should remain proactive
and flexible in quickly bringing up emerging issues for
discussion, whether through re-establishing some form
of horizon scanning, through informal briefings by the
Department of Political Affairs, or through the use of
“Other business”.
The Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front
Initiative should also be further developed and applied
systematically as an early-warning tool, providing
prompt, reliable and unsanitized information about
serious human rights violations.

15-3822519/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/11/2015

In this context, let me stress that the need for rapid
deployment cannot serve as grounds for compromising
on the zero-tolerance policy towards all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations and
related personnel. A preventive approach is paramount,
including
pre-deployment
training,
adequate
mission staffing with gender mainstreaming, women
advisers, child protection advisers, viable complaint
and disciplinary mechanisms, and adequate vetting
procedures. The recommendations of the 2005 Prince
Zeid report (A/59/710) on making the complaints
investigation mechanism more independent from
missions also remain valid.

tasks are as relevant as ever, yet it is expected to deliver
more. We have heard the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General plead for flexibility and mandate
adjustments in order to be able to deliver some lowhanging fruit in an environment where hostility to
UNMISS is still high. In October the mandate was
adjusted to support the implementation of the peace
agreement. Next month the Council will once again
revise the mandate to reflect the need for greater
political engagement. How best to balance the core
priorities with measures needed to build trust with the
host country while ensuring the necessary resources
and force enablers is for the Council to decide.

To have a meaningful impact on the ground, as the
Panel notes, the United Nations should be able to deliver
more “right fit” rather than “template” missions. The
Council and the Secretariat must ensure that mission
mandates are sufficiently clear and robust, adequately
financed and supported by the necessary materiel.
Peacekeepers must have the will and the capacity to act
in defence of those they are mandated to protect.

In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is facing a
complex set of tasks and challenges, operating in an
environment under constant terrorist threat, of which
we were once again reminded this morning. How to
adjust and update the Mission to best protect not only
civilians but also the peacekeepers themselves calls for
intensified discussion by all stakeholders.

As the United Nations is forced to operate with
insufficient capacities and drawn-out force generation,
prioritizing and sequencing might indeed be the most
suitable approach in situations where every day of
inaction means more deaths and displacement. Recently,
such sequencing was introduced in the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and was welcomed as an example to follow. While fully
appreciating this innovation, we believe that we should
continue to carefully observe the impact of sequencing
where it is applied and draw lessons for improvement.

Finally, as Jordan has rightly underlined, mandate
sequencing is a concept that should be explored not
just when a peace operation is deployed but also as it
prepares to leave.

On the ground in the Central African Republic,
concerns have been expressed about the impact of
such sequencing on the Mission’s capacity to support
security-sector reform (SSR) efforts at a time when this
issue is causing especially heated reactions in political
circles as well as among the population. As security
in the country continues to suffer setbacks, the need
to invest in the SSR process, to promptly carry out
vetting procedures and to proceed with building viable
and professional security and defence forces could not
be more urgent. Furthermore, lack of progress on the
matter could have a negative impact on the protection
mandate, especially as elections are approaching.
In South Sudan, with almost 190,000 civilians
seeking protection at United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) sites, the Mission’s urgent protection
20/22

Building on the accomplishments made by Côte
d’Ivoire in the areas of national reconciliation, stability,
economic recovery and the successful conclusion
of the presidential elections, the Council employed
benchmarks to measure progress that served as the
basis for gradually phasing out the mission and handing
over authority to the host Government and the United
Nations country team. We should apply this model
more regularly, since it offers all sides concerned a
clear path towards completing the involvement of the
United Nations and encourages a sense of ownership
over the reforms needed to take complete charge of the
country’s future.
Sequencing and the use of benchmarks could be
employed to prevent the hasty and premature induction
or even departure of peacekeeping operations. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the elaboration by
the Government and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of a gradual exit strategy, bound to benchmarks
and indicators in the security, economic and political
fields, is clearly a better course of action that can
minimize the risk of squandering the gains achieved at a
great cost by the Congolese people and the international
15-38225

20/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

community. Had we embraced such benchmarks in the
case of the United Nations Office in Burundi, we may
have had a different situation in Burundi today.
To conclude, we encourage the Council to continue
discussion on implementing the recommendations of
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General, and we
hope that it will be followed by concrete action very
soon.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin with some comments on the
situation in Mali. Like others in the Council, I have
been shocked by the hostage crisis in Bamako today.
I express solidarity with the Malian Government and
its people in their fight against terrorism. I offer my
sincere condolences to the victims of the attack and
deep sympathy for the fear and injuries inflicted on
those held hostage. We commend the swift and decisive
action by the Malian security forces, supported by
French forces and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The Security Council will remain closely engaged
in the stabilization of Mali through MINUSMA, and
the Government and the people of Mali have our full
support at this difficult time.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General not just
for his briefing but also for his initiative in setting up
the peace operations review (see S/2015/446) and his
follow-up to that review, including through this meeting
of the Security Council. As we have heard today, the
Council needs to play a significant role in empowering
peace operations if we are to meet the challenges of
current and future conflicts.
For the United Kingdom, this means improving the
way the Council mandates missions and changing how
we discuss the work of the United Nations in fragile
and conflict-affected States. At its best, United Nations
peacekeeping can save lives, rebuild communities
and replace fear with hope. But not all United Nations
peacekeeping is as good as the best. In particular, the
United Nations must respond robustly to all allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse. Like New Zealand and
others, we therefore support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and stand ready to help implement
them. On this and all other issues related to peace
operations, it is time now to stop talking and to start
taking action to make a real difference. Let me make
three practical suggestions on how we can do so,

S/PV.7564

focusing on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) as an example.
First, we need better phased or sequenced
mandates with more prioritization of mandated tasks.
The Council initiated that in the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, and I hope
that we can continue by looking at greater prioritization
and sequencing of tasks when we come to renew the
mandate of UNMISS next month. We must set a clear
direction for UNMISS as it evolves over the coming
months to support the peace agreement. We will, of
course, be guided by the technical assessment of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We should
also take this opportunity to think hard about UNMISS
priorities, how they are sequenced and how best to
expand the Mission so that it delivers what is needed
on the ground.
Secondly, we need to get our political messaging
right. When the Council speaks, it is the voice of the
international community. We must use that voice to
support the work of our missions across the globe, as
well as the peace processes that we and others lead.
We must make use of all tools at the Council’s disposal
to speak out when there are repeated violations of
status-of-forces agreements. We also need to keep
in mind the impact that our political messaging can
have in preventing conflicts and in responding to
situations of emerging conflict. This means using
press statements, resolutions and Council visits to the
region to send clear and unambiguous messages; and
yes, it means being prepared to impose sanctions and
arms embargoes where appropriate. It also means that
if States demonstrate and deliver a firm commitment
to peace, we should respond to that commitment with
equal determination.
Finally, the United Kingdom believes that we
need more feedback and better analysis to improve
our ability to protect civilians. To inform the phasing
of the Mission, the Council needs to be provided with
evidence of how the Mission is fulfilling its tasking and
why there are shortfalls. This should include whether
or not the current Mission configuration and military
components are sufficient to deliver. All of this requires
greater strategic analysis and planning at earlier stages
by the Secretariat. We fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to enhance those capabilities and to
engage with the Security Council at an earlier stage.

15-3822521/22

S/PV.7564

Maintenance of international peace and security

We can put this into practice by thinking about what
tools UNMISS needs to protect civilians better. What
additional or different police or military capabilities
are required? What levels of good offices are needed
to support the parties’ political commitment to the
ceasefire so as to reduce the threat of violence against
civilians? Engaging with the local community will
also be vital — putting people at the centre of what we
do and really thinking about what the United Nations
Mission can do to deliver for those who live there. We
should listen carefully to the local community about
how it can support the work of the Mission.

20/11/2015

I look forward to continuing these discussions as
we approach the mandate renewal for UNMISS in the
coming weeks. If we take these steps and more, I believe
that we can make a tangible improvement in the work
both of UNMISS and United Nations peacekeeping
more broadly, and in doing so we can help improve the
lives of the people of South Sudan and beyond.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

22/22

15-38225
