S/PRST/2006/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5394th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 March 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has taken note of the Secretary-General’s sixth
report on the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB), and approves his
recommendations.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned by the continuing violence
carried out by the Forces nationales de libération (FNL), and the fighting
between them and the Burundian army, by the human rights abuses committed
by both sides, as well as by factors of instability remaining in the region. It
calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities and human rights abuses. It
welcomes President Nkurunziza’s commitment to bring to justice those
responsible for such abuses and encourages the Government of Burundi to
work closely with the United Nations human rights monitors to this end.
“The Security Council welcomes the statements recently made by the
FNL leader, Agathon Rwasa, in Dar es Salaam, expressing his readiness to
negotiate with a view to put a final end to violence. The Council urges both
parties to seize this opportunity for negotiations with a view to bringing peace
to the whole country.
“The Security Council requests in this context the Secretary-General to
keep it regularly informed on developments in the situation, and, in
consultation with the Government of Burundi, on ONUB’s disengagement
plan.
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made by the Government
of Burundi since the completion of the Transition, in particular its efforts to
reduce poverty.
“The Security Council encourages the Burundian parties to continue on
the course of the reforms agreed in Arusha, while maintaining the spirit of
dialogue, consensus and inclusion which made possible the success of the
transition in their country.
“The Security Council invites the States of the Regional Initiative to
continue to work with the Burundian authorities on the consolidation of peace
in the country and in the region. It encourages the international community —
including the relevant United Nations agencies — to continue to support the
Burundian authorities following ONUB’s disengagement in the long-term.”

06-28168 (E) 230306

*0628168*
