A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/166
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/607)]
49/166.

Traffic in women and girls

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women, enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the principles set forth in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 1/ the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 2/ the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 3/ the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 4/ the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 5/ and the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women, 6/
Recalling that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 7/ affirmed the

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 34/180, annex.

3/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

4/

Resolution 39/46, annex.

5/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

6/

Resolution 48/104.

7/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

95-76975

/...

A/RES/49/166
Page 2

human rights of women and the girl child as an inalienable, integral and
indivisible part of universal human rights,
Convinced of the need to eliminate all forms of sexual violence and
sexual trafficking, which are violations of the human rights of women and girl
children,
Condemning the illicit and clandestine movement of persons across
national and international borders, largely from developing countries and some
countries with economies in transition, with the end goal of forcing women and
girl children into sexually or economically oppressive and exploitative
situations, for the profit of recruiters, traffickers and crime syndicates, as
well as other illegal activities related to trafficking, such as forced
domestic labour, false marriages, clandestine employment and false adoption,
Noting the increasing number of women and girl children from developing
countries and from some countries with economies in transition who are being
victimized by traffickers, and acknowledging that the problem of trafficking
also victimizes young boys,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1994/45 of
4 March 1994, 8/ called for the elimination of trafficking in women,
Aware of the decision of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, in its resolution 3/2 of 6 May 1994, 9/ to consider the
international traffic in minors at its fourth session in the context of its
discussion on the question of organized transnational crime,
Realizing the urgent need for the adoption of effective measures
nationally, regionally and internationally to protect women and girl children
from this nefarious traffic,
1.
Expresses its grave concern over the worsening problem of
trafficking, particularly the increasing syndication of the sex trade and the
internationalization of the traffic in women and girl children;
2.
Welcomes the Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development, 10/ held at Cairo from 5 to 13 September
1994, which, inter alia, called upon all Governments to prevent all
international trafficking in migrants, especially for the purpose of
prostitution, and for the adoption by Governments of both receiving countries
and countries of origin, of effective sanctions against those who organize
undocumented migration, exploit undocumented migrants or engage in trafficking
in undocumented migrants, especially those who engage in any form of
international traffic of women and girl children;
3.
Encourages Governments, relevant bodies and specialized agencies
of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations to gather and share information relative to all
aspects of trafficking in women and girl children to facilitate the
development of anti-trafficking measures;

8/
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
9/

Ibid., Supplement No. 11 (E/1994/31), chap. I, sect. C.

10/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/166
Page 3

4.
Urges Governments to take appropriate measures to address the
problem of trafficking in women and girl children and to ensure that the
victims are provided with the necessary assistance, support, legal advice,
protection, treatment and rehabilitation, and urges Governments to cooperate
in this matter;
5.
Calls upon all Governments to take appropriate measures to prevent
the misuse and exploitation by traffickers of economic activities, such as the
development of tourism and the export of labour;
6.
Encourages Member States to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and
of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 11/ the Slavery
Convention 12/ and all other relevant international instruments;
7.
Invites Governments concerned and relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to adopt appropriate measures to create a
better public awareness of the problem;
8.
Draws the attention of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on violence against women and the Working Group on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to the problem of trafficking in women and girl
children;
9.
Invites the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World
Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace and the Ninth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders to consider including in their respective programmes of action the
subject of the traffic in women and girl children;
10.
Recommends that the problem of trafficking in women and girl
children be given consideration within the implementation of all relevant
international legal instruments and, if need be, that consideration be given
to measures to strengthen them, without undermining their legal authority and
integrity;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session, under the item entitled "Advancement of women", a
preliminary report on the implementation of the present resolution.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

11/

Resolution 317 (IV), annex.

12/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 212, No. 2861.
