UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-N.INTH

YEAR

1779’”

MEETING:

NEW

16 JULY

UN
LlBMsaY
1974

MAY 5 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1779) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..#.........

1

Tribute to the memory of General Juan Domingo Peron, President of the
Argentine Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

1

of the agenda...............................................

The situation in Cvnrus:
(4 Letter dated 16-July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1779

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official .Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of .Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operatrve
on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-NINTH

Held in New York’ on Tuesday,
Pr4sid&t:

Mr. Javier P&REZ

de CUBLLAR

(Peru).

Jpsent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq,
Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon and
United States of America.
Provisional
1.’ Adoption
2.

of the agenda

was

caRed to order

Adoption
The agenda

at 4.05 p.m.

Tribute to the memory of General Juan Domingo Per&,
President of the Argentine Republic
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I am sure that I shall be reflecting the sentiments of
,the members of the Council in extending to the Government and people of the Argentine Republic and,to its
Permanent .Representative to the United Nations our
condolences upon the death on the first of this month
of General Juan Domingo Peron, President of the
Argentine Republic. May I be allowed, as a Latin
American representative in the Council and as the
representative of Peru, a sister nation closely linked
to the Argentine Republic, to pay a tribute to one of
the most exceptional political personalities of our
continent in this century who valiantly, for many years,
identified himself with the ‘great premises of what is
today the third world, and was thus a pioneer in many
important struggles which the developing countries
have already won or are still waging,
Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

2.’ The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
Before we begin the consideration of our agenda for
today, I should like, on behalf of the Security Council,

1974, at 3 p.m.

to express the gratitude of all its members for the
important
services rendered by Ambassador
El
Bassen, the representative of Mauritania, as President
during the month of June. I take pleasure in placing on
record our appreciation of the unusual qualities of
wisdom, tact and cordiality with which he conducted
both the informal ,consultations and the public debates
of the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l779)

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11335)
The meeting

16 Juiy

MEETING

of the agenda

was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of fbe Security Council
(S/l 1335)
3. The ‘PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I have received letters dated today from the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece inwhich they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the question on the Council’s agenda, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. If I hear no objection I
propose, in accordance with the usual practice of the
Council and with the rules of procedure, to invite the
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to take
places at the Council table in order to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. O/cay (Turkey) and Mr. Megalokonomos
(Greece) took .places at the Security Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fro& Spanish):
This meeting of the Council has been convened
pursuant to the request contained in the letter dated
16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General
to the
President of the Council [S/11334], and in the letter
dated 16 July 1974 from the representative of Cyprus
to the President of the Council [S/11335].
5. The first speaker on my list is the SecretaryGeneral, on whom I now call.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, as
I explained to you .in my letter, I requested you to
convene a meeting of the Security Council in order to,
report to the Council on the information
received
through my Special Representative
and the Commander of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
on recent developments in the
island.
7. Members of the Council will recall that, in its first
resolution on the Cyprus question, [resohtio~
186
(1964)], of 4 March 1964, the Council asked the
Secretary-General to report periodically to the Council.
I feel that the present situation fully warrants such a
report by me. Members of the Council are aware that
in the meantime the representative of Cyprus has also
requested a meeting of the Council.

13. In view of the extreme seriousness of the developments just described, yesterday I addressed messages
[see S/11336] to the Prime Ministers of Greece and
Turkey emphasizing my deep concern and stressing
the importance of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Cyprus. I also urged maximum
‘.restraint and the avoidance of any action which might
give rise to further violence. This morning I received
the answer of the Prime Minister of Greece [see
S/11337]; I have been informed by the representative
of Turkey that an answer from the Turkish Government
is to be sent shortly.’
14. It will be recalled that the mandate of UNFICYP
is in the context of the conflict between the two
communities in Cyprus, and that UNFICYP
is therefore deployed along the lines of confrontation between
those two communities.
For that reason, UNFICYP
did not have direct observation of most of the areas of
current fighting, which is related to rivalries within
one community and is not on the lines of confrontation
between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
communities.

8. Early in the morning of 15 July, I received information from my Special Representative in Nicosia and
the Commander of UNFICYP
confirming reports of
the events which were taking place in Cyprus. While
the situation remained confused, the indications were
that a coup was ‘being staged against President
Malcarios by the National Guard. There were radio
reports of the death of President Makarios. Those
reports were not confirmed by UNFICYP
and proved
to be incorrect.

15. In the late afternoon of 15 July, I received a further
report from my Special Representative. There were
reports that President Makarios was alive and had
broadcast a radio message to the Cypriot people. The
situation in Nicosia and throughout the island was still
confused. The airport was under the control of the
National Guard. The Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation
facilities were in the hands of the National Guard and
were broadcasting announcements on behalf of the
“Government
of National Salvation”.
The Telecommunications Building was occupied by the National
Guard and all internal and external ‘communications
controlled by it had been cut. The Presidential Palace
was reported to be burned to the ground. Shooting had
been reported during the morning from Limassol,
Paphos and Famagusta. The Turkish Cypriot forces
w.ere ‘on full alert and had manned all their positions.
UNFICYP
was maintaining its contacts with VicePresident Denktag and his associate, Mr. Orek,, and
my Representative was urging them to encourage the
Turkish Cypriot community
to remain. calm.

9. The Force Commander ordered an island-wide
alert for UNFICYP personnel at 0100 hours on 15 July,
and sentries were doubled. UNFICYP
reported that
the situation on the Turkish Cypriot side remained calm
and that its leadership, having taken various security
measures, had given instructions that Turkish Cypriots
should avoid any involvement.
10. The Special Representative also transmitted to
me the text of a special news bulletin broadcast over
the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation at midday on
15 July, announcing that the National Guard had taken
over authority in Cyprus.
11. At about noon New York .time on 15 July, I
received a further message from my Special Representative informing me that the UNFICYP
Zone Commander in Limassol had reported that the Bishop of
Paphos had informed him that he had received a radio
message from President Makarios asking him to send
a message to the representative of Cyprus requesting
him to call forthwith for a meeting of the Security
Council. My Special Representative added that he was
not able to verify the authenticity of that message and
in particular whether it emanated from Archbishop
Makarios. In the circumstances I considered it my duty
to communicate this message to the representative of
Cyprus, at the same time mentioning the inability of
UNFICYP
to verify its authenticity.

16. At 1715 hours local time on 15 July the Senior
Adviser and the Chief of Staff of UNFICYP
visited
Mr. Orek, who agreed to do his best to keep the Turkish
Cypriot community calm. He added, however, that the
community was deeply concerned at developments and
was preoccupied that an attack might be made on it:
Shooting was heard close to the Vice-President’s office
during this meeting.
17. The two UNFICYP
officials then called on the
Counsellor of the Turkish Embassy, who complained
that a number of heavy weapons, including mortars,
had been fired in the direction of the camps of the
Turkish National Contingent, and that the electricity
to one camp had been cut off. The UNFICYP officials

12. On the morning of 15 July I discussed the situation
with the President of the Security Council and gave
him the information
then at my disposal.

I Subsequently circulated as document S/l 1341.

2

I._

said that despite present difficulties
to remedy the situation.

they would try

UNFICYP
Paphos District Commander
had met
Archbishop Makarios who invited the Special Representative to meet .him on the following day-that
is
today. The Special. Representative
,and the Force
Commander saw the Archbishop at Paphos at 1000
hours today, 16 July. His main request was that the
Security Council meeting should be held as soon as
possible. He also asked the Special Representative to
convey, through me, an appeal to all countries friendly
to Cyprus to help Cyprus’s independence and sovereignty. I informed the representative of Cyprus of the
content of this interview.

18. Subsequently,
the Special Representative
and
the Farce Commander briefed Vice-President Denktas
on the day’s developments and received assurances
from him that he would do his best to see that the
Turkish community exercised restraint.
19. The Special Representative
and the Force
Commander
also called on Ambassador Inhan of
Turkey, at his request, and were informed by him about
the firing near the Turkish National Contingent camp.
The Ambassador requested the Force Commander to
intervene immediately
with the National Guard to
prevent any recurrence.

24. When ‘the two UNFICYP
officials returned to
their headquarters in Nicosia at 1230 hours, they
received information’that
the Archbishop was seeking
to be evacuated from Paphos. Subsequently it was
reported that he was requesting United Nations protection. In view of the circumstances, I authorized
UNFICYP
to extend such protection to Archbishop
Makarios on a humanitarian
basis. In the meantime
I have been informed that Archbishop Makarios has
left the island.

20. General Chand ‘proceeded immediately
with an
escort to National Guard headquarters at Athalassa,
where at 2030 hours he called upon the acting Commander of the National Guard. The Force Commander
raised four matters of immediate importance:
(a) The report by the Turkish Ambassador that
mortar bombs had been fired into the area of the
Turkish National Contingent at Geunyeli;

25. I have followed the recent developments
in
Cyprus with the deepest concern. While the mandate
of UNFICYP
is specifically related to the conflict
between the two communities in Cyprus and the Force
cannot therefore be involved in the internal affairs of
one of the communities,
the repercussions of violent
disturbances such as those of the past two days can
very easily extend beyond the confines of one community. When this happens the matter becomes one
of direct concern to UNFICYP
under its mandate. As
will be seen from this report, UNFICYP has been doing
all it can to prevent the present violence from causing
renewed intercommunal
strife. Moreover, .in the
context of the Cyprus problem such events carry a
serious risk of a threat to international
peace and
security in a much wider framework. For all these
reasons, and in view of the Security Council’s responsibilities in the Cyprus problem, I have felt it my duty
to make this report to the Council today.

(b) The report that firing had been directed towards
the Turkish Cypriot sector in Nicosia;
(c) The fact that an UNFICYP
fired upon;

helicopter

had been

(d). The importance of.having UNFICYP
enjoy full
freedom of movement in accordance with its mandate;
that United Nations vehicles with flags or personnel
with UNFICYP
identity cards should not be stopped
or otherwise interfered with in their activities in relation
to the intercommunal
situation.
21. ‘The Acting Commander of the National Guard
stated that strict instructions had been issued to his
troops not to fire’at the Turkish National Contingent
or at Turkish Cypriot areas; any such firing was
accidental and regrettable. Strict instructions would
be issued to prevent any recurrence of such firing. The
firing at the UNFICYP
helicopter was also described
as accidental but instructions would be issued to
prevent any recurrence. Lastly, the Acting Commander of the National Guard gave assurances that
instructions not to interfere with the movements of
UNFICYP
would be issued.

26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his very important
statement.
27. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
28. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): The present case is a
very particular one in that a coup was organized in
Cyprus by a large number of officers who came from
Greece to train and command the Cypriot National
Guard, which had been created in consequence of the
troubles that arose in 1963 and 1964. These officers
were supposed to be acting, on the instructions of the
Government of Cyprus, for the National Guard. In
reality, however, they were entirely directed and
instructed from Athens. The Government of Cyprus
and Archbishop Makarios,
its President, did not
interfere with that direction from Athens in a military
sense.

22. During the night of 15116 July, the Force Commander reported that firing of varying intensity had
occurred in Nicosia, Famagusta, Lamaca, Limassol
and Kyrenia. Unconfirmed reports indicated that as a
result of the fighting 20 to 30 persons had been killed
and more than 100 wounded in Nicosia alone.
UNFICYP
remained on full alert. All UNFICYP
personnel were safe and there had been no casualties.
23. At 2100 hours on 15 July, I received a report
from my Special Representative to the effect that the
3

.
A

29. It emerged, however, that this batch of officers
-not negligible in number; there ‘were 650 of themwas becoming increasingly noxious to peace in Cyprus.
It appears now that for some time they had been
engaging in subversive propaganda. The Government
did not take the matter very seriously; it did not consider it to be a matter for action. But a time arrived
when the situation appeared to become more noxious
and more dangerous than permissible. That occasioned
a letter from Archbishop Makarios, the President of
Cyprus, to President Gizikis of Greece. In that letter,
dated 2 July, Archbishop Makarios asked, as he had
a right to do, that all of these 650 officers should be
recalled from Cyprus for reasons which were stated in
the letter and for which proof was established.

described: blood and fire all of a sudden, with a great
number of tanks rolling through the streets of Cyprus,
against an unarmed population and a mere police force.
As I have said, this military intervention followed upon
the aforesaid request of the President of Cyprus for
the recall of these foreign-offtcer elements of the
National Guard in Cyprus. I use the word “foreign”
in the sense that Cyprus is an independent, separate
State.
35. The full extent of the events which have to a
certain extent been described by the Secretary-General
is not yet known because all communications have been
cut in this prearranged coup and it is very difficult for
information
to get out.

30. A reply in respect of this matter was being awaited
when, all of a sudden--and as though by way of replythese grave events that have just been described by
the Secretary-General
erupted.

36. So that is the situation. It really speaks for itself:
res ipsa loquitur. The world press well knows what
is happening in Cyprus. Reports have been published
in all the capitals of Europe and here. The President
is now in Malta and is expected, we believe, to head
for New York. As things are now, it is clear that the
Security Council has a duty to act, even on the basis
of the facts that it has.

3 1, The National Guard is the military arm of Cyprus.
The men are Cypriots but all the officers, except for
very junior ones, are from Greece and are commanded
from Greece.

37. UNFICYP,
established under the resolution. of
the Security Council to which I have already referred,
has as part of its mandate the duty to prevent fighting
and to contribute to the maintenance and restoration of
law and order and to a return to normal conditions. Of
course, when the foregoing resolution was adopted it r
had in view the troubles between Greek and Turkish
Cypriots. None the less, the bloodshed and fighting
destroy the maintenance of law and order and would
inevitably affect the progress that has been made under
the resolution. Hence, UNFICYP
has a duty to act in
a constructive way towards preventing a deterioration
of the situation.

32. Since the troubles of 1964 the United Nations has
been involved in Cyprus in an effort to find a peaceful
solution of the problem. Indeed, the situation in Cyprus
has been an item on the Security Council’s agenda
since 1963. Since 1964, and to this very day, Cyprus
has been a concern of the United Nations. UNFICYP
has been operating in Cyprus under the mandate given
it by Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, under which it was established. Parallel to that
peace-keeping effort there has been the peace-making
effort through mediation. The peace-keeping function
in Cyprus has proved to be very successful, indeed one
of the most successful peace-keeping operations of the
United Nations.
The peace-making
efforts, after
following a course of mediation into which I need not
enter now, took the course of intercommunal
talks,
local talks. Those intercommunal
talks started in 1968
and were reactivated with the participation
of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and
in the presence of two constitutional
experts from
Greece and Turkey.

38. Therefore, the Security Council is now meeting
here, not in order to take new steps by sending a peacekeeping force to Cyprus, but only to reinforce its efforts
and to extend them to deal with the new situation that
has. arisen. It would, I believe, be contrary to the
principles of the Charter, the purpose of the United
Nations and the very idea of preventing a,deterioration
of the situation in Cyprus-which,
inevitably, would
have unforeseen repercussions affecting international
peace and security by violations of the Charter-for
,UNFICYP to remain inoperative, as a mere spectator.
I shall therefore not dwell any longer on this subject
at the present stage.

33. In Cyprus, therefore, there has been, by consensus of all sides, an effort to solve the roblem
through peaceful means by negotiation. That e8 ort has
been progressing, and, in spite of difficulties that have
arisen from time to time, progressing satisfactorily
-to the point .that at the last meeting, which was
attended by the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz,
a statement was made by Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz
showing
that there were hopeful signs.

39. But I should like to point out that it is vitally
important at this stage, with the information which is
already in the hands of the Securify Council and from
which it can be seen that extensive bloodshed is taking
place and fighting is continuing, to adopt a resolution
concerning a cease-fire and’ the prevention of outside
military intervention in the internal affairs of Cyprus.
Therefore, military officers who were there originally
with the consent of the Cypriot Government-consent
that was withdrawn as from the date of the letter from

34. This balanced development
and this peaceful
progress towards an agreed solution, in accordance
with resolution 186 (1964), was interrupted by the
violent action which the Secretary-General
has just
4

President Makarios to the President of Greece, 2 Juiyshould abandon the island so that calm, peace and
normal conditions can return to the island on the basis
of the status quo that existed and that had the consensus of all the parties concerned; and on the basis
of that consensus sratus quo, the conduct of the talks
for the solution of the problem should continue.

here and whosec%Xttents were published by the head
of the Cypriot State, lie asked that the Government of
Greece recall allGreek offtcers serving in the National
Guard of the Republic of Cyprus. In that letter, President Makarios openly accused Athens of supporting
and directing an underground terrorist organization,
EOKA-3, and also of organizing attempts on his life.

40. I need not dwell further upon the fact that there
can be no doubt that the only legitimate and elected
President of Cyprus is Archbishop Makarios.

47. What President Makarios warned of has now
taken place. On the morning of IS July; Greek military
personnel-for
whose actions the Government ‘of
Greece is responsible-dpenly
took up arms against
the legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
against its lawfully elected President,‘and
against the
sovereignty and political independence of the Cypriot
State. The whole world knows that the threads of the
conspiracy against the legitimate
Government
of
Cyprus, headed by President Makarios, go beyond the
confines of the island, and lead to’those forces which
have long been hatching plots against the independence
and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus and have
advocated the absorption of Cyprus by Greece.
:
48. The anti-Govemmentpufsch
in Cyprus, for which
the Greek military clique. and the Government
of
Greece are responsible, cannot be regarded otherwise
than .as an act which grossly flouts the Charter of the
United Nations and the ‘universally recognized rules
of international law. Greece’s armed intervention in
the internal affairs of Cyprus creates a serious threat to
peace and security in that region of the world as a
whole. The. continuation
of this intervention
woulii
mean that the Greek Government assumes serious
responsibility
for all the possible consequences:

41. In this situation, therefore, I believe that we must
have a resolution today for the cessation of fighting
and bloodshed through a cease-fire, and for the protection of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Cyprus from outside military intervention.
42. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. Perez de
Cuellar, allow me first of all to congratulate you on
your accession to the honourable and responsible post
of President of the Security Council. We should also
like to express our deep appreciation to your predecessor, the representative
of Mauritania,
who so
fruitfully and successfully conducted the work of the
Council in June.
43. The Council has met today at the request of the
Secretary-General and the representative of Cyprus,
Mr. Rossides, to consider the critical situation in
Cyprus resulting from the intervention of outside forces
which threaten the independence of the Republic of
Cyprus and also international
peace and security in
the region. Time will not wait, and the Council must
take the most urgent measures to protect the security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member of the
United Nations, the Republic of Cyprus.

49.

The Soviet Union strongly condemns the armed
organized by outside forces against the legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus, a sovereign State and a Member of the United Nations.
A TASS statement on the subject, published on 16 July,
states:

putsch

44. As is well known, what we are concerned with
is an armed pursch aimed at the violent overthrow of
the legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
headed by the President of the Republic, Archbishop
Makarios, who was elected to that post as a result of
the free expression of the people’s will. These events
are the result of flagrant intervention by outside forces,
which have done everything possible to prevent the
attainment of a peaceful settlement in Cyprus and have
deliberately and for far-reaching purposes aggravated
the internal situation in the country.

“The Soviet people resolutely condemn the armed
in Cyprus org.anized by external forces
against the legitimate Government of that country.
The only legitimate Government, based on the will
of the people, is the Government
of President
Makarios. The Soviet people are fully on the side of
those who in this difficult hour for Cyprus are
rebuffmg the insurgents.

putsch

“TASS has been authorized to state ,that the antigovernment putsch in Cyprus, for which the .Greek
military clique is responsible, is regarded in ‘.the
Soviet Union as an act which grossly violates the
Charter of the United Nations and the universally
accepted rules of intemational,law.
Neither can one
fail to see that such acts may give rise to serious
international
complications.”

,45. What is happening in Cyprus today cannot be
considered in isolation from the systematic subversive
activities which have been carried on for many years
by Greek offticers.in the service of the National Guard
of Cyprus who are today at the head of the putsch.
46. A few days ago the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, demanded the recall
of these Greek officers from the territory of Cyprus in
connexion with their anti-Government
activities. In
his letter to the President of Greece, Mr. Gizikis, a
letter to which the representative of Cyprus referred

The TASS

statement

goes on:

“In ruling circles in the Soviet Union it is expected
that the Government of Greece will immediately put
5

an end to its gross intervention in theinternal affairs
of the Republic of Cyprus-a
sovereign State and
a Member of the United Nations. The continuation
of this intervention
would mean that the Greek
Government assumes serious responsibility for the
consequences.

56. The Greek intervention-because
it is indeed an
intervention-is
in flagrant violation of the rights
conferred upon Greece by the treaties and agreements
to which it subscribed jointly with Turkey and the
United Kingdom.
Moreover, this intervention
was
fostered, and the coup carried out, by Greek troops,
whose presence, in numbers vastly greater than had
been provided for in the international agreements, has
always been a source of grave concern to the Turkish
community of the island and also an element of imbalance in Greek-Turkish
relations.

“In informed Soviet circles it has been reported
taht the Soviet Government is taking appropriate
steps with the Governments of Greece and Turkey,
and also with the United States, the United Kingdom
and France, which, together with the Soviet Union,
are permanent members of the Security Council”.

57. I do not wish to dwell on the strange explanation
given for the presence and illegal activity of the Greek
forces in Cyprus; I shall leave it to members of the
Council to draw the appropriate conclusions.: But I
must stress that the violence committed by Greeks
against Greeks, this fratricidal fury that has taken place
these past days before the eyes of the whole .world,
should serve as a warning to those who so far have
failed to appreciate the feeling of insecurity and lack
of confidence on the part of the Turks vi&vis
the
Greeks in Cyprus.

SO. The Security Council, as the main organ of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, considering the seriousness of
the situation which has arisen, must urgently take the
necessary decisive measures aimed at putting an
immediate end to the armed intervention by the Greek
military clique in the internal affairs of the Republic
of Cyprus and ensuring the immediate withdrawal of
the Greek military personnel present in the territory
of Cyprus. Accordingly, we fully support the proposals
and demands that have been voiced here by the
representative of Cyprus.

58. Turkey has always maintained and proclaimed,
as the verbatim records of the Council bear witness,
its attachment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, based
on equality before the law and responsibility
with
regard to the political future of the two communities
of the island which constitute its population.

51. Time will not wait. The sovereignty, freedom
and independence of the Republic of Cyprus-a State
Member of the United Nations-depend
on urgent and
decisive action by the Security Council.

59. I have had occasion to state here that the Turkish
community is in fact the only guarantee of the independence of Cyprus. I could not have foreseen that
events would bear me out in such a short time. At
present, the only institution in Cyprus having a legitimate constitutional basis happens to be the Turkish
Cypriot administration,
which continues to maintain
with the United Nations,. through the representative
of the Secretary-General and the UNFICYP
administration, the only legitimate relations provided for in
the spirit and letter of the United Nations resolutions,
in particular resolution 186 (1964). The Turkish Cypriot
administration is at present more than ever dissociated
from the Greek Cypriot administration.

52. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on
whom I now call.
53. Mr. OLCAY
(Turkey) (interpretafion
from
French): Mr. President, it is an honour for me to take
part in a meeting of the Security Council over which
you are presiding. I should like to thank you as well
as the members of the Council for this opportunity to
appear here.
54. The Security Council is meeting once again in
circumstances that could be described as dramatic, if
not tragic, to consider the latest developments
in
Cyprus, so eloquently set forth a few minutes ago by
the Secretary-General.

60. In the view of the Turkish Government,
the
United Nations should as a matter of priority ensure
that the balance of forces, ‘so deeply disturbed to the
detriment of the Turkish community, be re-established
to the extent possible and that, to that end, all necessary measures be taken under effective control in
order to prohibit any illicit entry of armaments, troops
or munitions into Cyprus. That is all the more urgent
since today in Cyprus the periodic change of part of
the Greek contingent stationed there takes place in
compliance with the agreements of 1960Strict supervision of that operation is more necessary than ever.

55. Turkey has the sad satisfaction of seeing confirmed its most pessimistic predictions with regard to
Greek intentions vis&vis the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus, this time
through a coup d’etat, which seems to have been
mounted in Athens and carried out through the support
of the Greek armed forces in Cyprus with the complicity of the worst elements in the island, which the
international press has elaborately described in terms
as frank as they are colourful--elements
which have
vowed to annex Cyprus to Greece, and which have
never concealed their violently
anti-Turkish
sentiments.

61. The measures to which I have just referred
are imperative if a semblance of order and security
concerning the rights and legitimate interests of the
6

:

Turkish community
maintained.

is to have any possibility

of being

66. I reserve the right to speak again, as appropriate,
to express the particular views of my Government in
the light of any further information that may be forthcoming in the ‘course
of this debate.
.,,

62. Turkey, a country which is a guarantor of the
territorial integrity and independence of Cyprus in
conformity with the-Zurich and London agreements,
follows with calm resolve the developments in Cyprus
-despite
certain provocations that have been mentioned by the Secretary-General-because
it is very
sure of how well-founded are its rights and those of the
Turkish communities of the island. Once again it wishes
to proclaim its devotion to a peaceful solution to the
problems of the island. At the same time, it none the
less wishes to leave no trace of a doubt with regard to
its intention to safeguard its legitimate
rights and
interests as they have been enshrined in international
agreements, as well as those of the Turkish community
in Cyprus, which for more than 10 years has suffered
because of conditions brought about by machinations
which the events of the past 24 hours have finally
disclosed to the whole world.

67. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
Before
turning to the matters under consideration,
may I,
Mr. President, join those who have expressed their
congratulations to you upon your assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
May I also join those who have paid a tribute to your
immediate
predecessor,
the representative
of
Mauritania.
68. My delegation is indebted to the SecretaryGeneral for informing the Council of the part which
UNFICYP
is playing and how he envisages its discharging its mandate in the new circumstances. In so far
as this meeting of the Council has the object of informing the Council, and, indeed, of informing the
world, of exactly what has taken place in Cyprus in
the last two days, it is an objective with which we
would wish to be associated.

63. I thank you for having given me the floor,
Mr. President, I reserve my right to speak again should
it be necessary.

69. The British Government
has a very special
interest in Cyprus. As people will know, we have a
history of a close connexion with that island for many
years. Cyprus is a member of the Commonwealth;
indeed, President Makarios
himself is the senior
Commonwealth
head of Government. May I say that
we are extremely relieved and heartened at the news
that he is still alive.

64.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interprefurion
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Council. I should also like to associate myself
with the words of praise you addressed to your predecessor, Ambassador El Hassen, of Mauritania,
who
presided over the Council with particular distinction
in June. I should also like to associate myself with the
tribute you paid to the outstanding figure of the late
President Peron, who died recently, and with the
condolences which you addressed to our friend
Ambassador Ortiz de Rozas.

from

,70. Members of the Council may wish to know that
earlier today President Makarios at his own request,
left Cyprus on board a British aircraft via one of the
British sovereign-base areas. The British Foreign and
Commonwealth
Secretary today announced in the
IIouse of Commons that President Makarios had
requested that he should be allowed to enter the
Akrotiri base on Cyprus and that we had agreed to that
request.

65. Once again the Security Council is meeting to
consider the case of Cyprus. But we are meeting today
in particularly dramatic and, indeed, unprecedented
circumstances-unprecedented
in the history of the
young Republic.. These circumstances have led the nine
members of the European Community to consider the
situation jointly. After consultations, which took place
today in Paris, the nine Governments have agreed on
the text of a communique
expressing their common
position, which I shall now make known to the Council
as representative of a country which since 1 July has
held the presidency of the Community. Here is the text:

71. I understand that the position now is that President Makarios is in Malta, and I believe that an
announcement to that effect was made in Malta at
4.30 this afternoon New York time. If President Makarios is indeed .on his way to New York, as the
representative of Cyprus told us, it would seem to me
sensible that this Council should wait and see what
it is that President Makarios has to tell us, what he
himself would wish us to do, and how he sees the
situation which has arisen on the island, of which he
was, until today, the person in control.

“The nine Governments of the countries members
of the Community have held consultations on the
situation in Cyprus, and they wish to make known
their lively concern at events which seriously
threaten stability in the eastern Mediterranean. They
reaffirm their dedication to the independence and
the territorial integrity of Cyprus and their opposition
to any intervention
or interference which might
jeopardize it. They have requested the French President to make their common position known to the
Governments concerned.”

72. The events of yesterday and today are a severe
blow to the achievement of our common objective of
peace and security in Cyprus. The situation on the
ground is still very far from clear. What is, however,
tragically evident is that armed force has been used
against the Government of President Makarios, the
elected leader of his country. There has been bloodshed
and there has been suffering, and this, I am sure, we
7

all strongly regret. But the full facts are not yet available. It is nevertheless clear that the present situation
is a highly explosive one, not only for Cyprus itself,
but possibly for the peace of that whole area of the
Mediterranean. It puts at risk the work of the United
Nations as a whole for preserving international peace
and security in the area, and very great statesmanship
and restraint will need to be shown.

79. Mr. MEGALOKONOMOS
(Greece): Mr. President, first of all I wish to thank you and the members
of the Council for permitting my delegation to take
the floor on the item under discussion. If I have asked
for the floor, it was for the unique purpose of refuting
vehemently and categorically, upon instructions of my
Government, all the allegations that were made in .this
room this afternoon by some delegations.

73. What I think would clearly be wrong would be
for us here today to attempt to apportion final responsibility and to attempt to assess final blame. That may
come hereafter, but only if and when we know precisely what has happened and who has instigated it.
If in the event it turns out that external intervention
has occasioned this coup, then we would all condemn
it. But today it is frankly not possible to arrive at that
final judgement.

80. I must say that I very sincerely regret that, by
an unforeseeable and strange fate, my delegation is
obliged to reply also to Ambassador Rossides, for
whom I personally have deep and heartfelt respect.
The events that took place yesterday in Cyprus, and
continue today, are, in the opinion of my Government,
an internal affair of the RepubIic of Cyprus; and my
Government, apart from following the situation with
keen and well justified
interest, has no relation
whatsoever with their origin or incitement. The policy
of the Hellenic Government,
expressed many times
in this room, remains unchanged. My Government,
as was reiterated by the message of the Greek Prime
Minister to the Secretary-General
this morning, is
still convinced that the territorial integrity and independence of Cyprus, as well as the unitary character
of the Republic, should be maintained and respected
by all parties concerned.

74. The British Government has been in close touch,
over the past 36 hours, with other interested Govemments. The Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary
who stressed that the situation contains grave risks
and that it is of great importance that peace be restored
as soon as possible, gave details of those exchanges
in the House of Commons today. I wonder if I may
quote just one paragraph from what he said. In relation
to the Greek Government, the Foreign Secretary said:

81. It was said by some delegations that the main
role was played by a great number of Greek officers.
I am aware of a malicious campaign being conducted
by certain news media concerning the alleged role of
the Greek officers in Cyprus. My delegation wishes to
underline here that those allegations, published in a
very hasty way, are totally unfounded. I must stress,
also, a point that was not mentioned by those who were
too eager to accuse the Creek Government, without
proof, for the events which have taken place in Cyprus.

“I can only re-emphasize that we attach the utmost
importance to that Government’s
carrying out and
making tangible the statements which they have
made on their attitude to Cyprus. .If they do so,
the cause of tension will be very much less than it
appears to be at present.”
75. But in the absence of precise information, I see
no merit in the Council’s now attempting to determine
the precise causes of the fighting or, as I say, to
apportion the final blame. Our main concern here
today should be to try to avert the dangers to the peace
of the area and to preserve intact the international work
for peace which has .gone on there over the past
10 years. We look to those .concemed to exercise
statesmanship and restraint, particularly the Govemments of Greece and Turkey.

82. I am not going deeply into the affair, but-1 would
just make the point that the National Guard in Cyprus
consists of about 10,000 men, all of them Cypriots,
and that the officers of this corps are not solely trained
officers from Greece, a large number of them being
Greek Cypriot officers. I do not want to elaborate on
that any more, but those who accused my Government
forget also that the National Guard was exclusively
under the authority and the responsibility
of the
Cypriot Government, consisting therefore of a uniquely
Cypriot corps under the sole authority of the Cyprus
Republic. This is one more reason, if it were needed,
to reiterate and to conclude that the events in Cyprus
are an exclusively internal affair of the Republic.

76. May I say that we would associate ourselves, of
course, with the statement made by the representative
of France on behalf of the European Community.
77. We are confident that UNFICYP
will continue
to play its part in,ensuring that intercommunal violence
is avoided. I hope that other delegations, as interested
as we are in restoring tranquillity
and continuing
the work for a lasting peace, will join in this appeal.
I hope, also, that those who speak this afternoon will
recognize that restraint in their language today may
mean that fewer people will die tomorrow.

83. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): The
United States strongly deplores the violence which
has upset the delicate balance on the island of Cyprus.
Unhappily, such violence and bloodshed have all too
often influenced the fate of that republic.

78. The PRESIDENT
(interprefutionfrcm
Spnnish):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, on
whom I now call.

84. We have listened with keen attention to the report
of the Secretary-General
on recent developments
there.. I am sure that all of us share a common sense
8

of relief that Archbishop Makarios is alive and free.
Unfortunately, there is much more we still do not know
about the emerging situation on Cyprus, and it is
difficult at this moment to see clearly whether and how
the Council could make a positive contribution.
85. We continue to support the independence and
territorial integrity of Cyprus and its existing constitutional arrangements. We urge all other States to
support a similar policy. We wish to urge in particular
that all interested parties exercise the utmost restraint
and statesmanship and avoid actions which might
further worsen the situation.
86. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Cyprus.
87. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I have asked to speak
to reply to a statement made by my colleague and
friend the representative of Greece.
88. The representative
of Greece said that the
National Guard in Cyprus was under the complete
control of the Government. It was not. The Government had the right to control the National Guard, but,
as I said in my statement to the Council, it did not
interfere with the command of the force from Athens.
That was so true that in his letter to the President of
Greece President Makarios had to say: “Please do not
forget that the National Guard is a Cypriot army, not
a Greek army. Therefore it should come under the
control of the Government of Cyprus. That control has.
not been exercised so far, but now I request that all
these officers be recalled.”
89. Even that request by the President of Cyprus was
not acceded to by those who were indeed in control
of the force. There are Cypriot officers, but .they are
very few in number and are on a very low level. The
command was entirely out of the hands of Cyprus.
That was the complaint made by Archbishop Makarios
in his letter of 2 July, which, it appears, was resented.

90. I should like to comment on another aspect,
which related to something that has been said by some
of the most distinguished members of the Security
Council and that I would ask to be allowed to disagree
with. I refer to the notion that when fighting and
bloodshed are taking place, when there is to a very
great extent a violation of human rights, the Security
Council should be so reluctant to adopt any resolution
for a cease-fire. With all due respect I must say that
that seems to me to be inconsistent both with the
principles of the Charter and with the purposes of the
United Nations. Whatever the details may be, whether
the blame should be put on A or B, the fighting must
be stopped. That is the first, the paramount duty of the
Security Council when it meets in a situation when
fighting is still going on. And fighting is continuing in
Cyprus. The latest reports are that tanks are moving
towards Paphos, where there is strong resistance. We
anticipate more bloodshed and fighting today, with
great sacritice of life. That cannot be disregarded by
means of a statement that “We want to know all the
details”. The details are not required to stop the bloodshed. That is a matter of general principles. It is
Cyprus today; it may be another country tomorrow.
Too often we have seen the Security Council adjourning while fighting and bloodshed are stillgoing on.
91. I take this opportunity
today to put this issue
before the Security Council and the United Nations in
general. When a cause involving bloodshed and human
rights comes before the Security Council, it is not
permissible to seek an opportunity to evade a resolution. It is not reasonable for any member of the Council
to suggest or to support a suggestion that the Council
should adjourn and allow fighting and bloodshed to go
on, on the mere excuse that additional details are
required. Such details do not make any difference at
all to the need to stop the fighting and bloodshed. For,
whatever the details-and
on whomsoever the blame
should be afftxed, the fighting must in any case stop.
That is my submission, which I make with all humility
to the Council.
The meeting

at 5.30 p.m.

HOW

‘f0

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Salea

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vents dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
0~1 adressez-vous
A : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIY¶HTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3~AHHfI

OPI-AHZI

PUBLICACIONES

3AIUiH

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

OEi’bEJkHEHHbIX

NACIONES

;

HAQHII

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones

74-82001-April1983-2,200
