General As11embly-Twellth Seuion

8

Further noting that resolutions 395 (V) of 2 December 1950, 511 (VI) of 12 January 1952 and 616 A
(VII) of 5 December 1952 have successively affirmed
that a policy of "racial segregation" (apartheid) is necessarily based on doctrines of racial discrimination,
1. Deplores that the Government of the Union of
South Africa has not yet responded to the call and
invitation conveyed in paragraphs 3 and 4 of General
Assembly resolution 1016 (XI) of 30 January 1957;
2. Again draws the attention of the Government of
the Union of South Africa to that resolution and, in
particular, to paragraphs 3 and 4 thereof;
3. Appeals to the Government of the Union of
South Africa, in the interests of the common observance by Member States of the high purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
to which the Government of the Union of South Africa
has also subscribed and is as much committed as any
other Member, to revise its policy in the light of those
purposes and principles and of world opinion and to
inform the Secretary-General of its response.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1179 (XII). Treatment of people of Indian
origin in the Union of South Africa
The General Assenibly,
Recalling its resolution 1015 (XI) of 30 January
1957,
Having considered the reports of the Governments
of India2 and of Pakistan, 3
1. Notes that the Governments of both India and
Pakistan have reiterated their readiness to pursue
negotiations with the Government of the Union of
South Africa in accordance with the expressed desires
of the United Nations;
2. Notes with regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa has not agreed to carry forward
the purposes of General Assembly resolution 1015
(XI) of 30 January 1957;
3. Appeals to the Government of the Union of
South Africa to participate in negotiations with the
Governments of India and of Pakistan with a view
to solving this problem in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
4. Invites the parties concerned to report to the
General Assembly as appropriate, jointly or separately,
regarding the progress of the negotiations.

723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1190 (XII). Question of amending the United
Nations Charter, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 108 of the
Charter, to increase the number of nonpermanent members of the Security Council and the number of votes required for
decisions of the Council
Question of amending the United Nations
Charter, in accordance with the procedure

----• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 61, document A/3643.
• Ibid., document A/3645.

laid down in Article 108 of the Charter, to
increase the membership of the Economic
and Social Council
Question of amending the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, in accordance with the procedure laid down in
Article 108 of the Charter of the United
Nations and Article 69 of the Statute of the
Court, with respect to an increase in the
number of judges of the International Court
of Justice
The General Assembly,
1. Decides to give further consideration at its thirteenth session to items 19, 20 and 21 of the agenda
of the twelfth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include these
items in the provisional agenda of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.
728th plenary meeting,
12 December 1957.
1191 (XII). Report of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

The Generul Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V) of 2
December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952, 614
(VII) of 6 November 1952, 720 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, 818 (IX) of 4 December 1954, 916 (X)
of 3 December 1955 and 1018 (XI) of 28 February
1957,
Noting the annual report of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East4 and the report of
the Advisory Commission of the Agency, 5
Having reviewed the budget for relief and rehabilitation prepared by the Director of the Agency, and
having noted the comment of the Advisory Commission
to the effect that the budget is minimal,
Noting with grave concern that contributions to the
budget are not yet sufficient, that the financial situation
of the Agency is serious, and that cuts have already
had to be made in the rehabilitation programme,
Noting that repatriation or compensation of the refugees, as provided for in paragraph 11 of resolution
194 (III), has not been effected, that no substantial
progress has been made in the programme endorsed
in paragraph 2 of resolution 513 (VI) for the reintegration of reft.tgees and that, therefore, the situation
of the refugees continues to be a matter of serious
concern,
Noting that the host Governments have expressed
the wish that the Agency continue to carry out its
mandate in their respective countries or territories
and have expressed their wish to co-operate fully with
the Agency and to extend to it every appropriate
assistance in carrying out its functions, in accordance
with the provisions of Articles 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the terms of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
'Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/3686 and
Corr.1).
• Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/3735.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Speeial Political Committee

Nations, the contents of paragraph 17 of resolution
302 (IV) and the terms of the agreements with the
host Governments,
l. Draws the attention of Governments to the critical financial position of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and urges them to consider to what extent they
can contribute or increase their contributions in order
that the Agency may carry out its budgeted relief and
rehabilitation programmes and that cuts in services
may be avoided ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
critical financial position of the Agency, to make, as
a matter of urgent concern, special efforts to secure
the additional financial assistance needed to meet the
Agency's budget and to provide adequate working
capital;
3. Directs the Agency to pursue its programme for
the relief and rehabilitation of refugees, bearing in
mind the response to paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
4. Requests the host Governments to co-operate
fully with the Agency and with its personnel and to
extend to the Agency every appropriate assistance in
carrying out its functions ;
5. Requests the Governments of the area, without
prejudice to paragraph 11 of General Assembly re~,
lution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, in co-operation
with the Director of the Agency, to plan and carry out
projects capable of supporting substantial numbers of
refugees;
6. Requests the Agency to continue its consultations
with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine in the best interests of their respective tasks,
with particular reference to paragraph 11 of resolution
194 (III) ;
7. Expresses its thanks to the Director and the
staff of the Agency for their continued faithful efforts
to carry out the mandate of the Agency and to the
specialized agencies and the many private organizations
for their valuable and continuing work in assisting the
refugees;
8. Requests the Director of the Agency to continue
to submit the reports referred to in paragraph 12 of
General Assembly resolution 1018 (XI) of 28 February 1957.

728th plenary meetinq,
12 December 1957.
1192 (XIl). Composition of the General Committee of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the considerable increase in the
membership of the United Nations,
Taking also into account that the General Committee
should be so constituted as to ensure its representative
character on the basis of a balanced geographical
distribution among its members,
Believing that for these reasons it is desirable to
enlarge the composition of the General Committee,

9

Noting that the General Committee is composed
of the President, the Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the Main Committees,
1. Confirms the practice established with regard to
the distribution of the chairmanships of the Main Committees, namely, two from Latin America States, two
from Asian and African States, two from Western
European and other States, and one from an Eastern
European State;
2. Decides to amend as follows rules 31 and 38 of
its rules of procedure:
"Rule 31
"The General Assembly shall elect a President and
thirteen Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until
the close of the session at which they are elected.
The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the election of the Chairmen of the seven Main Committees
referred to in rule 101, on the basis of ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee."

"Rule 38
"The "General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside,
the thirteen Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of
the seven Main Committees. No two members of the
General Committee shall be members of the same
delegation, and it shall be so constituted as to ensure
its representative character. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to
be represented and which are established by the
General Assembly to meet during the session shall
be entitled to attend meetings of the General Committee and may participate without vote in the discussions" ;
3. Decides that the thirteen Vice-Presidents shall
be elected as provided in the annex to the present
resolution.

728th plenary meeting,
12 December 1957.
ANNEX
1. The thirteen Vice-Presidents shall be elected according
to the following pattern:
(a) Four representatives from Asian and African States;
( b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
( c) Two representatives from Latin American States;
(d) Two representatives from Western European and other
States;
(e) Five representatives from the permanent members of
the Security Council.

2. The region from which the President is elected will,
however, reduce by one the number of vice-presidencies allocated
in paragraph 1 of the present annex.
3. At least one of the Vice-Presidents in categories (a) or
(d) above, or the President or one of the Chairmen of the
Main Committees, will be from a Commonwealth country,
without altering the geographical distribution of seats in the
General Committee, as defined in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
annex and in paragraph 1 of the resolution.
