A/RES/76/229

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 80
Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 December 2021
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/76/471, para. 13)]

76/229.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would contribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of
promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization
of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal

__________________
1

21-19660 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/76/17).

050122

*2119660*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active
in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Legislative Guide on Limited Liability Enterprises, 2 the Legislative Recommendations
on Insolvency of Micro- and Small Enterprises, 3 the Mediation Rules, 4 the Notes on
Mediation 5 and the Guide to Enactment and Use of the Model Law on International
Commercial Mediation and International Settlement Agreements Resulting from
Mediation (2018), 6 and the Expedited Arbitration Rules; 7
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration, 8 as a continuation of the project until the end of 2023, to be funded
entirely by voluntary contributions, notes with satisfaction the contributions by the
European Union, Germany and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries Fund for International Development in this regard, 9 and requests the
Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of developments regarding
the funding and budgetary situation of the transparency repository;
4.
Notes with interest the progress made by the Commission in its work in
the areas of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement, investorState dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce, insolvency law and the judicial
sale of ships, 10 and encourages the Commission to continue to move forward
efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes in those areas;
5.
Takes note with interest of the decisions of the Commission as regards the
progress of preparatory work in the areas of warehouse receipts, negotiable
multimodal transport documents and legal issues related to the digital economy
(including dispute resolution), as well as its exploratory work on the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on international trade law; 11
6.
Welcomes the decision by the Commission to take stock of developments
in dispute resolution in the digital economy, expresses its appreciation to Japan for
its willingness to contribute the financial resources necessary to implement the
project in its entirety, and welcomes contributions from other Governments; 12
7.
Takes note of the request by the Commission to the secretariat to organize
a colloquium during the seventy-fifth session of Working Group II on legal issues

__________________

Ibid., chap. IV, sect. C, and annex I.
Ibid., chap. V, sect. G, and annex II.
4
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. B.2, and annex III.
5
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. C.2.
6
Ibid., sect. D.2.
7
Ibid., chap. VII, sect. D, and annex IV.
8
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
9
Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/76/17), chap. XV, sect. D.1.
10
Ibid., chaps. IV–XI.
11
Ibid., chap. XII, sects. B.2–B.5.
12
Ibid., sect. B.4 (b).
2
3

2/7

21-19660

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

related to dispute resolution in the digital economy, such as model provisions that
could be employed in the context of technology-related disputes;
8.
Notes the interest of the Commission in holding a colloquium during the
seventy-fifth session of Working Group II to discuss the desirability and feasibility of
future work on adjudication by the Commission;
9.
Notes with interest the upcoming consideration by the Commission’s
working groups of early dismissal of claims in international arbitration, the use of
artificial intelligence and automation in contracting and issues concerning civil asset
tracing and recovery as well as applicable law in insolvency proceedings; 13
10. Takes note of the proposal for future consideration by the Commission on
the facilitation of climate change mitigation, adaptation and resilience goals in the
implementation of existing Commission texts or through the development of new
texts; 14
11. Notes the endorsement by the Commission of the Unidroit Principles of
International Commercial Contracts 2016; 15
12. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, including on legal
issues relating to the digital economy as reaffirmed by the Co mmission at its fiftythird session, 16 and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels
in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant international and regional
organizations to coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, to avoid
duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
modernization and harmonization of international trade law;
13. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, in that respect
encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and non-State actors
to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes with appreciation
the organization by the secretariat of the UNCITRAL Day events, in partnership with
Governments and regional universities in Asia and the Pacific and Latin America and
the Caribbean, aimed at promoting awareness and encouraging the study and
discussion of Commission texts, as well as the call by the Chair of the Commission
during the African forum, held as a side event to the fifty -fourth session of the
Commission, for Member States to host an inaugural series of UNCITRAL Africa
Day in 2022, in partnership with the secretariat; 17
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
__________________

Ibid., sects. B.1, B.4 (c) and C.1 (a).
Ibid., sect. C.2.
15
Ibid., chap. XIII.
16
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/75/17), part two, chap. X, sect. C.4.
17
Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/76/17), chap. XV, sect. B.1 (b).
13
14

21-19660

3/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law trust fund for symposiums and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat
of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work
and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 18
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member
States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity building, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients;
14. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods
of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive deliberati ons, taking
into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III to the report on
the work of its forty-third session, 19 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings
of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rul es of procedure
and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the work of the
Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and recalls in this
regard its previous resolutions related to this matter;
15. Decides to allocate one additional one-week session per year for a single
period of four years from 2022 to 2025 and additional support to the Commission to
allow its Working Group III to continue to implement its work with respect to
investor-State dispute settlement reform, on the condition that the Commission would
during its annual session re-evaluate and, if needed, revisit its decision concerning
the need for allocating an additional one-week session to Working Group III and
related support based on its annual report on the use of its resources; 20
16. Commends the Commission for the continued temporary adjustments it has
made in its methods of work in order to advance its work to the extent possible in the
light of prevailing travel restrictions owing to the COVID -19 pandemic on the
participation of delegations at sessions of the Commission and its working groups,
which demonstrates the adaptability and resilience of the Commission and its
secretariat in such exceptional circumstances as well as the fruitful efforts to preserve
transparency, inclusiveness, flexibility, multilingualism, effectiveness and equality in
carrying out its work;

__________________

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
20
Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/76/17), chap. XII, sect. E.
18
19

4/7

21-19660

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

17. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea,
towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to States in the
Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional organizations, expresses
its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose contributions enabled
continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the continuation of the
regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources, including but not
limited to voluntary contributions from States, and requests the Secretary -General to
keep the General Assembly informed of developments regarding the establishment of
regional centres, in particular their funding and budgetary situation;
18. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make volu ntary contributions to the trust
fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members
of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary -General,
in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in those countries
to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
19. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries, at their
request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, and notes the contributions
from France, Germany and the European Union to the trust fund, which wo uld
facilitate the participation of representatives of developing States in the deliberations
of Working Group III; 21
20. Takes note of the decision by the Commission to recommend the
enlargement of its membership, which was based on informal consultatio ns facilitated
by Japan and reflects a collective compromise with broad support; 22
21. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations
should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law at the national and international levels, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
22. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of la w, respective
discussions in the Commission at its fifty-fourth session and the comments
transmitted by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 20 of General Assembly
resolution 75/141 of 15 December 2020, highlighting the relevance of its current work
to the promotion of the rule of law and the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals; 23
23. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable leg al
__________________

Ibid., chap. IX.
Ibid., chap. XX, sect. A.
23
Ibid., chap. XVIII.
21
22

21-19660

5/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development, economic
growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating entrepreneurship and,
in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in modernizing and
harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the declaration,
Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and development were
strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
24. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015,
States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at
increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
25. Recalls that the special session of the General Assembly on challenges and
measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international cooperation
was convened from 2 to 4 June 2021 pursuant to its resolution 74/276 of 1 June 2020
and its decision 74/568 of 31 August 2020, and notes that the contribution by t he
Commission was brought to the attention of the Assembly at its special session and
that, while that contribution is not referenced directly in the political declaration of
the special session, it is underscored, under the section of the declaration rela ted to
anti-corruption as an enabler for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, that
the anti-corruption work of the United Nations should be strongly linked and
coordinated with measures and programmes contributing to strengthening the rule of
law at the national and international levels; 24
26. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 25 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission; 26
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration of
its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts;
28. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
29. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international
trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
30. Commends the Commission for holding online panels during its fifty fourth session to convene an African forum, to discuss technical assistance activities
__________________

See resolution S-32/1, para. 63; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/76/17), chap. XVIII, sect. A.
25
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
26
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
24

6/7

21-19660

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-fourth session

A/RES/76/229

organized by its secretariat focusing on the recovery of micro -, small and mediumsized enterprises from the COVID-19 economic shock, to celebrate UNCITRAL Day
events and to launch online training modules entitled “Introduction to the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law”; 27
31. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource -intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, in this regard welcomes the renewed efforts by the Commission and its
secretariat towards building partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising
awareness as to the availability and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional,
academic and judiciary circles and in securing the funding required for the
coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat
of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the promotion of ways and means of
interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
32. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT system,
in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the
promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular b y
building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal practitioners to interpret
those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in internatio nal trade,
and notes the satisfaction of the Commission with the performance of the New York
Convention website 28 and the successful coordination between that website and the
CLOUT system;
33. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 29 commends the fact that the website of
the Commission has been migrated to a mobile-device-friendly platform and that it
continues to be published simultaneously in the six official languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website and to enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media
features in accordance with the applicable guidelines. 30
54th (resumed) plenary meeting
24 December 2021

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/76/17), chap. XV, sect. B.
28
www.newyorkconvention1958.org.
29
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B,
sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV,
paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
30
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
27

21-19660

7/7
