U N I TE DNA T ION S
D1str.
GEl\1ERAT..

SECURITY

8/5525
7 June 1963

COUNCil

ORIGINAL:

El~GLISH

REPORT OF THE SECRErARY-GENERAL TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL
ON LATEST DIDlELOPMEWrS CONCERNING THE PROPOSED YEMEN
OBSERVATION MISSION
1.

In paragraph 4(g) of my Report to the Security Council of 27 May 1963 (S/532l),

reference was made to the possibility that the two parties principally involved,
namely Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Republic, would undertake to defray the
costs of the Yemen operation.

I am now able to report that Saudi Arabia has

agreed orally to accept lI a proportionate share" of the costs of the operation,
while the United Arab Republic agrees in principle to provide assistance in an
amount equivalent to $200,000 for a period of two months, which would be roughly
half of the cost of the operation over that period as indicated in my Report on
Financial Implications (S/5323).

It is not precluded, of course, that an appeal

to the United Arab Republic Gover~ent for additional assistance could be made at
the end of the two months, should it be found necessary to extend the operation
beyond that period.

I have asked both Governments for written confirmation of

these financial positioDS and I expect to have favourable replies shortly.
2.

In the light of the foregoing circumstances, there are no financial

implications for the United Nations in getting the Yemen Observation Mission
established and the operation under way, or for its maintenance for an initial
Jeriod of two months.
3.

It is now my intention, therefore, to proceed with the organization and

dispatch of the Mission without further delay, and ~ am instructing General Von Horn
to go to the area with a small advance party within a day or two.
4.
While it has been my assumption that the agreement has been in effect since
the parties signined their acceptar..ce of the terms of diserlgagr.:ment (S/5298),
the arrival in the area of General Van Horn and an advance party of United Nations
Observers will formal2.y signify that all provisions of the terms of disengagement
are in effect and that the agreement is being implemented in full.
63-13088
