S/PV.8011

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8011th meeting

Tuesday, 25 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Russian Federation
Senegal
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Uruguay

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tileuberdi
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-22872 (E)
*1722872*

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting: Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires a.i.
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; and Her Excellency Mrs. María Rubiales de
Chamorro, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose also that the Council invite the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the Council’s provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/31

begin

25/07/2017

its

Mr. Mladenov: As we meet today to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, the risks of escalation and violence in the
region continue to increase, despite the emergence of
newfound agreement among a number of countries
of the need to stand united against terrorism and
radicalism. As societies continue to fracture along
ethnic or religious lines and non-State actors continue
to control large swathes of territory, recent events in
Jerusalem resonate across the Middle East. For nearly
a century, despite myriad peace efforts, one conflict
has evaded solution. Some say it is irresolvable. Others
challenge the basic premise of international consensus
on how it can be resolved. The Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is not only about land and peace; it is about two
peoples who both have legitimate national aspirations
for statehood and recognition — two nations whose
histories are intertwined and whose future is forever
intricately linked.
Fortunately until now, Israelis and Palestinians
have not succumbed to the torrent of violent upheaval
that has engulfed the region in recent years. But half a
century of occupation has produced tens of thousands
of casualties and left deep psychological scars on
both sides. Developments over the past 11 days at the
holy sites of the Old City in Jerusalem, however, have
demonstrated the grave risk of dangerous escalation that
exists, a risk of turning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
into a religious one and dragging both sides into the
vortex of violence along with the rest of the region.
On 14 July, two Israeli policemen were killed by
three assailants at the Lion’s Gate entrance to the Holy
Esplanade. The attackers fled inside the compound
before being shot by police. According to the Israeli
authorities, the assailants had initiated the attack from
within the compound. In the immediate aftermath, the
Palestinian President condemned the attack, while the
Israeli Prime Minister committed to upholding and
respecting the status quo at the holy sites in the Old
City of Jerusalem. Citing security concerns, the Israeli
authorities closed the compound to all — including,
for the first time since 1969, to Muslims for Friday
prayers — and restricted entrance to the Old City in
order to secure the area of the attack, search for further
threats and conduct an investigation.
Two days later, on Sunday, 16 July, the compound
was reopened, first for Muslim worshippers and later
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for visitors, with metal detectors placed outside its
entrances. The Islamic Waqf immediately rejected
that move as a change in the status quo and called on
worshippers not to enter the compound through the
metal detectors, but to pray outside the entrance and
in the streets of Jerusalem. Palestinian factions also
immediately rejected the security measures. Hamas
and Islamic Jihad issued a joint statement warning that
that was a red line that would lead to an escalation, and
Fatah called for “a day of rage”.
Starting on 16 July, prayers and peaceful protests
were conducted at the Lion’s Gate, followed by clashes
with the Israeli police. Tensions rose by Friday, 21 July,
as the Waqf announced the closure of all Jerusalem
mosques for Friday prayers. In response, Israel
announced a restriction of entry into the Old City
for all Muslim men under the age of 50. Clashes that
evening and the next turned fatal, with four Palestinian
protesters killed and hundreds injured. Later on Friday,
three Israelis were killed in a brutal terror attack at
their home in the West Bank settlement of Halamish by
a 19-year-old Palestinian assailant who in his last will
made a clear connection between his act and the events
in East Jerusalem. Overall, in clashes since 14 July, at
least four Palestinians were killed and more than 300
have been injured.
I ask Member States today to unequivocally
condemn the violence of the past few days. Our
thoughts and prayers must go out to all the victims and
their families.
On 21 July, President Abbas announced that the
Palestinian Authority was freezing all contact with
Israel, including high-level security coordination.
Let us make no mistake: while events in Jerusalem
may be taking place over a couple of hundred square
metres in the Old City, they affect hundreds of millions
of people around the world. Therefore, I welcome
last night’s decision by the Israeli security Cabinet to
remove the metal detectors, while ensuring the security
of visitors and worshippers to the holy sites. I hope that
the Cabinet decision will lead to a calming of the current
tensions and will enable a return of worshippers to the
Holy Esplanade. It is expected that President Abbas
will convene the Palestinian leadership later tonight to
discuss those developments.
As we have seen over the past 11 days, it is vital
that the status quo established since 1967 be preserved.
Recognizing the special and historic role of the

S/PV. 8011

Hashemite Kingdom, I encourage Israel to continue its
intensive contacts with Jordan. All parties must refrain
from provocative actions, show restraint and bring a
conclusive end to this crisis in the next few days. In
those efforts, constant discussion with the Islamic
religious authorities in Jerusalem and the Palestinian
leadership can greatly contribute to maintaining calm in
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied West Bank.
As this crisis has unfolded, I want to reflect
briefly on the views we hear from residents in East
Jerusalem — people who have been caught in the midst
of these events over the past few weeks. They often tell
us that for many years they have felt that their religious
and ethnic identity is under threat; that their very
livelihoods in their own city are at risk while living
under occupation; and that their children often live in
fear of security operations and house demolitions. They
want to pray in peace and live in security and freedom.
Many of them feel alone. They talk of the special status
that resolution 181 (1947) had bestowed on Jerusalem,
yet they see the reality around them. That is why
often they come to us, the United Nations, appealing
for protection. It is critical that any decision made at
the highest political and religious levels, if it is to be
sustainable, take into consideration the fears and hopes
of the people on the ground.
Jerusalem remains a final-status issue that needs to
be decided and negotiated between the two sides.
As the occupying Power, Israel has a responsibility
to uphold its obligations under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
must show maximum restraint in order to avoid further
loss of life and an escalation of the situation.
At the same time, Palestinian leaders have a
responsibility to avoid provocative statements that
further aggravate an already tense environment. In that
respect, I am particularly concerned about statements
made over the past weeks by some factions that have
sought to fan the flames of violence. Such provocations
are dangerous, and I call on all to condemn them.
This crisis has diverted us from the real tasks ahead,
namely, how to restore a political process in order to find
a solution that meets the legitimate national aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians — a solution that is
based on United Nations resolutions and is achieved
through negotiations; a solution whose ultimate goal is
two States living side by side in peace and security.

17-228723/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Unfortunately, these latest incidents have taken
place against a backdrop of other developments in
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In July alone, plans
were advanced for more than 2,300 housing units in
East Jerusalem, which is 30 per cent more than were
advanced during all of 2016. That includes plans
for approximately 1,600 units expanding a ring of
settlements in north of East Jerusalem, as well as plans
in Sheikh Jarrah, which may involve the demolition
of Palestinian houses. I must once again emphasize
that settlement activity in occupied territory is illegal
under international law and undermines the chances
for the establishment of a viable, contiguous and
sovereign Palestine.
On a more positive note, some constructive
steps have been taken that are in line with the
recommendations of the report of the Middle East
Quartet (S/2016/595, annex).
On 10 July, an interim power-purchasing agreement
was signed, energizing the first Palestinian-owned
and operated substation in Jenin. That will increase
electricity supply in the northern West Bank and help
the Palestinian Authority take control of the energy
sector. Both sides should now move to negotiate a
comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian power-purchasing
agreement that would be a landmark achievement
towards Palestine’s energy independence.
On 13 July, with United States facilitation,
the Palestinian Authority and Israeli Government
reached an agreement allowing for an increase in
water supply for Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza. Under its terms, the Palestinian Authority will
purchase some 32 million cubic meters of water from
Israel — 22 million cubic meters for the West Bank
and 10 million for Gaza. The water will come from a
desalination plant to be constructed in Aqaba, Jordan.
The implementation of such agreements is instrumental
in rebuilding trust between Palestinians and Israelis.
They are, however, all put at risk by the freezing of
contacts between the Palestinian Authority and Israel.
Without a resolution to the current crisis, these hardwon gains will swiftly evaporate.
I now turn to the situation in Gaza with a heavy heart.
Some 2 million people there have been taken hostage
in the political standoff between Fatah and Hamas.
The humanitarian impact of the punishing measures
taken against Gaza is appalling. In some parts of Gaza,
people have experienced electricity cuts of 36 hours.
4/31

25/07/2017

No electricity means no drinking water. Hospitals are
struggling to survive. An environmental crisis is in the
making. Whatever the political differences between the
Palestinian factions, it is not the people of Gaza who
should be paying the price.
I want to assure the Security Council that the
United Nations will not give up on Gaza and its
people. Despite the odds, we will continue our intense
mediation efforts to resolve the standoff. I take this
opportunity to thank Egypt for stepping in at a moment
of need and facilitating the entry of badly needed fuel
to increase electricity supply. Egyptian fuel, along with
the nearly 900,000 liters of fuel per month provided
by the United Nations for the most essential services,
provide a temporary lifeline to the residents of Gaza.
In this environment, the continued functioning of the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism is more critical than
ever to the people of Gaza. Recently, too, the State of
Qatar has signed contracts for eight more residential
buildings as part of its commitment to reconstruction.
Today, Gaza and the West Bank are further apart
than ever. Palestinian leaders must make some hard
choices about the future of their people. They can
work to overcome their ideological divisions or they
can continue along the path that will guarantee Gaza’s
complete collapse. They can work to unite Palestinians
in pursuit of the goal of statehood or they can oversee
the demise of the Palestinian national project. They can
resolve the current crisis in Gaza or preside over the
radicalization of their population and see it fall into the
hands of extremists with ever more destructive agendas.
I know that this is not the future that President
Abbas or the majority of Palestinians want for their
country. I know that they want to build a State in which
human rights are respected; a State that is achieved on
the basis of negotiations, not violence; one that lives in
peace and security with the State of Israel. For 10 years,
however, the population in Gaza has lived in a state of
chronic vulnerability. At what point will people say
“enough is enough”? At what point will we say “enough
is enough”?
Since violently seizing control of Gaza, Hamas has
tightened its grip on power and suppressed dissent. The
fact that no presidential or legislative elections have
been held in Palestine since 2006 has also created a
democratic deficit that undermines the legitimacy of
institutions. Two different legal systems have emerged
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and diverging laws have been enacted in Gaza and the
West Bank.
I once again call on all Palestinian leaders to
address the destructive consequences of the split. I
encourage them to reach an agreement that would allow
the legitimate Palestinian Government to take up its
responsibilities in Gaza as a step towards the formation
of a unity Government on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform, and agree to hold
elections. Meanwhile, Hamas must ensure that calm is
maintained by ceasing militant build-up against Israel
and by maintaining security at the border of Egypt.
At the same time, I encourage Israel to step up its
measures to lift the closures and facilitate development
in Gaza as overall calm persists in the Strip, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009).
Turning very briefly to Lebanon, I should like only
to refer to the briefing a few days ago by the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, who briefed
the Council in detail on developments and risks under
resolution 1701 (2006).
Meanwhile, I also want to note that the ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic has
been maintained, albeit in a volatile environment. I
am alarmed by the recent spike in military activities
in Syria, which has resulted in several spill-over fire
incidents across the disengagement line and Israeli
retaliatory actions. I join the Secretary-General in
welcoming the announcement by the Governments of
Jordan, the Russian Federation and the United States
of a de-escalation zone and arrangements to support a
ceasefire and the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
south-western Syria.
In closing, let me emphasize that the events we
have witnessed over the past weeks in Jerusalem are
a reminder of how easy it is to reach the precipice
of a dangerous escalation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. We are not over the crisis yet,
but I hope that the steps that have been taken by Israel
will enable a return to relative calm in the next couple
of days. I hope that as agreements between Israel and
Jordan are implemented and a positive engagement with
the religious authorities takes places, we will avoid a
cycle of violence that would destroy all peace efforts
for the foreseeable future.
We must not lose focus on the need to restore a
political perspective or on the need to bring Palestinians
and Israelis back into an environment that is conducive

S/PV. 8011

to negotiations on a final status arrangement and avoids
turning the national Israeli-Palestinian conflict into a
religious one.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency this month, confident of China’s
skilled leadership and guidance of the Council’s
important work. I also wish to thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing to the Council
this morning.
Before proceeding, we also renew our deep
appreciation to Bolivia for its wise leadership of the
Security Council in June, including its convening on
20 June of the meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7977)
to sombrely mark and reflect on the fiftieth year of
Israel’s occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands since
1967. As reflected in the statements made by Council
members that day, the international consensus is firm
and clear that the two-State solution, on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, remains the central pillar of a
just, comprehensive and peaceful solution based on
the relevant resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Also clear are the responsibilities of the Council
under the Charter of the United Nations to act to
advance a solution to the conflict, which continues to
impact international peace and security. And yet, we
continue to face the tragic consequences of the illegal
occupation and the rapid deterioration on all fronts, and
the absence of a credible political horizon to end the
occupation, end this injustice and realize the Palestinian
people’s rights, including to self-determination.
We come before the Council today amid escalating
tensions and instability in our homeland and a profound
sense of worry. The fragile situation in occupied East
Jerusalem has been inflamed yet again as Israel, the
occupying Power, presses forth with its reckless and
destructive agenda against our people and holy sites,
especially Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which houses the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque, in absolute contempt for international
law and the will of the international community. The

17-228725/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

situation that we have repeatedly warned against — the
stoking of a religious conflict — is rapidly unfolding
as Israel persists with its illegal actions in occupied
East Jerusalem, including its aggressive behaviour
and provocative violations of the historic status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, aggravating religious sensitivities
to the point of eruption. We are clearly at the tipping
point. We must therefore again warn against the
dangers of such provocations and incitement and the
fueling of yet another cycle of violence, which will
surely have far-reaching consequences in this already
volatile climate.
We condemn the closure of Al-Aqsa Mosque
by Israel and all other related provocative and
inflammatory measures and we do not accept, under
any circumstances or pretexts, the closure of that
holy site to worshippers. At this time, occupied East
Jerusalem is a city besieged from within and without
by military checkpoints, occupation forces, settlements
and armed and violent settlers. The Palestinian people
in the city face negation, subjugation, discrimination,
armed demolitions and violence, with the aim of forcibly
transferring them out of their city. Israel openly and
shamelessly pursues discriminatory plans and policies
based on religious and national affiliation.
The Palestinian people are resisting the recent
provocative measures, including the closure of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, the banning of the Friday prayers
and restrictions and access to the holy sites by praying
in the streets. They are peacefully — and I emphasize
peacefully — expressing their rejection of the illegal
measures against their rights and their holy sites.
Yet, peaceful demonstrations and steadfastness in
preserving the character and identity of the city are
being met with violent repression. Such aggression,
provocations and violations must be immediately
halted in order to avert the complete destabilization and
collapse of the situation.
We recognize the efforts undertaken thus far
by concerned parties in the region and across the
international community to de-escalate the situation
in Jerusalem and affirm the Palestinian leadership’s
readiness to cooperate with such efforts. In that context,
we recognize the important role and supervision of the
Islamic Waqf at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the first kibla
and the third holiest site in Islam, and recall the special
role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as custodian
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in the city. Yet,
Israel continues to ignore the international community.
6/31

25/07/2017

A clear unified message must be conveyed to Israel to
cease and reverse all such illegal actions and policies.
Furthermore, explicit calls must be made for an end to
Israeli incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, including
by Government officials, regarding the city and the
holy sites, such as remarks by Israel’s Public Security
Minister who brazenly declared that:
“Israel holds sovereignty over the Mount, no matter
what other countries’ positions are, and if we decide
that a certain move has a certain advantage, then it
is carried out”.
Such declarations are aimed at illegally asserting
Israeli control over Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the heart
of occupied East Jerusalem, which remains an integral
part of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel
since 1967. De-escalation is urgent. We appeal for the
continuation of all efforts to restore the historic status
quo at Al-Haram mosque compound and achieve calm.
That requires the lifting of all measures in violation
of the historic status quo, including any hindrances or
obstructions violating the access by Palestinians to that
holy site and their freedom of worship. We recall the
Council’s press statement (SC/12052) of 17 September
2015, in which it was underscored that
“Muslim worshippers at the Haram al-Sharif must
be allowed to worship in peace, free from violence,
threats and provocations”.
We also recall the numerous relevant Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem from 1948 to 1967 to
the present day, the most recent being resolution 2334
(2016), which explicitly underlined the non-recognition
of any changes to 4 June 1967 lines, including with
regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the
parties through negotiations. We call for the full respect
and implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Council has not only the power to
enact the law, but a duty to uphold it. Its credibility and
authority in this case and all cases depend on it. The
question of Palestine cannot remain the exception to
every rule.
The de-escalation of this perilous situation
is contingent on respect for the law, including as
enshrined in the relevant resolutions and that, in turn,
is what will preserve the sanctity of the holy sites and
preserve fleeting prospects for peace. The protection of
human life is equally urgent. The protection of civilian
Palestinians in the occupied territory, including in East
Jerusalem is very urgent and important. International
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian law and human rights law must be
respected, without exception. We deplore the killing
and injury of all innocent civilians. I repeat, we deplore
the killing and injury of all innocent civilians, including
innocent Palestinian civilians.
Israel, the occupying Power, must be held
accountable for its violations and negligence, including
with regard to the terror inflicted by its settlers on the
Palestinian civilians under its occupation; it cannot
continue to be absolved of its legal obligations. We
mourn the loss of five of our youth, who were brutally
killed last week by the occupying forces, and pray for the
recovery of the more than 1,000 peaceful demonstrators
who were injured. In that connection, we commend the
European Union, the Secretary-General and others who
have asked for investigations into such crimes. We also
deplore Israel’s ongoing military raids and arrest of
Palestinian civilians, including children, adding to the
thousands of Palestinians unlawfully imprisoned and
abused by the occupation.
We must remind the members in the Chamber that
the Palestinian people are an unarmed, defenceless
people. We must also remind members that Israel is
the occupying Power and is not the sovereign in any
part of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and cannot be permitted in any way
to act as sovereign, whether in practice, policy or
rhetoric. This occupation, entrenched and sustained by
Israel’s illegal policies and practices over the decades,
is the context and harsh reality in which all of these
disturbing developments are taking place. And all of
it is happening against the backdrop of the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) — a resolution
that was unequivocal as to the occupied status of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, since
1967 and the illegality of all measures aimed at altering
the demography, character and status of that territory.
Resolution 2334 (2016) determined a clear path
away from conflict and towards peace. We must not
allow the occupying Power to continue dragging us in
the opposite direction. In the absence of serious steps to
implement resolution 2334 (2016), and in the absence of
any consequences for Israel’s flagrant disrespect of the
resolution, the occupying Power has not only persisted
with its violations — committing thousands since the
resolution’s adoption — but has also been encouraged
and emboldened to accelerate its reckless colonization
and annexation campaign.

S/PV. 8011

The occupying Power’s actions continue to
endanger Palestinian civilians’ lives and risk further
destabilizing the situation on the ground, with
potentially dramatic consequences for Palestinians
and Israelis, for the region and the prospects for peace
and security. We should not underestimate the risks.
Despair, anger and tensions throughout Palestine are
running extremely high, especially among our young
people, who have not known a single day of freedom or
dignity under this abhorrent occupation.
An hour from Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied West Bank, 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip remain under Israel’s illegal blockade in an act of
massive collective punishment. For a decade, an entire
population has been imprisoned — denied freedom of
movement and access to livelihoods, basic supplies
and even vital medicines; deprived of clean water and
energy and forced to live in the ruins of war, even as
reconstruction continues to be obstructed and at least
40,000 people remain displaced. That is the reality of
their lives. This man-made catastrophe is deepening
by the hour and requires urgent remedy through
humanitarian, humane and political solutions. Gaza
is unlivable for humans. That does not mean a decade
from now, or even a few years or months. It is unlivable
now, as we speak. While Palestinian unity is vital and
a priority that we are working very hard to accomplish,
only an end to the Israeli blockade can bring life back
to Gaza. We therefore appeal once again for immediate
action to save its Palestinian civilian population from
this inhumanity and avert another explosive crisis.
Seventy years after the United Nations was first
seized of the question of Palestine, the denial of the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination still
continues. How many Palestinian generations will
have to endure the suffering caused by their persistent
dispossession and exile and by the colonial and military
Israeli occupation in all its manifestations? How many
more years and decades do we have to wait? Here,
before the Council, I have to say that if affirming and
defending the Palestinian people’s rights is equated
with being anti-Israel, the logical conclusion is that
only a negation of Palestinian rights can be considered
pro-Israel. That is not just offensive and unacceptable;
it constitutes an existential matter for the Palestinian
people. Moreover, it implies that a just peace — one
that recognizes the legitimate national aspirations
and rights of the Palestinian people — is not possible
and that somehow our collective pursuit of peace is

17-228727/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

anti-Israel. We reject that equation and continue to
believe that peace is possible, not by negating our
rights but rather by ending the Israeli occupation of
our land, securing Palestinian rights — including
the right to self-determination and freedom — and
ensuring a just settlement for Palestinian refugees, in
conformity with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The Palestinian leadership will continue to engage
positively with every peace effort. We say that even
at a time of great pain and turmoil for our people and
our land, for we firmly believe that the path of peace
and international legitimacy will rectify this grave
injustice and ensure that one day the Palestinian people
will live in dignity, freedom and sovereignty in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with Israel and all of its other
neighbours, in peace and security within recognized
borders. We appeal to the Council and all those present
to uphold its role and responsibilities under the Charter
in this urgent hour. We need the Council, and we need
it to act.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Last Friday, a disgusting act
of terror took place in my country. The Salomon family
had gathered together for the traditional Friday-night
Shabbat meal. They came together to celebrate a joyous
occasion, the birth of a new grandson. But it was only
a matter of time before the family’s festivities ended
in horrific bloodshed. A Palestinian terrorist broke
into their home. He murdered Yosef, the 70-year-old
grandfather of the family, and Yosef’s daughter Haya and
son Elad. That terrorist slayed those innocents in cold
blood before the eyes of the children and grandchildren.
This family, including the youngest children, had to
witness their loved ones bleed to death at the hands
of terror. Had it not been for Elad’s wife, the horrific
attack would have taken the lives of the entire extended
Salomon family. She hid the children while a brave
neighbour who heard the victims’ screams neutralized
the terrorist before he could complete his massacre.
We cannot continue to ignore the basis for this
ghastly assault. The attack did not happen in a
vacuum. No, that terrorist committed a heinous crime
following rampant, relentless incitements to violence
by Palestinian officials. The Palestinian President,
8/31

25/07/2017

Mahmoud Abbas, has publicly endorsed the practice of
paying salaries to convicted terrorists and their families.
Schools are named for mass murderers. Monuments
dedicated to these killers stand at the centres of
Palestinian towns and villages. Palestinians in Gaza
even celebrated Friday’s horrific events. The result is
clear. Palestinians are radicalized and encouraged to
kill innocent Israelis in cold blood. It is no secret that
they have built an industry of incitement. How many
more innocents will be murdered? How many more
terrorists will be paid to kill? And how many thousands
of dollars will be awarded to the Salomons’ killer? This
incitement, culture of hate and glorification of terror
must end now.
We are assembled in this forum to examine the
situation in the Middle East. So let us examine the real
situation. The core of so much violence in our region
and around the world comes from the unrelenting
glorification of terror. We cannot continue to sideline
the truth. Friday’s unspeakable atrocity was not an
isolated incident. This kind of encouragement to terror
has been going on for decades. The Palestinians will
not admit it. They make up excuses and divert attention
from the truth. They have just claimed that Israel is
seeking to change the status quo on the Temple Mount
and that that is what prompted the violence. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Israel’s top priority is
to maintain the safety and security of all Temple Mount
worshippers and visitors. The Palestinians’ top priority
is to ignite violence.
Let me go back to 4 October 2003. Jews and
Arabs were gathered together in Haifa’s famous
Maxim restaurant. Maxim was seen across the world
as a symbol of coexistence, brotherhood and peace.
While enjoying a family lunch, no one suspected the
impending violence. On that October day, Hanadi
Jaradat, a female Palestinian student from Jenin,
disguised herself as a pregnant woman. Jaradat walked
into the restaurant with one twisted intention in mind:
to blow herself up and kill as many innocent people as
possible. In cold blood, Jaradat took the lives of 21 Jews
and Arabs and badly injured 51 others. Dead customers
were still sitting upright in their chairs, with blood
spilling from their bodies. Babies and young children
were propelled across the room from the force of the
blast. No plight or struggle can justify such disgusting
acts of terror. No claim of victimhood can validate the
cruelty and the insanity of such sick crimes.
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Terror has many untold victims. Oran Almog is one
of them. While only 10-years-old, Oran lost his father,
grandfather, grandmother, brother and cousin because
of Hanadi Jaradat. Oran was badly burned and blinded.
Oran is here with us today.
Hanadi Jaradat’s family — the family of the
killer — has earned tens of thousands of dollars in
payments for her crime. Jaradat’s two accomplices have
earned more than $500,000 in total terror payments, and
those sums are only increasing. The more prison days,
the higher the terror wage. Jaradat’s father declined all
condolences and called his daughter a “gift”. What a
gift indeed. Jaradat’s family earned a blank check for
her suicide. In October 2012, the Arab Lawyers’ Union
awarded its top prize to that terrorist. The Union even
sent a delegation to her family to present them with
the award.
Professional women in Israel, like in many of the
other members’ countries, win awards in the arts,
sciences and business. Professional Palestinian women
win awards for murder. As Israeli women become chief
executive officers, Palestinian women like Hanadi
Jaradat become chief executive killers. The Palestinian
Authority (PA) is just as guilty as the terror groups
themselves. Abbas not only has the audacity to claim
that he seeks peace, but actively funds, promotes and
glorifies terror.
In 2016, the Palestinian Authority spent more than
$300 million — yes, members have heard correctly — on
the salaries paid to terrorists and their families, on
mass killers with innocent blood on their hands. The
PA under Abbas dedicates approximately 7 per cent of
its budget to funding terrorists and their families. How
much of its budget does it spend on higher education?
The answer is as low as 1 per cent. You do not need a
university degree to determine where the Palestinian
Authorities’ priorities lie.
Mahmoud Abbas has made his position clear. He
supports the policy of “pay to slay”. Just recently,
he said,
“I will not compromise on the salary of a martyr or
a prisoner.”
This is the leader of the Palestinian Authority who pays
terrorists to kill. The truth is plain and simple: Israel
values every life, while the PA praises every death. Not
only does Israel cherish life, but Israel believes firmly
in building a better future for every person.

S/PV. 8011

In Israel we value the freedom of expression, the
freedom of ideas and the freedom of religion — for all
religions. In Israel we empower women and minorities.
We protect the rights of Muslims, Christians and Jews
to pray at their holy sites. We commit to ensuring the
safety of all worshippers and visitors and to taking
the necessary measures to guarantee their complete
security. In Israel we teach our children to invest in
democratic values and a genuine, enduring peace. The
Palestinians do not. They teach hate. They invest in
terror. And they celebrate death.
In Palestinian classrooms fourth-graders solve
word problems to calculate the number of terrorists
killed in suicide attacks against Jews. If children are
surrounded by the praise of terror in and out of school,
they are destined to kill. Israel wants nothing more than
to simply live in peace with its neighbours. We extend
a hand in peace, but the Palestinians continue to say no.
Prime Minister Netanyahu has stated time and again
that we are ready and willing to negotiate — anytime
and anywhere.
The United Nations is an Organization dedicated
to peace, human rights and justice. One might think
it would be quick to condemn the glorification of
terror wherever it happens, but that is hardly the case,
especially with regard to the Palestinians. The PA
has mastered the art of deceit, and the international
community has fallen for it. The Palestinians spin.
They call those who send suicide bombers to Israeli
restaurants, stab Israelis in the streets and seek Israel’s
ultimate destruction “political prisoners”. Worst of all,
the Palestinians fund their terror scheme through the
generous donations of other countries. That is right: the
international community has allowed approximately
30 per cent of foreign aid intended to support the
Palestinian’s well-being to fund blood money.
Israel will not tolerate the bankrolling of terror any
longer. We will not accept the glorified killing of our
citizens. I turn to the Palestinian representative and ask
him to look at Oran and tell him and the Council that
the Palestinian Authority will stop paying thousands
of dollars every month to the terrorists and abusing
international aid and foreign funds to promote terror.
His silence speaks for itself
As Oran has taught us,
“After what I have gone through, I know that even if
they hurt you, they cannot defeat you. If we remain

17-228729/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

united and continue to maintain our togetherness,
no one can beat us”.
Oran is a true hero, a true patriot and a true model for
the appreciation of life. Like Oran and all the people of
Israel, the Council must value life over death. The blind
acceptance of murder cannot go on. The silence in the
face of terror must end.
I turn now to the Security Council, a body founded
to ensure “the maintenance of international peace and
security” for all. The Council must not sacrifice the core
values of justice, morality and truth for cheap political
victories and empty promises. Let us pledge to work
together to end this vulgar exploitation of international
aid. Let us hold the Palestinians accountable and ensure
that they teach their children to seek peace. Only then,
will we see the possibility of real peace in our region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. The United States shares
everyone’s concern about the heightened tensions in
Jerusalem. All parties should work to reduce these
tensions, and we offer whatever assistance we can
in helping to do that. At the holy sites, it is vital that
both access and security be ensured. In keeping with
Mr. Mladenov’s recommendation, I am going to refrain
from further comment on this sensitive issue in the
hope that wisdom will prevail over emotions.
This is our monthly gathering to discuss the Middle
East. The complicated and seemingly unending conflict
there is frustrating to many Americans. It is frustrating
to me. But truth be told, the Security Council often makes
the Middle East more complicated than it actually is. It
obsesses over Israel, and it refuses to acknowledge one
of the chief sources of conflict and killing in the Middle
East. That is Iran and its partner militia, the Lebanese
Hizbullah. Hizbullah is a terrorist organization. In
its own words, it is “dedicated to the destruction of
Israel”. It has the blood of hundreds of Americans and
thousands of others on its hands. Together with its
Iranian patron, Hizbullah seeks to cause destruction
throughout the Middle East. Some regard Hizbullah as
having two wings: a terrorist wing and a political and
social wing. This is a convenient excuse for Hizbullah,
but it is dangerous fiction. Just because a terrorist
group also promotes political candidates for office does
not make it any less a terrorist group.
10/31

25/07/2017

For a glimpse of Hizbullah’s true nature, we need
look no further than its work on behalf of the Syrian
dictator. From its base in Lebanon, Hizbullah sends
its men into Syria. There, they have been responsible
for some of the bloodiest campaigns of a very bloody
war. They are returning to Lebanon battle-hardened
and their presence in Syria keeps open their supply
route of sophisticated weapons from Iran. Simply put,
Hizbullah has grown stronger. It is preparing its men
and its arsenal for a future war. None of this is secret.
The leader of Hizbullah boasts about the destruction
that his group of capable of. He talks openly about the
support Iran provides. Hizbullah even takes journalists
on tours of its military operations on the border that
Lebanon shares with Israel — operations that are in
defiance of the Council.
It is no secret where the United Nations stands
either. It has adopted multiple resolutions calling on
Hizbullah to disarm. It has called on the Lebanese
State to exercise control over its territory. But neither
of these things has happened. The trend is very much
in the opposite direction. Hizbullah openly defies these
resolutions and impedes the Lebanese Government’s
ability to exercise full control over its territory. For too
long, the Security Council has chosen to pretend that
the status quo is acceptable to the people of Lebanon. It
is not. Hizbullah’s illegal weapons build-up is putting
the people of Lebanon in great danger. Remarkably, the
Council has not even been able to bring itself to use the
word “Hizbullah” in recent resolutions or statements
on Lebanon. Many here are happy to name Israel time
after time, but Hizbullah is somehow off limits. It is
absurd; worse than that, it is dangerous.
The least the American people expect from the
Council is to acknowledge the obvious threats that
are right in front of us. How can I explain to them that
there is a terrorist organization preparing its men and
its arsenal for war, but that the United Nations refuses
to even say its name. That must change. We must
show Hizbullah that it cannot get away with its illegal
weapons. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) has an important role to play. The United
States supports UNIFIL, but there is much more that
UNIFIL should do to help prevent another conflict. It
can begin by acknowledging what is happening right
under its nose. There are reports of UNIFIL not fully
investigating alleged violations. Sometimes it fails to
report what its investigators have found. If UNIFIL
cannot acknowledge illegal weapons that Hizbullah
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

parades in front of the media, one wonders what else
it is missing. We will have more to say about UNIFIL
when its mandate is up for renewal next month.
The American people sympathize with the
challenges facing the Lebanese people. We will continue
to support them as they combat the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and host over a million refugees.
We understand that the issues in the Middle East are
complex, but we also understand right and wrong, and
we expect our leaders to know the difference as well.
Hizbullah is a destructive terrorist force. It is a major
obstacle to peace and the dangers it poses are getting
larger, not smaller. Simply acknowledging this and
saying it aloud would be a significant step forward,
but we must do more than that. We must begin to get
serious about enforcing our own resolutions that have
been routinely violated by Iran and Hizbullah.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mukhtar Tileuberdi, First Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov,
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. I
also express appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening today’s open debate which highlights the
crisis in the region and collectively seeks concerted
action on several fronts in each of the critical countries.
The situation in the Middle East region is of
great concern to Kazakhstan because the region is
the epicentre of numerous armed conflicts of extreme
complexity. These flash points and tensions have grave
implications for international peace and security.
Rivalry and the lack of trust, unity of purpose, justice,
escalating stark economic and social inequalities and
underdevelopment prevent the global community from
achieving progress in the Middle East. As a result,
today we are witnessing the rapid growth of terrorism
and violent extremism, a grave humanitarian situation
and violations of the most basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We also see an unprecedented
migration crisis and the suffering of millions of people.
A most serious and dangerous problem is the fact that
terrorism has spread all across the region. Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Lebanon and Yemen are impacted and suffering
from this scourge, and the international community
needs to take a coordinated and united approach to
combat this threat.

S/PV. 8011

On the Palestinian question, we are concerned over
the ongoing construction of settlements and the growing
threat of violence, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and economic backwardness, all of which are
unacceptable. The escalated tensions in the holy city
of Jerusalem — sparked by the killing of two Israeli
policemen, the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
imposition of restrictions on worshippers — are further
worsening the fragile security situation. As a member
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, we urge the
Government of Israel to lift these restrictions, as such
actions could escalate into a religious confrontation
with dangerous repercussions. All acts of violence
should end, and parties should refrain from conduct
and actions that could lead to a further escalation of the
already complicated situation on the ground.
The early resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, without any preconditions, is urgently
needed. In this connection, we commend the efforts
of the United States and Russia to facilitate the
resumption of the peace dialogue within the framework
of the Middle East Quartet. Kazakhstan supports a
negotiated two-State solution, leading to the realization
of the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel’s right to security. Both sides need to demonstrate
the political will necessary to reach a historic and
long-awaited peace agreement. One of the positive
outcomes of the efforts undertaken thus far is the
water-sharing agreement between Israel and Palestine,
and we hope that it will create a positive atmosphere
towards cooperation on other important issues on the
bilateral agenda.
Kazakhstan welcomes the outcomes of the recent
international high-level meetings within the framework
of the Astana and Geneva processes and the recent
agreements between the Russian Federation, the
United States of America and Jordan regarding the
de-escalation areas in south-western Syria. We call
on all parties and countries involved to fully observe
the ceasefire and continue to pursue every possible
constructive interaction in order to restore peace and
stability, for only then will we be able to find a political
solution to the crisis in Syria.
We congratulate the Government of Iraq and the
Iraqi people on liberating Mosul from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). This marks a significant
turning point in the conflict and in countering
international terrorism. The post-ISIL long-term
recovery and reconstruction process will require unity,

17-2287211/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation.
We call upon the international community to support
the Iraqi Government’s new five-year national
development plan, its 10-year reconstruction plan and
its poverty reduction strategy.
Kazakhstan welcomes the consensus reached
among the various political forces of Lebanon to
adopt a new electoral law. The parliamentary elections
scheduled to be held in May 2018 will positively
promote the stabilization of the situation in the country
and strengthen its State institutions. The number of
Syrian refugees in Lebanon has exceeded 1 million.
The international community must provide greater
assistance to Lebanon for its generous gesture in
hosting such an enormous number of refugees, in spite
of its most limited resources.
The Yemeni crisis, which is a direct result of
armed conflict, has no military solution but only a
political one. My country is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and epidemiological situation in Yemen,
where the cholera outbreak has further escalated an
already acute humanitarian situation. We call upon
all parties to the conflict to take decisive measures
to prevent the spread of the epidemic by respecting
international humanitarian law and to refrain from
impeding humanitarian and medical access and
supplies, which are obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
Over the past two weeks, the Council has conducted
two urgent series of consultations on the crises in Gaza
and Jerusalem. The crises are localized, but they are
not local. Each threatens to unleash a new escalation of
violence in Israel and Palestine, as well as beyond the
region. These acute crises only confirm the warning
that many of us have regularly delivered to the Council.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict will not resolve itself.
Let us be fully aware of the fact that the solution to
the conflict does not lie in the principal actors acting
on autopilot, on the basis of outdated software, nor
on delusional shorcuts. There is no alternative to the
difficult path to peace based on respect and negotiations.
Time does not make the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
less dangerous. The rise in regional crises has neither
normalized nor marginalized it. On the contrary, the
lack of a solution to the conflict, which is particularly
12/31

25/07/2017

serious in and of itself, constitutes an ongoing threat to
international security. Given its gravity, its symbolic
dimension and its place in the collective imagination
of the parties involved, the impact of this unresolved
conflict has structural dimensions and goes beyond the
borders of Israel and the Palestinian territories. Any
escalation in the conflict carries with it uncontrolled
regional destabilization. For that reason, we cannot
resign ourselves to a false status quo that conceals a
daily regression, both on the ground and in peoples’
minds. The end of the current path is clear. The idea of
a two-State solution will disappear like a mirage in the
desert. That would represent a leap into the unknown
and the risk of a worst-case scenario.
The crisis in Jerusalem shows that a surge in
violence can occur at any time in the region and
beyond, given the spiritual, religious and symbolic
weight of the Temple Mount. In the light of the alarming
rise in tensions and violence in recent days, France
has expressed its extreme concern and stressed the
imperative for a return to calm. In that regard, we have
taken note of the removal of the metal detectors, which
is an encouraging signal. We hope that it will open the
way to a lasting settlement of the situation. France also
recalls that such appeasement requires respect for the
historical status quo of 1967 and cooperation among the
Israeli, Jordanian and Palestinian parties. We continue
to monitor the situation with the utmost attention
and reiterate our call for the utmost restraint. As
Mr. Mladenov rightly stressed, there is a need to avoid
transforming the political conflict, which can and must
be subject to agreement and compromise, into a religious
conflict that would make any compromise impossible.
In Gaza, the continuing humanitarian crisis for
2 million Palestinians has suddenly deteriorated due to
cuts to the electricity supply, that have lasted more than
three months. The inhabitants of Gaza live today with
two to three hours of electricity per day on average.
The energy crisis is paralysing medical, sanitary and
water treatment infrastructure. It strikes the weakest in
Gaza, not the leaders of Hamas. If nothing is done, the
ongoing tensions could lead to a new deadly conflict of
the sort seen three times in the Gaza Strip in less than
a decade. That would be unacceptable. Israel must fully
assume its responsibilities as the occupying Power by,
inter alia, alleviating restrictions on the movement of
goods and persons to and from Gaza. It is also critical
that the Palestinians reach a reconciliation agreement.
We know that there can be no viable Palestinian State
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

without Palestinian unity, based on the principle of the
two-State solution. More critically, a lasting political
solution must be found for Gaza, predicated on the
lifting of the blockade and robust security guarantees
for Israel.
The crisis calls for an urgent response, both
from the parties involved and from the international
community. But beyond that immediate demand, we
must restore the prospects for a just peace, in which
Palestinians and Israelis are ever less inclined to
believe. Violence is proliferating in the current political
vacuum, and that violence is unacceptable. The recent
deaths of 10 people in attacks and clashes in Jerusalem
and the Palestinian territories serve as a new tragic
illustration of that. We condemn all violence, and the
well-known, horrendous murders of three members of
an Israeli family in a settlement in the West Bank, must
be firmly repudiated.
In that context, it is essential to return to the
negotiating table. Such negotiations are of course
incumbent on the parties, but their outcome must
not be pre-empted by faits accomplis. Settlementbuilding, which is illegal under international law,
directly threatens the preservation of the two-State
solution on the ground and the prospect for a fair and
lasting peace for both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The announcement at the beginning of the month of
the construction of 1,500 new housing units in East
Jerusalem is unprecedented. It is a very bad sign and
will only fuel tensions on the ground.
It is therefore necessary to provide a genuine
political horizon to both Israelis and Palestinians.
France welcomes and encourages all initiatives
undertaken to that end, in particular by the United
States. It also recalls the fact that all attempts to
partially address the conflict have failed. Economic
development and security arrangements can make sense
only in the context of a comprehensive agreement.
The path to achieve that is not easy; sacrifices will be
required on both sides. However, there is no alternative
to internationally agreed parameters: two States living
in peace and security along secure and recognized
borders, based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreedupon territorial exchanges, with Jerusalem as the
capital of the two States.
France is a friend of both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why we will speak truth and steadfastly call
for a return to the negotiation table. We will never

S/PV. 8011

throw in the towel. Faced with the temptation to put
off addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or to
lose sight of the need for a final status agreement, it
is essential to reaffirm the two-State framework. As
President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
said to the Palestinian President and to the Israeli
Prime Minister, whom he hosted in Paris in recent
weeks, France will remain firmly committed to this
issue and will fully contribute to the efforts, which
are more necessary than ever, to restore a credible and
dynamic policy.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.
Bolivia expresses its strong support for sincere,
cross-cutting and transparent dialogue to achieve the
two-State solution. We are convinced, like all other
States Members of the United Nations, that both Israel
and Palestine have the right to live in security as free
and independent States.
As on other occasions, we endorse the initiatives
that lead to a peaceful settlement to the conflict between
Palestine and Israel, such as the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, and others that seek to ensure
a just and lasting peace for both peoples. In that regard,
we reaffirm our full commitment to multilateralism
and to debate framed by respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the States.
On this occasion, I would like to express our
deepest condolences to the families of the Palestinian
and Israeli citizens who died over the past few days
in violent clashes in the territories of Jerusalem and
the West Bank. As a pacifist State, we categorically
reject all kinds of acts of force that result in the loss
of human life, regardless of who commits them or the
circumstances in which they occur. Our commitment
to the sanctity of life prevails over all ideological
speech or action that embraces violence as a valid
means to achieve an end, regardless of how fair that
end may appear.
Unfortunately, again and as on other occasions,
we are participating in this open debate in a context
that does little to inspire optimism for the long-desired

17-2287213/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace in the Middle East. The Israeli Government
recently sought to justify a number of violations of
international law, including practices aimed at altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
occupied since 1967.
Between 16 July and today, at least eight deaths have
occurred in clashes that took place in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank. As members of the Security
Council, we cannot allow an escalation in the violence
that adds to the deaths, be they Israeli or Palestinian.
On 21 July, last Friday, the Israeli police issued
a communiqué announcing the implementation of a
series of measures restricting the access of men under
the age of 50 and Palestinian women in general to the
Holy Esplanade. In imposing those new restrictions,
which include metal detectors and metal barriers at the
holy sites that surround the Al-Aqsa Mosque, Israel is
violating the historic status quo. We must recall the
historic General Assembly resolution 181 (II), of 1947,
which refers to the fact that the liberty of access to holy
sites and sanctuaries and religious buildings, as well as
freedom of worship, shall be guaranteed, in conformity
with existing rights and subject to requirements of
public order and decorum.
We join the nations that today are calling on the
parties to heed the call of history and to sit down together
to begin a frank and sincere dialogue, while refraining
from any attitude whose outcome is to increase the
violence in a land already steeped in volatility, a land
in which various faiths and cultures should coexist and
recognize their shared humanity.
We also call upon all parties to refrain from
resorting to the use of aggressive rhetoric, which
fans the flames of hostility between both peoples. It
is crucial that every possible effort be made to avoid
any escalation of violence, which ultimately affects
innocent men, women, children and the elderly.
We express once again our commitment to the
immediate implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
and we encourage all members of the Security Council
to join forces for its implementation without further
delay. We believe that all the resolutions adopted by the
Council should be implemented with the same rigor and
commitment that they demand, with the sole purpose of
guaranteeing international peace and security.
14/31

25/07/2017

In conclusion, we emphatically reaffirm that the
only long-term solution to the conflict is the two-State
solution, with an Israeli State and a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State, within the pre1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation, through me, would like to
welcome the convening of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization
and
the
Palestinian
Authority,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for the clarity of his briefing.
The information he shared with us once again confronts
us with the extreme volatility of the situation on the
ground and in the peace process, which has clearly been
struggling since 2014.
Against the backdrop of the particularly tense
situation in Jerusalem, a city that is a symbol of three
monotheistic religions, my delegation calls upon the
parties to work to reduce tensions, as Mr. Mladenov
urged. We reiterate our call for respect for the status
quo of the Muslim and Christian holy sites, including
the Holy Esplanade, and welcome the important role
Jordan continues to play in that regard.
The
fourth
International
Conference
on
Jerusalem — which just took place in Baku, Azerbaijan,
on 20 and 21 July, at the initiative of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, in cooperation with the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation — rightly drew attention to the centrality
of the issue of that city in the search for negotiated
peaceful solution to the conflict. While expressing
our condolences to the relatives of the victims of the
recent violence, we reiterate our disapproval and
condemnation of all forms and manifestations of
violence and terrorism, regardless of the perpetrators
or motives.
On 19 and 20 June, here at Organization Headquarters
in New York, that Committee, in accordance with
its mandate from the General Assembly, organized
a forum to mark 50 years since the Arab-Israeli war.
On that occasion, Israeli and Palestinian participants,
as well as experts and members of civil society from
various backgrounds, with innovative ideas, urged the
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international community — in particular the Security
Council, in view of its international obligations — to
work tirelessly in support of the two-State solution,
which is the only viable solution, as it would guarantee
peace and security to both Israelis and the Palestinians,
who are condemned by geography to live together.
At a time when we agree on the need to give priority
to conflict prevention, the disastrous humanitarian
and socioeconomic situation in Gaza, which appears
to be a time bomb, should receive our full attention.
The Special Coordinator recently alerted us to the
scale of the crisis, at the same time launching a call for
$35 million in funding to cover emergency needs.
In its report entitled Gaza Ten Years Later, the
United Nations country team — which in 2012 had
already pointed out that Gaza would become unliveable
by 2020 should the trend continue — describes once
again a most bleak humanitarian situation. In addition,
there are structural problems linked to the supply of
water and electricity, and to sanitation, not to mention
the rebuilding of infrastructure. My delegation
therefore urges Palestinian political actors to set aside
their divisions in order to tackle humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges, in particular the electricity
supply gap, which affects about 2 million people, half of
whom are children. Against that backdrop, we reiterate
our support for ongoing efforts to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has predictable, adequate
and sustained resources, with a view to enabling it to
continue its vital work for the benefit of millions of
Palestinian refugees.
Beyond the humanitarian aspect, however, with
the support of the international community, the parties
should work towards the recovery of the Palestinian
economy, particularly in Gaza, which suffers from the
decline in assistance from external partners. In these
difficult circumstances, we renew our appeal to the
parties, in accordance with their repeated commitments
to the two-State solution, to open negotiations that
would lead to a definitiveg peace that responds to the
security needs of Israel and the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinians for a sovereign State.
While renewing its support for the diplomatic
initiatives undertaken by several countries — including
Egypt, France, Jordan and the Russian Federation — my
delegation also calls for the culmination of the ongoing
efforts of the United States with a view to relaunching

S/PV. 8011

the peace process, on the basis of existing platforms
such as the Arab Peace Initiative, which was reaffirmed
at the latest Summit of the League of Arab States.
Seventy years after the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), the international
community, in particular the Security Council, has no
choice but to redouble its efforts to fully implement
these texts, so that, like the Israeli people, who enjoy
a prosperous State, the Palestinian people can see
their legitimate aspirations for a sovereign and viable
State fulfilled.
Senegal will continue to support any initiative to
achieve the two-State solution.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to extend our gratitude
to the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladnenov,
for the thorough briefing and for the efforts that he
has undertaken.
We are deeply troubled by the escalation of
tension in Palestinian-Israeli relations. We firmly and
categorically condemn any manifestation of terrorism,
which worsens the already difficult relationship
between the parties and erodes the situation in the
region as a whole.
We believe that a solution to the issue of Jerusalem,
a sacred city for the three monotheistic religions,
must hinge on General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. The specific parameters of an
agreement on the city must be arrived at through direct
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. Prior to reaching
such an agreement, the parties must refrain from any
action that predetermines the final status of Jerusalem.
In that regard, the aim of close coordination between
Israel and Jordan is to help calm the situation at the
holy sites in East Jerusalem and to maintain the status
quo around them. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
plays a specific and important role in the management
of Muslim holy sites.
The protracted pause in the peace process carries
with it a high risk of further escalating the situation.
The destabilizing factors have not been addressed;
rather, they have worsened. Settlement activity is
ongoing and, in recent days, in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem, provocative rhetoric on both
sides has been heightened.

17-2287215/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation in the Gaza Strip requires specific
attention. The humanitarian situation there remains
dire. There are major disruptions in the provision of
electricity. The unemployment level is among the highest
in the world. What remains on the agenda is the need
to provide for intra-Palestinian unity on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization platform and under
the auspices of a legitimate Palestinian leadership. We
support the mediation efforts of the parties, including
those undertaken by the Arab Republic of Egypt. The
solution lies not only in stabilizing the current situation,
but — and this is important — in paving the way for
a genuine political horizon for an Israeli-Palestinian
settlement through direct talks between the parties on
the universally recognized international legal basis.
Russia helps to facilitate progress in the political
process, acting both bilaterally and through the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators, which we view
as a critical mechanism and which has been endorsed
by Security Council resolutions. We are keen to further
contribute to upholding unity within Palestinian ranks.
We reaffirm our initiative on conducting a meeting
in Moscow between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu.
Our position was and remains steadfast: a
comprehensive, fair and lasting peace can be achieved
exclusively through the relevant international legal
instruments, including Security Council resolutions as
well as the Arab Peace Initiative, and through direct
talks between the parties, without preconditions. Such
negotiations must lead to a cessation of what began in
1967, namely, Israel’s occupation of Arab lands, and
to the establishment of an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting side by side
in peace with Israel and within secure and recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with West
Jerusalem becoming the capital of the State of Israel.
We see no alternative to the two-State solution. That is
the sole realistic means to put an end to the PalestinianIsraeli confrontation and to mutual recriminations.
The Middle East and North Africa region remains
in crisis — old crises and new crises. The most
recent wave of instability in the occupied Palestinian
territories only confirms this lamentable reality. There
are still terrorists in many parts of the region and
beyond, despite the gains in combatting terrorism, who
seek to gain possession of chemical weapons. Once
again, last night the Russian Embassy in Damascus was
16/31

25/07/2017

shelled twice. We call upon our partners to condemn
such attacks.
We once again call attention to the fact that the
destabilization of the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa has significantly disrupted the fragile
ethno-religious balance that has historically prevailed
in the region. Extremists have exploited this religious
factor, thereby unleashing a veritable genocide against
Christians and other minorities with one end in mind:
to stoke hatred and to swell their own ranks.
All of that serves to bolter our position in favour
of concerted efforts on the part of the international
community to forge genuine cooperation and build a
wide-ranging counter-terrorism front to effectively
repel the global terrorism threat, including depriving
terrorists of access to chemical weapons and other
types of weapons.
It is axiomatic that, in parallel with counterterrorism measures, we must takes steps for a political
settlement to the myriad conflicts and to restore peace
and stability in the Middle East and the North Africa
region. With respect to resolving the crises in the Middle
East, Russia has steadfastly called for a political and
diplomatic process, for which there is no alternative, one
that hinges on inclusive national dialogue. We continue
to focus efforts on achieving effective and enduring
results and will continue urging the belligerents to
overcome the mistrust, without imposing any external
solutions, in order to seek a political settlement. It is
our hope that our partners share that approach.
We reaffirm our position in favour of respect and
upholding the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States. Efforts to settle regional
crises must be premised on diplomacy, dialogue
and engagement. History attests to the fact that with
goodwill even the most intractable crises can be settled.
We call upon all international and regional players
to overcome their differences and disagreements on
an equal footing, without counter-productive rhetoric
or mutual recrimination, in order to demonstrate
a constructive position and self-restraint and seek
mutually acceptable solutions. On that basis, we stand
ready to work collectively.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be made later today on behalf of
the European Union.
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would also like to thank Special Envoy Mladenov
for his timely briefing to the Security Council
this morning.
Together with Egypt and France, Sweden called for
yesterday’s discussion in the Council because we were
deeply concerned by the heightened tensions and violent
clashes, including loss of life in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, particularly at Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount. It is critical to avoid any further escalation of
the situation, which, as highlighted by Mr. Mladenov,
could have consequences far beyond the walls of the
Old City.
Since the Council met yesterday, we have learned
that Israel has decided to remove the metal detectors at
the entrances of the Holy Esplanade — a key demand
from the Palestinian side, as well as Jordan and many
other Arab countries. That is a step that we hope can
pave the way for de-escalation. It remains of great
importance to uphold the historic status quo at the
holy sites.
Jerusalem is home to three religions, and it has a
special status granted by the United Nations in 1947.
The special role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
and of His Majesty King Abdullah II, as recognized in
the peace treaty between Jordan and Israel, is key, and
we appreciate the efforts that Jordan, as well as many
others, are making to find a solution to the crisis.
While we are hopefully close to a solution to
the immediate crisis, we must not lose sight of
the urgent need to find a just, comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Developments on the ground, unfortunately, continue
to take us further away from the two-State solution.
We are deeply concerned about the recent Israeli
announcement of the issuance of building permits
for 1,500 new settlement units in East Jerusalem. As
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), the establishment
of settlements by Israel in occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law. Settlements
further constitute a major obstacle to peace and, if not
reversed, will render the two-State solution impossible.
We call on the Israeli authorities to immediately reverse
that decision.
We unequivocally condemn all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terrorism. We
condemned the attack on 14 July in the Old City

S/PV. 8011

of Jerusalem and we welcome the swift and firm
condemnation by President Abbas in that regard. In
line with resolution 2334 (2016), we reiterate the call
for immediate steps to prevent such violence, as well
as all acts of provocation and destruction, and for
accountability in that regard.
We are extremely worried about the situation in
Gaza, particularly the humanitarian consequences of
the energy crisis and Israel’s policy of closure. Civilians,
including women and children, should not pay the price
for this long-lasting crisis. However, they continue to
do so on a daily basis. The energy crisis, which has
resulted in lack of access to basic essential services,
including water and sanitation, is an assault on their
human dignity. Sweden is one of the major donors to
Gaza and recently made additional funding available,
given the gravity of the situation.
While humanitarian assistance is needed to
mitigate the effects on the people of Gaza, it alone will
never resolve the problem. All Palestinian factions
must commit to finding a solution to the energy crisis.
Furthermore, while fully understanding the legitimate
security concerns of Israel and Palestine, full and
sustained access for humanitarian actors and all donors
is crucial. An immediate end to the Israeli closure
policy is therefore necessary.
The question of Gaza should not be separated
from the peace process. All Palestinian factions need
to engage in good faith in a reconciliation process
that leads to a unified Palestinian leadership and the
reunification of Gaza with the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
Fifty years ago, the Council affirmed that the
fulfilment of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations required the establishment of just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, including the right to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free
from threats and acts of force. Today, 50 years later, we
have yet to realize that just and lasting peace.
Ending the occupation and achieving a two-State
solution is the only way forward. The two-State solution
reflects the consensus of the international community
and must not be called into question. However, it
is becoming more distant by the day. Unless we act,
we are moving rapidly towards not only perpetual
occupation, but a one-State reality, which would not be
in the interests of the State of Israel.

17-2287217/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United States has always played a leading
role in efforts to advance peace in the Middle East.
We are encouraged by continued efforts by the United
States Administration, and we welcome the holding
of the Quartet meeting of 13 July. We hope that it
will constitute the first step towards relaunching a
meaningful peace process, leading to the achievement
of the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank him as well for always
being as objective as possible. We understand how
difficult the job is. I believe this must be said, although
it might sound trite.
Let me start by expressing our deepest sorrow and
sympathy in connection with the loss of lives in the
recent outbreak of violence. We recall with appreciation
the statement issued by the Secretary-General, who
called on both sides to refrain from taking any action
that would further escalate the situation. Violence must
be condemned and also, as the Secretary-General said:
“The sanctity of religious sites should be respected
as places for reflection, not violence”.
This sentiment was also echoed by the Quartet,
which, in its statement of 22 July, noted the particular
sensitivities surrounding the holy sites in Jerusalem and
the need to ensure security, thus encouraging Israel and
Jordan to work together to uphold the status quo. We
are pleased that all concerned seem to have played their
role in reducing the prevailing tension, and one hopes
the situation will continue to be controlled. However,
the danger should not be understated.
All this makes it self-evident that unless the
underlying problems are solved peacefully, the kinds
of reactions that took place over the past week are
likely to happen again and again, eventually getting
to a point of no return. That is why preserving the
possibility of finding a solution through the two-State
formula is absolutely critical. There is no other viable
option. All arguments to the contrary are unrealistic
and inconsistent with a firm commitment to seek a just
and democratic solution to the problem.
It is indeed unfortunate that the outbreak of violence
in Jerusalem overshadowed some of the modest but
positive steps taken recently, which have the potential
18/31

25/07/2017

to de-escalate tensions and contribute to advancing
understanding between Israelis and Palestinians. Here I
am referring to the agreement recently signed between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, which the Special
Coordinator mentioned earlier, to increase the electricity
supply to Jenin. This is in addition to another agreement
signed between the two sides that deals with addressing
the issue of the water supply. It is positive developments
such as this that demonstrate that the two sides can
indeed cooperate, giving us reason not to lose hope
in the quest for a lasting solution to the long-standing
dispute between Israelis and Palestinians. These two
very hard-working and intelligent peoples, who have,
as the Special Coordinator said, an inextricably linked
history cannot allow peace and the possibility of living
side by side as equals to elude them. This is our hope.
We welcome the meeting of the Middle East Quartet
that took place on 13 January aimed at discussing
current efforts to advance Middle East peace as well as
the deteriorating situation in Gaza. We believe that the
continuous engagement of the Quartet with Israelis and
Palestinians as well as other key regional stakeholders
is absolutely essential to efforts to resolve the crisis.
As far as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute is concerned,
Ethiopia’s position has always been very clear. As much
as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace and
security, we also support the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and the right
of Palestine to exist as a free and independent State.
Let me reiterate that we think that the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security is the
only viable option to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute. Any obstacle to this goal should be addressed
so as to pave the way for progress in the peace talks.
While it is the parties that should show the flexibility
to engage in direct and meaningful negotiations so as to
reach a final settlement on all issues, we believe that the
international community, and particularly the Council,
should help and encourage the two sides to do so. It
is in this context that we support the initiatives that
have been under way to facilitate negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution. The efforts
of the Middle East Quartet and its road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative as well as the efforts of countries within
and outside the Council are very much appreciated and
should be encouraged to continue.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): The situation in the Middle
East remains volatile and complex. Many issues affect
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

one another, further deepening their complexity. The
Palestinian issue is one of the most complex.
Japan continues to support a two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps,
which will achieve peaceful coexistence of a viable
Palestinian State and Israel within secure and
recognized borders. The final status of Jerusalem
should be resolved through negotiations based on the
assumption that it will be the future capital of both
sides. We must continue to work together to achieve a
solution that is just and sustainable.
Since the previous open debate on this issue (see
S/PV.7929), we have not seen any breakthroughs.
The familiar obstacles to peace that we have seen for
years persist. Japan is seriously concerned about the
escalating tension in Jerusalem and the West Bank.
The attack that occurred in the Old City of Jerusalem
cannot be justified for any reason, and Japan condemns
it. Japan stresses the importance of respecting the peace
of the holy sites.
The cycle of violence that followed shows how
violent incidents can snowball into a highly volatile and
dangerous situations. Violence is incompatible with
the peaceful resolution of conflict, and the relevant
parties must continue to work together to de-escalate
the situation.
Settlement activities continue in both the West
Bank and east Jerusalem. The physical expansion of
settlements erodes the viability of a two-State solution.
Japan has issued a series of statements deeply deploring
such activities. Settlement activities are in violation of
international law, and we have called upon Israel to
freeze such activities. Japan does not recognize any
unilateral change by either party that may prejudge the
final resolution.
Resolution of the conflict through dialogue and
agreement is also the spirit of resolution 2334 (2016).
Reconciliation among Palestinians is another important
element in promoting peace. The deepening divide
between the West Bank and Gaza is concerning, and
it is the people of Gaza who bear the burden of that
divide. Japan believes that the re-establishment of
effective governance by the Palestinian Authority over
Gaza will contribute to the overall peace process.
The current plight of the people of Gaza is serious.
Fatah and Hamas must find a way to alleviate this
suffering. We should also recall that the blockade of the

S/PV. 8011

Gaza Strip directly affects livelihoods in Gaza. Japan
stresses the importance of improving the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip by further easing the
blockade while securing the prevention of the inflow
of arms.
International efforts to relaunch the dialogue
continue against the backdrop of these persistent
obstacles. We are encouraged by the Quartet’s more
visible engagement. Japan also appreciates the
continued engagement by the United States, which is
particularly crucial.
The agreement on the allocation of water through
the Red Sea-Dead Sea project to Palestinians shows
what dialogue can achieve. Confidence-building,
though concrete cases of cooperation, is in line with
Japan’s efforts over the years. Japan believes that
such confidence-building efforts constitute part of the
endeavour to promote the overall peace process through
negotiations. These include the Jericho Agro Industrial
Park, which hosts six Palestinian firms, with some of
their products being exported to Jordan. We encourage
interested parties to come and see what cooperation
between Israel, Palestine, Jordan and Japan can achieve.
The international community is playing an
important role by encouraging dialogue and mutual
trust. However, the political will of the parties is
required first and foremost to relaunch negotiations
and to rein in obstacles to peace. We must continue
to encourage the parties to make difficult decisions.
Japan will continue its engagement through the three
pillars of political dialogue, confidence-building and
economic cooperation.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his precise and clear
analysis and briefing.
I would like to begin my statement by reaffirming
our extreme concern to the Council about the spiral
of tension and violence in Jerusalem and in all of the
West Bank. We mourn the tragic loss of life. On 14 July,
Italy condemned the terrorist attack that took place on
the same day in the holy city of Jerusalem against the
Salomon family. There is no justification for murders
or for the glorification of violence, and we welcome
President Abbas’ condemnation of that attack. The
deaths of two policemen in the holy city of Jerusalem and

17-2287219/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

those of the three Israelis in the Halamish settlement, in
the West Bank, are also tragic.
We mourn the loss of life among Palestinians, with
several young people killed during the recent clashes,
and we reaffirm the right of peaceful demonstration.
We take note of Prime Minister Netanyahu’s assurance
that no change to the status quo of the holy sites will be
introduced. We stress the special role of the Kingdom of
Jordan and His Majesty King Abdullah II, with regard
to the sites. We call on all parties to do their utmost to
diffuse the escalating violence, restore calm and uphold
the status quo in the holy places in Jerusalem, in word
and in practice. The decision of the Israeli Government
to remove metal detectors is a step in the right direction.
We call on Israel to further coordinate with Jordan on
all measures concerning the holy places, including
with regard to enhancing security. We also stress
the importance of maintaining security cooperation
between Israel and Palestine.
Let me now reiterate our full adherence to Italy’s
long-established position on the Middle East peace
process, including with regard to the 1967 lines and to
East Jerusalem, as set out in the relevant conclusion of
the Council of the European Union, and our unwavering
support for all efforts to resume peace talks between
Israel and Palestine. We believe that just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine needs to be based on
a two-State solution, as the only achievable objective of
direct negotiations between the two parties.
Many obstacles need to be overcome on the road to
peace, among them violence, as sadly confirmed by the
most recent events I alluded to earlier in my statement,
and settlements, which deserve special consideration.
Italy condemns the intensified expansion of Israel’s
settlements following the recent approval by Israeli
authorities of a plan to build almost 1,000 housing
units in a settlement in East Jerusalem. We believe that
that decision runs counter to the prospect for a twoState solution and undermines the chance of ensuring a
future of peace and security for the parties.
The dire situation in Gaza deserves our utmost
attention. The most recent report by the United Nations
country team provides an alarming description of the
de-development of the Gaza strip in the past decade.
Italy supports President Abbas as the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian leadership and it
upholds the goal of increasing pressure by the Palestinian
authorities on Hamas in order to retake control of the
20/31

25/07/2017

Gaza Strip and to restore the whole of Palestine under
a single democratic and legitimate authority. While
doing so, the humanitarian consequences on the people
living in Gaza must be taken into account as a priority,
particularly in the health sector.
Against that demanding background, I find it
appropriate to acknowledge some positive, though
limited progress. First of all, we always believe that
technical collaboration between the parties in the
delivery of basic services is critical, not as a substitute
for peace but to crucially improve the living conditions
of all Palestinians. Therefore, it is significant that two
agreements on electricity and water have been signed in
recent days. We encourage the parties to keep working
on cooperation at the ground level and to devise new
joint initiatives. Secondly, we welcome the recent
meeting of the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet and
wish to reaffirm the role that the Quartet can play in
order to create an environment that is conducive to the
resumption of peace talks.
Turning to Lebanon, Italy commends all Lebanese
parties on reaching a historic agreement on the new
electoral law. We are convinced that the renewal of the
Parliament next year will be a milestone in terms of
strengthening Lebanon’s institutions. It is hoped that
that will create better conditions for increasing the
State’s presence and authority across the country, as
requested by relevant Security Council resolutions. In
that regard, I would like to stress the essential work
carried out by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in the south of Lebanon, faithful to
its mandate as a crucial player for the stability of the
country and the geographical area plagued by conflict.
Finally, while reiterating Italy’s firm support to the
Lebanese authorities, I would like to acknowledge
the unwavering commitment of Prime Minister Hariri
and his Government to the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), through its
cooperation with the Special Coordinator and UNIFIL.
I would like to conclude by mentioning the
liberation of Mosul from Da’esh, undertaken by Iraqi
Government security forces, with the support of a
global coalition, as a sign of hope in a geographic area
marked by multiple crises. That result is a landmark
in the joint fight against terrorism in the Middle East
and points to future achievement in the region. While
the military fight against Da’esh is not over and the
need to ensure the protection of human rights must
still be upheld, our attention should now also turn
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to stabilizing the territory once under the control of
Da’esh. Humanitarian assistance and the restoration
of essential services are crucial in order to underpin
the military victory and allow the return of internally
displaced people.
Reconciliation in Iraq and a political transition in
Syria remain the keys to preventing any resurgence of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In that regard,
I would like to emphasize the need to uphold and
protect the right and freedom of all ethnic and religious
communities in the region, including the Christian
communities.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I join
with others in commending you, Sir, on convening
today’s open debate.
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his detailed briefing and, as we do every month, we
reiterate Uruguay’s full support for his efforts.
As the days go by, with a few exceptions,
regrettably, the situation in the Middle East either
remains the same or worsens. It is clear that, above and
beyond its good intentions, the Council has not been
able to honour its commitment to restoring peace and
stability to the conflict-stricken region. Like most of
us, the people of that region of the world want only
to live in peace, far removed from the horrors of
war, violence, terrorism and human rights violations.
We recall the millions of faceless victims who have
endured wars and invasions — some of them conceived
from afar — the pillaging of their resources and
wealth, constant changes to their land based on foreign
interests, the actions of terrorist groups who insult the
very religion with which they claim to be affiliated, and
a slew of Governments and authoritarian regimes that
are clearly out of touch with the desires of their peoples.
All of this has created fertile ground for the fomenting
of extremism and radicalism, which themselves have
become both the result and the cause of new conflicts.
Despite all of this, we continue to be optimistic and to
hope that the peoples of the Middle East will soon be
on the road to progress and cooperation in a peaceful
environment. To achieve that, the continued support
of the Council and the entire international community
is essential.
With regard to the recently escalating situation
in Jerusalem, which has spread rapidly to other areas

S/PV. 8011

and threatens to become a major new crisis, Uruguay
reiterates its firm condemnation of all the violent
incidents, which have left more than 10 victims. This
worrying situation creates distrust between the parties
concerned and affects all the efforts designed to enable
a resumption of bilateral Israeli-Palestinian peace
negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State solution.
The sacred sites of the city of Jerusalem, where three of
the world’s major religions converge, should be places
of reflection and peace, not violence and terror. It is
therefore crucial to maintain unrestricted access for the
faithful to their temples and ensure that this is reflected
in concrete action. In that regard, we were pleased by
the Government of Israel’s decision to act by removing
the metal detectors installed last week. However, the
critical situation in Gaza, to which the Council has not
given enough attention, is threatening to result in a new
humanitarian disaster very quickly. We should make
every effort to prevent this scenario from leading to
another war.
As it has done since 1947, Uruguay once again
reaffirms its unfailing support to the right of Israel and
Palestine to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation,
free from any threats to peace or acts that violate it.
We also reiterate our support to a solution based on
two independent States in the belief that it is the only
option that will enable Israel and Palestine to coexist
in peace, and in that regard we once again urge for the
resumption of direct negotiations between the two as a
crucial path to that end. We welcome all international
initiatives aimed at advancing the peace process in
order to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting
settlement that accords with international law in taking
into consideration the legitimate aspirations of Israelis
and Palestinians.
However, in order to achieve that goal, it is essential
to reverse the current trends on the ground, since
Palestine will otherwise find it extremely difficult
to consolidate its State. It is regrettable that, seven
months after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
little progress has been made in its implementation,
while Israel’s announcements of its expansion of
settlements in the occupied territories are increasing.
Similarly, the announcements of demolitions and
the forced transfer of vulnerable communities such
as Dakika, Khan Al-Ahmar and Susya only provoke
uncontrolled reactions.

17-2287221/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The recent violent incidents and terrorist attacks,
and their encouragement and glorification through
subsidy payments to the families of those who commit
them or by naming schools, buildings and squares
after them, do nothing to advance the cause of peace
and put the possibility of reaching a two-State solution
in jeopardy. However, just as in the past we have
repeatedly emphasized that we cannot be silently
complicit in the face of terrorist attacks, we would
like to take this opportunity to appreciate the fact that
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority
has condemned the 14 July shooting on the Mosque
esplanade. On a somewhat more personal and timely
note, I hope that we in the Council will soon see the
day when our colleagues Mr. Riyad Mansour and
Mr. Danny Danon can stop trading mutual accusations
and blaming each other and instead inform us of
developments in direct negotiations aimed at putting
an end to this dreadful conflict once and for all. Our
Colombian brothers have shown us that it is possible to
leave behind the pain of 50 years of war and to embrace
the commitment and risks of a peace agreement.
Uruguay is shocked by the serious plight of
civilians in Yemen, where according to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
humanitarian crisis is even more serious than in
Syria. It is regrettable that the situation there is still
not receiving the same degree of attention from the
Council as other regional crises are. Yemen is on the
verge of famine. It is suffering from a rapidly spreading
cholera epidemic and its hospitals, schools and markets
continue to be the target of indiscriminate attacks.
The prolonged stagnation of the peace process and the
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights committed by all the warring
parties have left millions of civilians drowning in chaos
and terrible suffering. Anyone perpetrating attacks or
providing logistical support and weapons in Yemen,
should cease hostilities immediately. Those responsible
for the revolting atrocities that have already been
committed should be brought to justice.
I would like to comment very briefly on the
conflict in Syria. Despite the fact that the Astana
ceasefire process has resulted in a considerable drop
in violence in some parts of the country, we are still
seeing sieges and famines, indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, the use of chemical weapons, terrorist attacks
and extremely serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, all while the Council’s
22/31

25/07/2017

frustrating inaction continues. We are concerned about
the fact that although the political process in Geneva
has made some progress, albeit modest, that has not
resulted in any improvements in humanitarian access
to the millions who are subsisting with no help at all in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We reiterate that this
horrific war can be ended only through a process of
political transition, led by Syrians and mediated by the
United Nations in accordance with the road map set out
in resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, where the recent situation that has
arisen among some of the States of the Arab peninsula
is concerned, we hope that the tensions can be overcome
through dialogue and negotiations.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate
on some of the most burning issues in the Middle East
and to express our appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
The Middle East peace process remains at the core
of all efforts aimed at restoring stability in the region.
Ukraine has consistently supported that crucial process
and the principle of a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. We
share the concerns of the Secretary-General and the
Special Coordinator about the escalation of tensions
and violence in Jerusalem, which reflects the gravity of
the situation in and around the Old City as well as in the
wider context of the peace process.
The recent deadly terror attacks in the Temple
Mount/Haram Al-Sharif and in an Israeli settlement
in the West Bank say a great deal about how far this
pattern of escalation has gone. Unless both sides take
swift and effective measures, these incidents could
ignite further violence. We have stressed time and
again that there can be no justification for any terrorist
acts and have firmly condemned any attempts to glorify
them. We are increasingly concerned about the violent
clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank in which at least
three people have died. The decision of the Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas to freeze contacts with
Israel is a worrying sign that the situation could get out
of hand very quickly.
We note the statement of Secretary General Ahmed
Aboul-Gheit of the League of Arab States about the
Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif. At the same time,
we would like to take this opportunity to urge both
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jordan, as Custodian of the holy site, and Israel to
find a reasonable compromise between public safety
and freedom to worship. We also urge everyone to
act responsibly so as to avoid escalation and calm the
situation and prevent it from spiralling out of control.
Ukraine reiterates its position that an Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement is to be found in the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
Turning to Syria, let me stress our dissatisfaction
with the slow progress on the political track. Based on
the latest rounds of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, I
see only one party willing to work constructively on the
agreed agenda. The Syrian regime’s delegation, on the
contrary, has so far demonstrated interest in discussing
only one basket, which is counter-terrorism. I believe
that the Security Council has made it clear on a number
of occasions that one basket cannot be promoted at the
expense of the other three. That is why we underscore
once again that the Geneva discussion needs to be
firmly entrenched in resolution 2254 (2015) and steered
towards the previously agreed common agenda points
covering the issues of governance, the Constitution,
elections and counter-terrorism.
On the whole, the international community should
avoid at all costs falling into the trap of short-term
solutions with regard to the Syrian conflict. Such shortterm fixes seem to provide temporary relief, only to set
the stage for a deeper crisis in the long term. The fact
that none of the root causes of the conflict has been
addressed essentially means more opportunities for
Da’esh and Al-Qaida to capitalize on the grievances of
the disaffected population.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen: it is
going from bad to worse. The cholera epidemic, which
is quickly spreading in every major Yemeni province,
has pushed the country’s population to the brink of
survival. We praise the efforts of the United Nations
and all other humanitarian actors that are delivering
lifesaving assistance to the Yemeni people. We urge the
parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of commercial
and humanitarian supplies; without them, millions of
Yemenis are at risk of famine and death. In the political
sphere, we are worried by the latest trends of an
increasing polarization of key stakeholders in Yemen

S/PV. 8011

and the further fragmentation of the Yemeni political
landscape. We call on all parties to resume direct talks
without preconditions, and to conduct them in the most
flexible and constructive manner possible.
The situation in the Middle East is very worrying
and full of challenges. We call on the Council to remain
united in addressing them.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to consider the
Palestinian question while the occupied Palestinian
territories are experiencing serious and dangerous
events, especially with regard to Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
which have led to a deterioration of the situation not only
in Al-Quds but throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories — and perhaps even beyond the region,
given the unique meaning that Al-Quds Al-Sharif has
not only for Palestinians and Arabs but also for the
entire Muslim world.
We have already warned of the grave repercussions
of the recent events. We reiterate our call upon Israel
to end the violence and the security escalations at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the grave toll in terms of
dead and wounded among Palestinians. We also call
upon Israel to respect freedom of worship and religion,
as well as the right of the Palestinian people to practice
their faith in freedom and security. We call upon Israel
to refrain from taking additional measures that are
liable to further fan the flames of the conflict, incite
religious passions and worsen the suffering endured by
the Palestine people, thereby undermining prospects
for achieving a fair, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the two-State solution.
To us it is important to reiterate once again the
Council’s own pronouncements concerning the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. In that connection, I refer to the Council’s
press statement of 17 September 2015 (SC/12052),
which calls for upholding the historic status quo of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in word and in practice, including
by safeguarding the right and freedom of Muslim
worshippers to practice their faith. It is also important to
refer to well-known measures adopted by the Council,
including resolution 478 (1980), which reaffirms that
all legislative and administrative measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, that threaten to change
the situation with respect to the holy city of Jerusalem
are null and void and must be rescinded. Moreover,
resolution 2334 (2016) does not acknowledge any
change to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard

17-2287223/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/07/2017

to Al-Quds, except with the consent of the parties
through negotiations.

in peace and security within their borders and to enjoy
good-neighbourly relations with the States in the region.

In that regard, I would like to reaffirm that Egypt
welcomes the efforts aimed at de-escalating the current
crisis, including those undertaken by Jordan in the light
of the historic role of the brotherly Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan in connection with its custodianship of the
sacred sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We have taken note
of the Israeli decision to remove the metal detectors. We
hope that the situation will return to normal, including
with regard to Jordan.

Historically, Egypt has been a pioneer in the
restoration of peace in the region, and we commit
ourselves to persevering in our efforts along that
path with the two sides, Israelis and Palestinians.
Furthermore, the recent visit to Cairo by Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas is part of the coordination
between the two parties. The Egyptian authorities
have reaffirmed their steadfast position, and call for
reaching a comprehensive and just solution that will
guarantee the right of the Palestinian people to build
their independent State, on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital.
The Egyptian Government has also affirmed that the
Palestinian question remains an utmost priority for
Egypt, and that reaching a settlement is indeed a basic
premise for the restoration of security and stability in
the Middle East and for lending new momentum to
development in the region. We reaffirm that our efforts
to relaunch negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis will continue, and that those efforts will also
help to forge closer ties among Palestinians and help
put an end to the divisions.

If the current crisis were to continue, its
consequences would not be limited to Palestine and
Israel. It is necessary for us all and for the Council to
be aware of that. For it incumbent upon the Council to
maintain international peace and security, as well as
shoulder the responsibility to monitor the crisis so that
the situation does not spiral out of control, and maintain
prospects for direct negotiations, including final status
issues encompassing Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
The occupation of Palestinian territories continues
without any glimmer of hope of ending that tragic
situation. Measures taken against the Palestinian
people are increasing at an accelerated rate. Settlement
expansion is also continuing. United Nations and
Security Council resolutions that call for upholding the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations are not
being implemented. I am speaking principally of the
right to self-determination.
All of those factors are causing great frustration,
which has accumulated during the years of siege and
occupation. What we see before us presently, in terms
of risks and dangers, clearly shows that attempts to
bury one’s head in the sand are liable to have great
consequences. All those who believe that the Palestinian
question does not have the same importance compared
to other issues plaguing the region have exhibited
poor judgement.
We reiterate that the call to end the occupation and
to implement United Nations resolutions, including
resolutions of the Security Council, which is tasked
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, is not aimed at delegitimizing any State. It is
a call for the restoration of the rights-holders and for
the implementation of international law. Ultimately,
that would have beneficial and positive results for all
the people throughout the region, including, of course,
the Israeli people. We all recognize their right to live
24/31

In conclusion, if I may, I would like to reaffirm that
the historic call of the Arab States — the Arab Peace
Initiative — clearly attests to the fact that Arab countries
have collectively committed themselves to the land-forpeace principle as the framework and foundation for a
solution. The recent Arab Summit held in Amman led
to a reiteration by Heads of States and Governments of
their support for that very same Arab Peace Initiative.
We have further noted that the Administration of the
United States of America is open to reaching a lasting
settlement, which we applaud. In that regard, we stand
ready to lend our assistance in that regard.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and his
tireless efforts on this issue. As he has set out so clearly
this morning, the situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories continues to be of the utmost
concern for the Security Council. After generations of
hostility, blood and tears and in the wake of years of
pain and wars, we are determined to bring an end to the
bloodshed and sorrow.
But such determination is not new. In fact, those
words I just uttered come from the Washington
Declaration, signed on this very day 23 years ago.
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That historic document started a process that created
a historic peace between Israel and Jordan, a peace
that would have been unthinkable decades before. The
symbolism of this particular anniversary should not be
lost on anyone in the Council today. It should remind us
all that the peace we seek is not impossible, no matter
how far off it may appear, no matter the challenges
ahead. It is a reminder of hope that the region desperately
needs. One need look only to the recent abhorrent surge
in violence to see that peace remains far from the minds
of far too many.
I condemn the horrific terrorist attack that claimed
the lives of three Israelis during a Shabbat dinner
last Friday. I deplore the tragic murder of two Israeli
policemen at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif
the Friday before. A spiral of tension and violence
has swept across the West Bank and Jerusalem in
recent days. I am deeply concerned about the loss of
life, including the deaths of at least four Palestinians,
and deplore the violence that left hundreds injured in
clashes over the weekend. The relevant authorities must
swiftly investigate all of those incidents.
We call on all parties to show restraint and restore
calm. We call on all parties to avoid provocation and,
through engagement, to reach a solution that ensures
the safety and security of the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, one that upholds the status quo. We welcome
the engagement between all parties to find a solution,
and we welcome positive steps taken overnight. This
is the path to de-escalation. This is the path all parties
must take.
In parallel, we must not lose sight of other challenges
to peace, such as the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza, where the recent cut in electricity
supplies is exacerbating already perilous conditions:
over 30,000 persons displaced and insufficient clean
water to meet the population’s needs, with most only
getting water for a few hours every three to five days.
Over 70 per cent of Gazans are now reliant upon the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Middle East. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the United Nations for its efforts
to alleviate the suffering of those in Gaza.
Ultimately, it is the decision of Hamas to choose
violence and to reject the Quartet principles that lies
at the heart of the tragedy in Gaza. There is a way
out: Hamas must renounce violence, recognize Israel
and accept previously signed agreements. That means

S/PV. 8011

an end to the rockets, an end to the violence. Those
countries in the region with influence over Hamas
must encourage them to take these steps. We also need
to see steps towards the restoration of the Palestinian
Authority control of Gaza, and with it the restoration
of effective and accountable governance. If we are to
achieve a solution, Israel must lift restrictions on Gaza
to ease the suffering of ordinary Palestinians. The
United Kingdom stands ready to do all it can to support
those efforts.
Beyond Gaza, we are also concerned at seeing
settlement activity in East Jerusalem increasing,
especially at a time of heightened tension. All
settlements are illegal under international law, and I
strongly condemn plans to build new settlement housing
units. Many of those units are within Palestinian
neighbourhoods, and some involve the demolition of
Palestinian homes. That is unacceptable. I am also
gravely concerned by proposals for the construction of
a further 1,100 units between the West Bank settlements
of Adam and Neve Yaakov. Settlements undermine the
territorial contiguity of the West Bank and make a twoState solution harder to achieve.
There is a great deal for us to do if we are to
make peace a reality. However, before concluding, let
me return to the Washington Declaration. While the
process that began on 25 July 1994 led to peace between
Israel and Jordan, we should never forget the leadership
shown by the United States, which was so instrumental
in making that peace possible. It is that same leadership
that President Trump and his Administration are now
demonstrating in reinvigorating the Middle East peace
process. That is to be applauded and supported. We call
on the region as a whole, Israelis and Palestinians to
seize the opportunity that such leadership offers, just
as it was seized 23 years ago.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing. China also listened carefully to the
statements by the observer of Palestine and by the
representative of Israel.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue and the main source of problems in
the region. It is also a gauge for international fairness
and justice. The international community should
proceed from the need to maintain peace and stability

17-2287225/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the Middle East and the world, maintain a long-term
vision, promote a political settlement of the question
of Palestine by addressing both the symptoms and the
root causes of the conflict, safeguard the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people, keep the
situation between Palestine and Israel from getting out
of control and prevent the Middle East from sliding into
a broader crisis.
China is a staunch supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people and an active mediator for peace
between Palestine and Israel. Last week, China received
a visit by President Abbas of Palestine. In his talks
with President Abbas, President Xi Jinping made four
proposals related to the promotion of the settlement of
the question of Palestine under the new circumstances.
First, he emphasized the importance of a firmly
advanced political settlement based on the two-State
solution. The two-State solution best fits the reality
on the ground and is the most universally accepted
option. The parties concerned must continue to work
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. They must also persist in negotiations for
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
question of Palestine. China firmly supports the twoState solution and supports the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine with full sovereignty,
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We will, as always, play a constructive role
for the settlement of the question of Palestine.
Secondly, President Xi Jinping proposed adopting
the concept of common, integrated, cooperative and
sustainable security. Palestine and Israel are neighbours
that cannot be separated. The security of the two
countries requires them to cooperate, work together
and support each other so as to build common security
through joint efforts. China calls for the effective
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). There must
be an immediate cessation of all settlement activities
on the occupied territories and an immediate adoption
of measures to prevent violence against civilians. We
also call for an early resumption of peace talks in
order to expedite a political solution to the question of
Palestine, and thereby fundamentally achieve common
and lasting security.
Thirdly, President Xi Jinping called for further
coordinating the efforts of the international community
and strengthening synergy in the interest of peace.
26/31

25/07/2017

For some time now, the international community
has increased its attention regarding the question of
Palestine. The parties concerned have conducted active
diplomatic efforts to promote the relaunching of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel. The international
community should further strengthen coordination and
come up with peace-promotion measures that entail
joint participation. China is willing to join and support
all efforts that are favourable to the political settlement
of the question of Palestine. China plans to hold a
workshop for peace activities in 2017 for Palestine
and Israel in order to provide them with ideas for the
settlement of the question of Palestine.
Fourthly, it is necessary to take integrated
measures in order to promote peace via development.
While promoting political talks, attention should be
given to development, especially to the enhancement of
the capacities of Palestine for economic development.
China views both Palestine and Israel as important
partners in the Belt Road initiative. China is willing
to work under the concept of development for peace in
order to promote Palestine and Israel in engaging in
mutually beneficial cooperation, keep open channels
for such cooperation and continue to support Palestine
to expedite is development. That will help strengthen
the basis of peace and harmony and reduce factors that
disrupt the peace talks between the two sides.
China has announced an initiative to launch a
tripartite dialogue mechanism among China, Palestine
and Israel in order to coordinate the implementation
of major projects of assistance for Palestine. The four
proposals made by President Xi Jinping represent
China’s new endeavour relating to the settlement of the
question of Palestine. It takes into account the current
situation as well as the international environment. The
proposals also represent the overall direction of China’s
efforts moving forward regarding the promotion of a
political settlement. We hope that the proposals will be
met with active responses and support from the parties
concerned so that we can work together to achieve a
breakthrough in the decades-long unresolved problem
at hand.
Recently, the situation in Jerusalem has continued
to worsen to the point of becoming extremely dangerous.
The top priority now is to ease the tension and
confrontations around the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
and achieve a settlement as soon as possible in order
to reduce tension and avoid any escalation of the
conflict. The Security Council and States in the region
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

need to carry out emergency diplomatic action and do
their utmost to engage with the parties concerned in
order to calm things down and avoid an escalation
of tensions. Any escalation would cause even more
serious consequences. The provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions must be implemented,
including the provision that calls for upholding the
historic status quo of holy sites in Jerusalem. We have
taken note of the initiative taken by Israel today and
we hope that the parties concerned will continue their
dialogue and communication so as to re-establish calm
at an early date.
China is willing to continue to work with all of the
parties concerned to promote an early settlement of the
current problems and the relaunching of peace talks
between Palestine and Israel so as to realize at an early
date a comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question and establish peace and stability in
the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his thorough briefing.
The difficult realities in the State of Palestine
have been somberly summarized in a report by Human
Rights Watch issued on the occasion of 50 years of
Israeli occupation:
“At least five categories of major violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian
law characterize the [Israeli] occupation:
unlawful killings; forced displacement; abusive
detention; the closure of the Gaza Strip and
other unjustified restrictions on movement;
and the development of settlements, along with
the accompanying discriminatory policies that
disadvantage Palestinians.”
Lately, we were also reminded of the extent of
the shocking Israeli practices in Jerusalem and at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound: killings, closure and the
disproportionate use of force against worshipers and
civilians, which constituted a clear attempt to escalate
an occupation into a war of religions. Those practices are
not only blatant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, principles of international law and resolutions
adopted by the Security Council — and in particular
of article 4 of The Hague Convention, article 39 of the

S/PV. 8011

Geneva Convention and article 27 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights — to respect
peoples’ rights to observe and practice their own
religion. Suffice it to say, these are deliberate attempts
to create new realities on the ground that make the twoState solution an objective that is practically impossible
to achieve. It is time to hold Israel accountable and to
compel it to cease and rescind all measures to tamper
with the historic status quo at the Al-Aqsa mosque and
its Esplanade.
Today the international community should be
biased to upholding the principles of international
law. It is high time to turn our commitment to the
principle of land for peace into reality by ending the
Israeli occupation and heeding the calls for peace and
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
adopted in my country, Lebanon, in 2002, and reiterated
by several summits and meetings, the latest being the
Arab Summit hosted by Jordan in March.
Turning to my country, since the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), there has not been a single
day during which Israel has not continued to breach
Lebanon’s sovereignty by land and sea, in total
disrespect of its obligation under resolution 1701 (2006).
Let me mention only the daily violations of Lebanese
airspace by Israeli fighter jets. Despite all such flagrant
violations, multiple smear campaigns, false allegations
and threats by Israel to send my country back to the
dark ages, the Government of Lebanon remains firm
in its commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), not only to preserve the gains of
our collective investment in security and stability, but
rather to multiply them.
It is in that context that my Government yet again
encourages the Secretary-General to expedite his
good-offices efforts and looks forward to receiving
the results of the efforts of the Special Coordinator on
the delineation of the disputed maritime border and
exclusive economic zone between Lebanon and Israel,
while emphasizing that the non-resolution of this issue
shall remain a source of conflict that threatens peace
and security in our region.
Furthermore, my Government will also submit a
request to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one year
without any changes. Only a capable and efficient
UNIFIL can maintain stability and security in the south
of Lebanon, in particular in the light of the volatile

17-2287227/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

situation in region. As for the partnership between
the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and UNIFIL,
my delegation would like to take this opportunity to
express its deep appreciation to all troop-contributing
countries — a good number of them are around the table
today or otherwise present in the Chamber — for their
sacrifices and noble determination to protect civilians
and to ensure full respect for Lebanon’s sovereignty.
Our meeting today coincides with the visit of the
President of the Council of Ministers to Washington,
D.C., which was preceded by visits to the European
Union and other friendly countries, with the sole
objective of emphasizing the economic, social and
security challenges facing my country and, most
important, to reiterate our calls to assist Lebanon in its
efforts to address the situation of refugees and their host
communities and to strengthen the LAF capabilities in
its commendable fight against terrorism.
All of those efforts are deeply rooted in the
importance of protecting and preserving Lebanon as a
model for the region: promising democracy, a liberal
system, leadership in combating terrorism and a beacon
of diversity and coexistence in a region raging with fear
and exclusion. Let right prevail in the Middle East and
for its peoples.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your able and wise leadership of the Security Council
throughout the month of July. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his very
in-depth briefing.
The Council is meeting today in the light of the
grave events that recently took place in the Middle East.
Some States in the region are undergoing deep-rooted
crises to which a political and humanitarian solution
has not been found. Other countries are wracked by
terrorism, while still others do not have the financial
capacity to help their citizens when they are in dire
need. The dangerous situation at the Holy Esplanade
and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque is escalating tensions and
risks exacerbating the crisis, threatening to plunge us
into an era of despair and allowing extremists to use
the situation to their own nefarious ends to further
28/31

25/07/2017

undermine peace across the broader region beyond
Israel and Palestine.
Jordan would like to warn about the potential
repercussions of what has been happening
recently — and continues to happen — in Jerusalem,
which could lead to a destabilization of the region and
constitutes a serious threat to peace. That could have
a devastating impact on the region and could plunge
us into a religious war, which would open the doors
to further terrorism and exploitation of the roots of
the conflict for criminal practices, and not just in our
region but beyond. In order to address those tensions, a
number of emergency measures will need to be taken.
First, Israel must respect the historic and legal
status quo and must allow for full and immediate
access by worshippers to Al-Aqsa Mosque, without
any restrictions. It must also put an end to its unilateral
measures to impose a new reality on the ground in the
region, which are a violation of its international legal
obligations as the occupying Power.
Secondly, the international community must
shoulder its responsibilities and put an end to the
tensions by respecting the historic and legal status quo
of the holy sites and by compelling Israel, the occupying
Power, to respect the legal obligations incumbent
upon it.
Thirdly, the international community must unite
its efforts, including within the Security Council, to
prevent an escalation of the violence and prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control. It must do so
by tackling the deep-rooted causes that have led to
this tension, as well as recent events, including steps
taken by Israel to change the situation and conditions
on the ground.
More must be done to put an end to tension, to restore
peace and to prevent a deterioration of the situation.
Jordan is working to those ends. We are also working in
order to ensure that the holy sites are fully accessible.
We will continue our efforts with our partners and
our friends. Under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, we will not let up in our
diplomatic efforts. As the Custodian and sponsor of
Muslim and Christian holy places in East Jerusalem, he
will continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure
that the holy sites are respected, to guarantee peace
and to ensure that conditions conducive to peace and
stability are in place. Such steps will be taken with the
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

overarching goal of resolving the conflict on the basis
of a two-State solution.
I would like to underscore the appeal made by
Jordan that an emergency ministerial-level meeting of
Arab States be conveyed to consider possible pathways
and courses of action to respond to this issue. As the
historic Hashemite Custodian and sponsor of Muslim
and Christian holy places in East Jerusalem, Jordan will
continue its efforts to rebuff any attempt to undermine
the holy character of these sites. We will stand firm
against any act of aggression and any attempt to try
to cut of access to the Al-Aqsa Mosque or the entire
Esplanade of mosques. We will do so through all legal
and diplomatic means at our disposal. We will in no
way let up in our tireless efforts and determination
to find a solution to this conflict. The lack of such a
solution would cause us to remain in the vicious cycle
of violence and instability, would prevent people from
living in peace and prosperity and would not allow us to
realize the future that the peoples of the region deserve.
In the light of other events that have taken place in
the region, Jordan would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that putting an end to the Syrian crisis
will require a comprehensive political solution that
guarantees peace and stability and the unity of Syrian
territory. We have spared no effort in terms of our
participation in the political efforts under way to put an
end to the deaths and violence in Syria. As such, together
with the United States and the Russian Federation, we
have been able to put together an agreement to support
the ceasefire and to put an end to the escalation of
violence in south-west Syria. That is a crucial step
towards reaching a complete cessation of hostilities
in order to usher in stability in Syria. It is also a key
step towards a political solution that will preserve the
territorial integrity, the freedom, the independence and
the sovereignty of Syria.
We would like to reiterate our determination to
tackle terrorism and to destroy terrorist organizations
and their affiliates. In that regard, we reiterate that the
region will not know security and stability without the
eradication of terrorist organizations, which lead people
astray and employ what should be peaceful, religious
principles and beliefs for their own nefarious ends.
We would like to congratulate our Iraqi brethren for
their recent success, with the support of international
forces, in wresting control of Mosul from the clutches
of Da’esh. We also reiterate our full support to Iraq and

S/PV. 8011

to its people as they seek to rebuild the city and their
country and bring about stability. We also appeal for
national reconciliation in Iraq in order to preserve the
stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
brotherly country and to ensure that it can build upon
what has been achieved thus far.
In addition, we support the efforts and actions of the
international coalition and the international community
to support the legitimate Government in Yemen to put
an end to the crisis on the basis of implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and resolution 2216 (2015).
In conclusion, we reiterate that more needs to be
done to address the core issue in the Middle East, that
is, the question of Palestine, which must be dealt with
in order to resolve all other issues in the region. Indeed,
a lasting, fair and comprehensive solution to the IsraeliPalestinian crisis is key to unlocking the other crises in
the region. That is why we must make serious efforts
to put an end to what appears to be an insurmountable
crisis that has dragged on for far too long, so as to
address Palestinian and Israeli concerns and resume
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine that
usher in lasting peace. In doing so, we must take into
account all final-status issues related to key national
interests, including those overseen by Jordan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the delegation
of China for convening this important debate. I also
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his informative briefing. We believe that the United
Nations as a whole — and the Security Council in
particular — has a leading responsibility in seeking
sustainable solutions for the complex and prolonged
conflicts affecting the Middle East.
As the Security Council prepares to discuss the
annual renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), allow me to stress
the vital role played by UNIFIL in maintaining peace
and stability in a vulnerable region. A particularly
relevant component of the mission is its Maritime
Task Force (MTF), which we have had the honour and
responsibility of leading for over six years now. The
MTF has successfully performed key security and
humanitarian activities, ranging from the seizing arms,
ammunition and illegal drugs to rescuing migrants and

17-2287229/31

S/PV.8011

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees in the Mediterranean Sea. The Task Force
also contributes to regional economic development by
establishing a safer environment for maritime trade.
Its core assignments — to prevent violations of the
arms embargo and to train members of the Lebanese
Navy — contribute to the maintenance of calm and
stability in the region and remain as indispensable
as ever.
The continued significance of the MTF was
confirmed by the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006):
“[t]he UNIFIL Maritime Task Force has
proved its operational effectiveness in its maritime
interdiction operations at the request of the
Government of Lebanon. [...] Those operations
are a significant deterrent against the illegal entry
of weapons or related materiel. Daily interaction
and exercises with the Lebanese Armed Forces
Navy have helped develop the Navy.” (S/2017/591,
para. 70)
It is imperative to ensure that UNIFIL and the MTF
continue to enjoy the strong political support of the
Security Council, as well as adequate resources to carry
out their mandate. That will be especially important
in the context of considering the proposals from the
strategic review conducted by the Secretariat earlier
this year.
Turning to the question of Palestine, a highly
symbolic milestone was reached last month: the
fiftieth anniversary of the ongoing occupation of
East Jerusalem, Gaza and the West Bank. During the
recently held United Nations Forum to Mark Fifty Years
of Occupation, Brazil expressed its deep regret that the
Palestinian right to a sovereign and independent State
has not yet been fulfilled — almost 70 years after the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and 50
years after the adoption of Security Council resolution
242 (1967).
The recent electricity crisis in Gaza is yet
another reminder of the severe social, economic and
humanitarian consequences of the occupation. Brazil
has consistently underscored that the two-State solution
is the only just and acceptable solution to the conflict,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, within internationally recognized and
mutually agreed borders. As stressed by the SecretaryGeneral,
30/31

25/07/2017

“[r]esolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will remove a driver of violent extremism and
terrorism in the Middle East and open the doors to
cooperation, security, prosperity and human rights
for all.” (SG/SM/18595-GA/PAL/1389)
We are deeply concerned about the recent incidents
of violence in East Jerusalem. We regret all loss of life
and call on all parties to reduce tensions and avoid
further escalation.
Recent developments concerning the crisis in
Syria continue to demand the attention of the Security
Council. It is key that the political dimension of the
negotiations on Syria — the Geneva process — and the
security initiatives encompassed by the Astana process
continue to advance hand in hand. Strengthening
the ceasefire regime is a fundamental component of
international efforts to find a political resolution to the
conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), including
the commitments to the unity, independence, territorial
integrity, and non-sectarian character of Syria. In that
regard, we took note with interest of the memorandum
that creates four de-escalation areas in the Syrian
Arab Republic, signed last May, as well as the recent
announcement by Russia, the United States and Jordan
of measures to stabilize some of those regions. Such
security measures create positive momentum and
make it ever-more essential to advance on the political
track. We need to ensure that the de-escalation zones
serve as a step towards peace and the alleviation of the
humanitarian situation.
Brazil reiterates its deep concern with regard
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We highlight the need for a full, impartial and
comprehensive investigation of all reported incidents,
such as those at Khan Shaykhun and Um-Housh,
including visits to all the relevant sites.
Lastly, with regard to Iraq, Brazil congratulated
the Government of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi
and the Iraqi people on the liberation of Mosul,
announced on 10 July. That was a milestone in the fight
against international terrorism, as well as a decisive
step towards consolidating security, stability and the
territorial integrity of the country. Many challenges
remain in ensuring the safe and dignified return of
displaced persons and extending State authority and
the rule of law in the liberated areas. We hope that
important victory will be followed by a successful
17-22872

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

process of reconstruction, economic recovery and
national reconciliation in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this

S/PV. 8011

meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the consent of the members of the Security Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

17-2287231/31
