United Nations

asdf

S/PV.6917 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6917th meeting
Tuesday, 12 February 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sook/Mr. Shin Dong Ik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Cong
Mr. Cabouat
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Ustinov
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. Menan
Ms. Jobbins
Mr. Lord

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 4 February 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Korea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/75)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-23027 (E)

*1323027*

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bolivia, Côte d’Ivoire, Nicaragua
and Sierra Leone to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
strictly to no more than four minutes in order to enable
the Council to carry out its work expeditiously today.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu,
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
Mr. İhsanoğlu: On behalf of the members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the
OIC General Secretariat, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, your
team and your country on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and on your successful steering
of the work of the Council this month, including the
holding of this important open debate.
It is quite unfortunate, and in fact unacceptable,
that throughout the world civilians endure the heaviest
cost of armed conflicts, no matter the scale, nature
or location of those conflicts. Civilians, be they men,
women, children or elderly, suffer from unspeakable
hardships and violations of human rights on account
of acts of violence carried out by States and non-State
armed groups alike. As expressed earlier by the
Council, it is deeply regrettable that civilians account
for most of the casualties in armed conflicts, including
as a result of deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as other acts that violate international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Ever since the Council took up the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict in 1999 with
its adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and various
others thereafter, an international normative framework
has emerged. However, ongoing armed conflicts,
perpetuated by one State’s illegal occupation of
another’s territory, and their impact on civilians show
that there is still much more to do in order to tackle
the core challenges outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/376).
The Council is expected more than ever to assume
its responsibility for spearheading the international
community’s efforts to enhance the compliance of

2

parties to conflict, States and non-State armed groups
alike, with international law, and to enhance the United
Nations peacekeeping missions’ protection capabilities
while respecting States’ sovereignty, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Improving humanitarian
access to victims of armed conflict and ensuring
accountability for violations of international law, as
well as international humanitarian and human rights
law, are also among the challenges that the Council has
to tackle on behalf of the international community.
Aside from legal, structural and operational
challenges, the real and grave challenge that needs the
urgent action of the Council is the ongoing violence
in Syria, which has cost the lives of more than 60,000
Syrians and displaced more than 700,000 others. As
a matter of fact, the conflict in Syria puts the ability
of the Council and the international community to
protect civilians in armed conflict to a clear test. It is
regrettable that neither the Council nor the international
community has passed that test yet, although so many
civilians have died and many others have been maimed
or displaced. I am particularly disappointed that the
Syrian leadership has perpetuated violence against its
own people.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation has
been actively involved from the very beginning in
every effort to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Syrians victimized by the ongoing conflict. In that
regard, we are closely cooperating with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The OIC
Department for Humanitarian Affairs is working to
provide assistance to Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries. On 30 January, the United Nations held a
very successful fund-raising conference in Kuwait, to
which the OIC contributed and by which the United
Nations managed to raise around $1.5 billion, mainly
from OIC countries.
Here once again, I reiterate our call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibility to do its utmost to
protect the Syrian people and bring a peaceful solution
to the Syrian conflict through political dialogue.
Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law is a
sine qua non for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. As encouraged by the Secretary-General
in his 2012 report, the Council is expected to ensure
such accountability for each and every Member State
without exception. Yet Israel continues to enjoy

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

impunity despite its flagrant violations of international
law, as well as international humanitarian and human
rights law.
The Palestinian people, be it in the West Bank or
Gaza, continues to suffer under the illegal measures
imposed by the Israeli occupation. The Palestinian
people’s aspirations to realize its legitimate right to
freedom, sovereignty and self-determination in its own
independent State and in its own homeland, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, should no longer be denied.
The ongoing confiscation of Palestinian properties
and construction of illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories should be seen as the biggest
challenge to the credibility of the Security Council.
The General Assembly’s recognition of Palestine as
a non-member observer State constitutes a timely and
fundamental opportunity that should be utilized in full
in order to give renewed momentum to the currently
deadlocked peace process. Both the Palestinian and
Israeli people deserve permanent peace. It is long
overdue for the Israeli and Palestinian people to live
side by side and in peace and security.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
represents only one aspect of the challenge of
protecting civilians. Civilians are also increasingly
becoming targets of terrorism and extremism, as well
as, maybe ironically, of counter-terrorism measures.
Certainly, nobody can deny the right of States to
undertake counter-terrorism efforts through law
enforcement agencies to combat terrorism. However,
the utmost should be done not to harm civilians and
reduce them to collateral damage. Civilians also suffer
during eruptions of violence due to simmering and
unaddressed situations of intercommunal hatred and
resentment, as was recently witnessed by the Muslim
Rohingya minority in Rakhine state, Myanmar.
Speaking of unaddressed problems, I should stress
the importance of responding to the needs of refugees
displaced by armed conflict. In this regard, the OIC
is particularly concerned about the continuing plight
of Azeri refugees forced to leave their homes in the
Nagorno Karabakh region and seven adjacent regions
of Azerbaijan.
We are also concerned about the deliberate targeting
of certain groups of people by non-State armed groups
or terrorists. The targeting and kidnapping of United
Nations or other international staff, humanitarian
assistance workers and volunteers, or health workers

13-23027

and teachers are unacceptable. In this regard, I strongly
condemn the killing of health workers engaged in
national polio vaccination campaigns. I also condemn
the killing of worshippers in places of worship as
abhorrent, inhuman acts. I also condemn and reject the
arguments of those who distort the teachings of Islam
by killing, kidnapping or harming innocent civilians or
by undermining their security.
Finally, I would like to express the commitment of
the OIC General Secretariat to work with the United
Nation for the protection of civilians. In this regard, we
highly appreciate in particular the dedicated efforts of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF, OCHA and the International
Committee of the Red Cross in this field. I would also
like to pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and to unarmed civilian peacekeepers who
are protecting civilians in a variety of trouble spots
around the world.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Minister Kim Sung-hwan for
his timely initiative to discuss the crucial issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This is a
question of vital importance that the Security Council
should address on a fixed timetable in order to keep
international attention focused. Violence committed
against civilians, often including women and children,
by Government forces or various types of armed groups
is a tragic reminder of the absolute importance of
protecting them.
I also wish to express great appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his intervention, and thank
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their very
important contributions.
Italy fully endorses the statements that will be made
by on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflicts.
In a national capacity, we wish to focus on a few aspects
of ensuring the effective protection of civilians by
peacekeeping missions, and briefly touch on the issues
of humanitarian access, safety of humanitarian staff
and accountability.

3

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
a significant impact on enhancing protection of the
civilian population. The effective implementation of
a protection of civilians mandate requires not only
resources and capabilities, but also training, prevention,
interaction with local communities, political will and
communication.
It is crucial for all uniformed personnel deployed
on missions with a protection mandate to receive
predeployment training with specific protection of
civilians modules. The United Nations has distributed
excellent specialized materials, which we encourage
all training organizations to adopt as the bases for
their courses. This is particularly important for police
officers and formed police units. These United Nations
guidelines have already been adopted by training
institutes, such as the Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units, located in Vicenza, Italy.
I take this opportunity to highlight that, without
underestimating the importance of in-mission training,
Italy has always stressed the need for effective
predeployment training, considering that, from day
one, peacekeepers are exposed to critical protection
challenges and must be ready to face them immediately.
This is particularly compelling when it comes to child
protection, which is why we support a specific child
protection project with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant United Nations agencies.
Prevention is one of the most important aspects
of protecting civilians, and situational awareness is
essential to preventive action. Missions must therefore
use all possible assets to enhance situational awareness,
including the unarmed surveillance capability provided
by unmanned aerial systems, which are also vital to
deterrence. Early detection is important to timely
and effective preventive intervention. Italy thus
welcomes the Council’s recent decision to authorize
the deployment of unmanned aerial systems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Developing and sustaining a dialogue with the
local population is fundamental to understanding
the full range of threats that civilians face and their
particular vulnerability. It is also indispensable to
managing the expectations of the civilian population,
which are sometimes unrealistic because they exceed
the capabilities or mandate of the mission.
Political will is also of the utmost importance.
Protection mandates and specific rules of engagement

4

are not enough. The protection of civilians is a
whole-mission effort in which every component — from
leadership to the military, police and civilians — must
share the will to implement protection mandates.
Civilian populations expect protection from Blue
Helmets, regardless of the tasks officially assigned to
the individual components of a mission. The credibility
of the entire United Nations system is at stake.
There are two sides of communication that need to
be highlighted. The first is how to tell the peacekeeping
story better; the second is acknowledging the media’s
role in reporting violence against civilians.
Why should we tell the peacekeeping story better?
Too often, the media simply denounces the failures
of United Nations peacekeeping and rarely, if ever,
highlights its successes. However, peacekeeping does
work and it is a success story that we must learn to tell
more effectively if we truly want world public opinion
to believe more firmly in the United Nations ability to
maintain peace and stability, protect civilians and move
national Governments to make the necessary human
and financial resources available to the United Nations.
When the media reports the violence committed
against civilians around the world, it keeps the
international community’s attention focused on the
issue and brings us face to face with our responsibilities
and our moral conscience. It is journalists who, on the
front lines, strive to ensure that the world does not turn
a blind eye to these tragedies, and who pay an extremely
high price for their commitment. Social media have also
been a powerful means of communication, bringing
violence against civilians to global awareness. Our
sincerest gratitude goes to these men and women who
also expose themselves to the risk of violence.
I conclude by offering a few words on
humanitarian access, the safety of humanitarian staff
and accountability. Italy shares the concern over the
severity and prevalence of constraints on humanitarian
access, as well as the frequency and gravity of attacks
on humanitarian staff, and in particular on medical
personnel. We must promote a culture of protection,
ensuring that even the most reticent understand that
free access must always be guaranteed to humanitarian
assistance, and that the very same people who are on
the ground to assist other human beings should never
themselves become the targets of attacks. Let us not
forget, lastly, that in all cases of violence against
civilians, the Security Council has the crucial task of
ensuring appropriate monitoring for the assessment
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

of responsibilities and, when warranted, referring
situations to the International Criminal Court.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We commend
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for placing the issue of accountability at the
core of your concept paper (S/2013/75, annex). Indeed,
the Council is increasingly called to task in that area.
Much emphasis in this discussion has been placed on
the Council’s competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We appreciate the
recent discussions about how to improve the Council’s
referral practice, including in the area of financing and
exemption clauses. The Council is taking an important
step in the right direction today by committing to
follow-up action in the case of referrals.
As illustrated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/376), however, the Council’s role in promoting
accountability and eliminating impunity for the most
serious crimes under international law goes far beyond
ICC referrals, which will always remain the exception.
Promoting accountability implies in particular that the
Council must neither mandate nor endorse amnesties
or one-sided exemptions from criminal jurisdiction,
which may seem expeditious in the short term but are
ultimately often detrimental to both peace and justice,
as the developments in Yemen have shown.
The Council should also put greater emphasis on
accountability at the national level, including through
capacity-building, in accordance with the principle of
primary domestic competence in that respect. While
accountability at the domestic level must be the goal,
international components can play a key role, and there
is much room for new ideas, including mixed and hybrid
models that give assistance to States. The International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala is an
example of that. It illustrates that the Council, while
certainly a crucial actor in that respect, is not the only
one. We support an ongoing dialogue to further develop
the relationship between the Council and the ICC and
hope that the Council will soon be able to accept the
invitation from the Dutch Government to visit the legal
institutions in The Hague.
The situation in Syria poses a very serious
challenge to the protection of civilians agenda and the
credibility of the Security Council. Serious violations
of human rights, amounting to crimes against humanity

13-23027

and large-scale war crimes, continue to be committed,
as documented by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Liechtenstein has therefore joined 57 other States of all
regions to call on the Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court. We repeat
that call today, which was supported earlier by both
the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. In addition, we believe that it
is crucial to discuss accountability issues with the
Syrian national coalition, primarily in order to
demand that those who have taken up arms to fight the
current regime fully respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, but also to encourage
any future Government to submit the situation in
Syria to the jurisdiction of the ICC, in accordance
with article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute. That
would demonstrate the opposition’s commitment to
accountability and to the protection of civilians and,
over time, would end impunity for those crimes in
Syria.
In any armed conflict, the warring parties must
assess the impact of their combat operations on the
civilian population. Keeping track of all civilian
harm in a centralized database and analysing it to
improve tactical directives, the establishment of rules
of engagement and the training of troops can help to
minimize civilian harm and ensure compliance with
international law. We welcome the establishment
of a tracking system initiated by the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, which, when
combined with tactical directives focused on civilian
protection, has reduced civilian casualty rates. Using
such data, warring parties can acknowledge civilian
harm and offer amends to those who have suffered
losses in the appropriate form.
The use of explosive weapons in populated areas
and the existence of remnants of explosive ordnance
pose a deadly threat to civilians. To minimize civilian
harm, parties to a conflict and States supplying arms
should track weapons and stockpiles and secure them
after conflicts have ended in order to limit their
transfer to other conflicts. We call on the international
community to assist States in post-conflict situations,
such as Libya, to effectively secure stockpiles, clear
ordnance, institute risk education and establish victims’
assistance programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

5

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate as testimony to the
importance that the Republic of Korea places on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject of
great significance to the international community.
Eight months have passed since our most recent
debate in this Chamber on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PV.6790). Since then, the death
toll in Syria has quadrupled, from 14,000 in June to
over 60,000 now. The civilians caught as targets of the
Al-Assad regime continue to cry out for protection.
Every one of those cries that goes unanswered highlights
our failures.
Today, my thoughts are with the students of Aleppo
University, who were indiscriminately slaughtered by
the Syrian military last month because of the school’s
reputation as the university of the revolution. They are
with Sayyad Ali, who fled Syria in December and now
lives with his family in a tent in an abandoned part
of northern Lebanon. He is just one of over 800,000
Syrians who have fled the Al-Assad regime since 2011.
Across the Middle East, they are being forced to bear
the harsh storms of winter with the most meagre of
shelter and provisions. For those refugees, the only thing
more painful than the cold weather they experience is
the cold shoulder they receive from the international
community.
The clock is ticking. Every day that passes before
the Council takes firm and decisive action in Syria
is another day during which countless civilians lose
their lives and countless more lose hope. Those of us
sitting here today must begin speaking loudly, clearly
and unequivocally against the horrors of the Al-Assad
Government. The ophthalmologist from Damascus
cannot continue to blind us to his crimes.
Al-Assad is not alone. On his advisory board sits
Hizbullah chief Hassan Nasrallah, who gives him
guidance on how to slaughter civilians more effectively.
With the blessings of Iran, its patron, Hizbullah has
provided arms, training and logistical support for tens
of thousands of Al-Assad’s men. It has assisted the
Syrian military in cracking down on dissidents so that
Al-Assad can cling to power.
Iran’s arm extends from Syria into Lebanon, where
it has helped Hizbullah amass 50,000 missiles — more
than many NATO members possess — and transform
the Lebanese State into an outpost for terror. Hizbullah

6

intentionally places its arms in civilian areas, using
the entire population of Lebanon as a human shield. Its
idea of investing in the next generation is to stockpile
its weaponry in the immediate vicinity of schools and
playgrounds.
Hizbullah’s reign of terror extends far beyond the
Middle East. Its fingerprints have been identified on
attacks on all five continents, from Kenya to Argentina
to Thailand. Last week, Bulgarian authorities also
identified Hizbullah as the culprit behind the July bus
bombing in Burgas, Bulgaria, that killed five Israelis
and one Bulgarian citizen. That was the deadliest attack
on European soil since 2005.
Despite such activities, however, Hizbullah remains
conspicuously absent from the European Union (EU)
list of recognized terrorist organizations. In fact, many
States, including some represented in this Chamber,
continue to classify Hizbullah as a charity. Not since
Napoleon invaded Russia has the European continent
seen such an astonishing lack of foresight. Let us make
no mistake — Hizbullah’s sole purpose, its raison d’être,
is to commit terrorist acts, both inside and outside the
Middle East. Calling Hizbullah a charity is like calling
Al-Qaida an urban planning organization because of its
desire to level tall buildings.
Some European lawmakers continue to bend
over backwards attempting to differentiate between
Hizbullah’s military and political wings. That is an
exercise in futility. The only difference between those
two wings is that the political wing negotiates the sum
of drug cartel money that the military wing later uses
to purchase weaponry. It does not take a Nobel Peace
Prize laureate to realize that we are not exactly dealing
with a selfless humanitarian organization here.
One does not need the fortitude of William Wallace,
of Braveheart fame, to understand that one should
do the right thing here. The EU must find the moral
and political courage to place Hizbullah on its list of
terrorist organizations. It must send a clear message
that Hizbullah can no longer target its civilians with
impunity. The voices of the victims of Hizbullah terror
call on us to take collective action and work together to
bankrupt the world’s most dangerous charity.
We have held many debates in these halls on the
protection of civilians. It is now our responsibility to
transform those words into direct and concrete action.
The numbers of civilian casualties across the globe grow
on a daily basis. We cannot allow our indifference to

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

those numbers to grow and grow alongside them. Today,
I urge the Council to heed the simple yet immortal
words of Edmund Burke: “The only thing necessary for
evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and the
Republic of Korea on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.
Once again, the Security Council is addressing the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
from the perspective of the duty to observe the relevant
regulations of international humanitarian law in order to
reduce the impact of armed conflict on civilians. This is
an issue of particular relevance to the Colombian State,
which has been defending its democratic institutions
from the attack of illegal armed groups whose strategies
of war openly violate those rules.
My country shares the concern of the SecretaryGeneral and other delegations over the situation of
civilians in armed conflicts in some parts of the world,
and over the recurrent failure of parties to conflict
to fulfil their duty to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law. We also agree that
respect for international law should be promoted by
all parties to a conflict; that the protection of civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping missions and other
relevant missions should be strengthened; that access
to humanitarian assistance should be improved in
coordination with States on the Council’s agenda; and
that accountability should be promoted when the law is
violated.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376)
refers to the importance of enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups, implying that such compliance
depends on existing direct contact between the United
Nations and non-State armed actors. The practice of
identifying a formula that can work or that has worked
in certain specific situations and elevating it to a
generalized category can cause difficulties. From our
point of view, it is hard to identify a unique formula
applicable to all cases. Each situation is different and

13-23027

must be addressed by taking into account its own
special circumstances.
In the particular case of policies towards non-State
armed actors, and in order to ensure that such policies
are compatible with those adopted by the Colombian
Government in the context of peace negotiations, in
the current circumstances we consider it essential to
preserve ownership by the State and its Government in
driving the process, without external interference. We
believe that the concern to ensure that non-State armed
actors comply with international humanitarian law and
other relevant law is valid, but we also believe that this
concern is fully covered by the cardinal principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution during an
attack.
For that reason, it is necessary to consider very
carefully the recommendation that State Members
should refrain from adopting policies or other measures
with the effect of preventing humanitarian actors from
working with non-State armed groups for humanitarian
purposes, and in particular from carrying out activities
to promote respect for international humanitarian law.
That recommendation must be based on principles of
cooperation and coordination with a concerned State on
the basis of its national sovereignty.
Based on its recent historical and painful experience,
and in relation to the particular circumstances of the
Colombian conflict, the Government of President
Santos Calderón has adopted a policy to ensure that
no dialogue with an illegal armed group that has been
designated internationally as a terrorist organization
will take place without its prior explicit consent — that
is, when the national Government of Colombia considers
such dialogue appropriate. Furthermore, while the
Government is determined to ensure that those groups
and their leaders take specific actions to comply with
the rules and principles of international humanitarian
law, it also firmly believes that such compliance should
not include independent contact by those groups with
United Nations representatives. Colombians have
already been down that road, with meagre profit.
We thank the States Members of the United
Nations and the Organization itself for understanding
and respecting that policy and for their offers of
cooperation, which will remain in effect until the illegal
armed groups operating in the country decide to change
their behavior and fully respect the international norms
described. The existence or absence of United Nations

7

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

contacts with these groups does not affect the viability
of the law applicable to armed conflicts, because what
counts is the will of the parties. When that is lacking,
States should have solid institutions for prosecution and
due punishment.
Focus on the possible approaches of certain actors
towards illegal armed groups diverts our attention from
the fundamental issue, which is the lack of political
will. The validity of the rights of civilians in hostilities
requires no contact with non-State armed groups, but
only the decision of the latter either to abandon violence
and pursue their goals through democratic debate, or, if
they decide to pursue armed conflict, to give full effect
to international humanitarian law, without exception.
Our Government has always welcomed and been
grateful for the work of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in facilitating the release of those
kidnapped by illegal armed groups. In recent years,
the Colombian Government has succeeded, with the
active collaboration of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and in some cases with the support of
friendly Governments and civil society organizations,
in helping many people to recover their freedom.
Another issue that we wish to highlight is the
recommendation to establish commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions, as contained in the
Secretary-General’s report, the concept paper before
us (S/2012/75, annex) and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) . We understand that, by definition,
these mechanisms may be applicable only to countries
on the agenda of the Security Council, and otherwise
only by prior arrangement with the State concerned.
My Government agrees that the alternatives raised in
the report to reach populations in need of humanitarian
assistance — such as temporary cessation of hostilities,
humanitarian pauses, humanitarian corridors and days
of tranquillity — must be adapted to the circumstances
of each conflict. Any serious analysis will indicate that
international humanitarian law obligates military forces
to adjust themselves to humanitarian imperatives,
without implying that such efforts may not occasionally
control, for obvious security reasons in the middle of a
conflict, the movement of people and properties.
Colombia supports the idea expressed by the Security
Council in the presidential statement on the protection
of civilians in November 2010 (S/PRST/2010/25), that
the promotion of peace processes, the achievement of
peace and sustainable development, and respect for

8

human rights and the rule of law are of the utmost
importance to protect the civilians in the medium and
long terms.
Colombia, with 200 years of democratic institutions
and a modern regulatory framework, has spared
no effort to enhance and complement its efforts in
that field, as can be see in the adoption of ambitious
initiatives to seek peace and reconciliation. Examples of
this include the transitional justice system incorporated
into the Justice and Peace Law of 2005, which has
allowed for the demobilization and reintegration into
society of over 54,200 members of illegal armed
groups; the establishment of an innovative mechanism
of indemnities and restitution of land established under
the Victims and Restitution of Land Law of 2011; and
the constitutional reform that has established a legal
framework for peace.
Consequently, we strongly believe that the peace
talks currently under way are founded on a solid
domestic legal basis and a strong political will on the
part of the Government, which are compatible with
the international obligations that we have undertaken
and consistent with the aim of protecting the civilian
population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Hisajima (Japan): At the outset, let me express
my sincere congratulations to the Republic of Korea
for its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and thank the Foreign Minister of the Republic
of Korea, Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, for holding this debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Navi
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights; and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their respective briefings.
Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.
The need for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict continues to increase. The five core challenges
identified in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) remain relevant today, and we need to
address what concrete measures can be applied to tackle
those challenges. Against that background, I would like
to focus on two issues in this debate.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Although the protection of civilians and the
building of capacities towards that end have been
part of the mandates of a number of peacekeeping
operations and other missions, ensuring the efficacy of
those mandates remains a challenge. In that regard, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which counts
the protection of civilians as one of its core goals, is
expected to deploy unmanned aerial vehicles in order
to improve surveillance capacity. Japan welcomes
effective measures of that sort aimed at protecting
civilians.
In Mali, the efforts of troops from France, African
States and Mali to re-establish stability are achieving
tangible results, and Japan commends their engagement.
Nevertheless, a number of challenges still exist, such as
providing assistance to the many internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees, stabilizing recovered
areas and promoting political transition in Mali.
Strengthening the capacities of the Malian authorities
is crucial in tackling those challenges and therefore in
achieving the protection of civilians.
Japan is considering allocating $120 million in order
to assist refugees and IDPs in Mali and its neighbouring
countries and to strengthen governance and security
in the region, including by supporting peacekeeping
operations training centres. We strongly hope that such
assistance will contribute to the protection of civilians
in Mali and its neighbouring areas and improve regional
stability as a whole.
Furthermore, we believe that pre-deployment
training for peacekeeping operations and other mission
personnel is extremely useful, and it is therefore
important to provide comprehensive training on such
issues as the protection of civilians and the prevention
of sexual violence.
Ensuring accountability and compliance with
international humanitarian law on the part of parties
to conflict is obviously important, but, as the concept
paper issued by the Republic of Korea (S/2013/75, annex)
points out, it is also important for the members of the
Security Council to fully recognize the importance of
those issues. The Security Council should take more
proactive actions to accelerate concrete movement in
that regard by, for instance, launching fact-finding
missions and submitting referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In that light, 57 countries,
including Japan, have requested that the Security
Council refer the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
13-23027

to the ICC. We all need to bear in mind that inaction on
the part of the Security Council sends the wrong message
to perpetrators and compromises the credibility of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, it is important that this open debate
should not only promote discussion at the normative
level but also contribute to the advancement of concrete
actions towards the protection of civilians on the
ground. In that regard, Japan hopes that the reports of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict will continue to be issued regularly,
with concrete recommendations, and that open debates
will provide a forum for active discussion on the matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the pleasure to speak today in the Security Council on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Let me start by expressing the Movement’s
appreciation to the Council presidency of the Republic
of Korea for organizing this debate and to Minister Kim
Sung-hwan for his presence and for presiding over this
meeting earlier. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
briefings to the Council today.
Current world events indicate that civilians are still
suffering in massive numbers around the globe. Despite
all the efforts at the international level for the protection
of civilians and the measures taken by the Security
Council and relevant humanitarian institutions, it
is regrettable that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflict, and, as the
report of the Secretary-General points out, the situation
vis-à-vis the protection of civilians remains dreadful.
The situation endured by civilians in many of today’s
conflicts therefore requires our particular attention and
action. It seems that the measures adopted so far fall
short of addressing the wider implications of attacks
against civilians and their effects on international peace
and security, as well as their humanitarian impacts.
The reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, in particular the latest report
contained in document S/2012/376, issued in May
2012, highlight the ongoing and emerging concerns
regarding the situation. They include the proliferation
and fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
9

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

displacement of civilians within and across borders,
the continued violence and hardships that women and
children face during armed conflict, and the continued
existence of a culture of impunity. The reports have
contributed to the advancement of the relevant debates
through the identification of five core challenges:
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations. The reports of the Secretary-General take
stock of both the encouraging developments and the
ongoing concerns and challenges affecting civilians in
contemporary armed conflicts.
In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that due priority should continue to be given to the
promotion of knowledge of, respect for and observance
by States of their obligations assumed under the Charter
of the United Nations, international law, including
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular their obligations under
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols.
We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations and civilian property and redoubling
their efforts to comply with their responsibilities to
ensure general protection against dangers arising from
military operations to civilian installations, hospitals
and relief materials and the means to transport and
distribute such relief materials.
The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. It urges the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations to ensure respect
for the protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime,
we reaffirm that humanitarian assistance personnel
should respect international humanitarian law and the
laws of the countries where they operate, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance set out in the
annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182, and
non-interference in the cultural, religious and other
values of the population in the countries where they are
active.

10

Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes
that respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States and of non-intervention must be upheld. The
consent of the host country is imperative to granting
access to its territory for humanitarian assistance
operations and for the continued work of their personnel
at all times.
United Nations peacekeeping missions constitute
one of the most significant means available to the
United Nations to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict. Since 1999, the Security Council has
tasked United Nations peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates. Such protection mandates include
establishing effective early-warning mechanisms,
ensuring the provision of adequate resources to monitor,
prevent and respond to incidents, and supporting the
efforts of the host country’s authorities to implement
their responsibility to protect civilians. In addition,
United Nations missions assist in creating protective
environments by supporting the establishment of
effective rule of law and security institutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement acknowledges that the
protection of civilians is currently mandated in a number
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. In that
context, it stresses that such peacekeeping operations,
in particular those with protection of civilian mandates,
should be guided by the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and should not be used as a means for
regime change or military intervention. The Movement
underlines the fact that the protection of civilians is
the primary responsibility of the host country and,
accordingly, emphasizes that relevant peacekeeping
missions with such a mandate should conduct their
tasks without prejudice to the primary responsibility of
the host Government to protect civilians.
United Nations efforts take place in support of and
not as a substitute for those of the national authorities.
We stress that the successful implementation of
tasks relating to the protection of civilians requires
integrated efforts at all levels and a holistic approach
that encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the necessary
training, as well as clearly defined and achievable
mandates. In that regard, we again acknowledge the
importance of peacekeeping operations supporting and
building synergies and of their coordination with host
Governments, including at the local level, in protecting
the civilian population.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The development of strategies for the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping missions where it is
mandated is significant. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations should continue to discuss
the best ways to overcome the challenges that remain.
Those challenges include the operationalization of such
strategies in action on the ground, addressing the gap in
the resources needed to carry out that complex mandate
task and the legal aspects of categorizing civilians in
combat situations in accordance with international law.
Allow me to conclude by expressing the hope
that this open debate will provide an opportunity to
assess the ways and means to provide better protection
to civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify
not only the positive developments to date but the
challenges ahead. Here, I would like to reiterate
the Non-Aligned Movement’s firm belief in the
importance of the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, in establishing accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and in putting an end
to impunity.
The President: There are still 49 speakers on
my list, so may I remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with longer statements can circulate the
written text. I would very much appreciate it if speakers
could turn directly to the conclusion of their statement.
I request members’ cooperation in delivering a
condensed version.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection
of Civilians, which comprises Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom and Uruguay. I would like to
thank the Korean presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this debate, which is long overdue.
Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a challenging task that requires our constant
attention. Unfortunately, the core challenges identified
in the three most recent reports of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/277, S/2010/579 and S/2012/376)
remain and the way forward set out in resolution 1894
(2009) needs to be pursued as a matter of priority.
International humanitarian law requires all parties

13-23027

to conflict to spare the civilian population from the
effects of hostilities. All too often, however, parties
to conflict fail to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Civilians, including
children and women, are subjected to acts of violence
with severe humanitarian consequences. Also, the
targeting of schools and health-care facilities places
civilians at risk.
We therefore regret that the Security Council does
not debate the issue on a more regular basis. To ensure
greater predictability in the treatment of the protection
of civilian by the Council and in order to have a greater
impact in the field, the Group strongly advocates for
regular biannual debates and for a standing reporting
requirement so that the Secretary-General is in a
position to report every 18 months, as is the case for the
issue of children and armed conflict with the adoption
of resolution 2068 (2012).
The briefings provided by the Secretary-General
during such debates are very important. Up-to-date
information is a necessary condition for meaningful
debates among Member States. We also note the
practice of the Emergency Relief Coordinator briefing
the Council, which we find essential and would like
to see continue in the future, as the Emergency Relief
Coordinator is, inter alia, an advocacy channel for the
wider humanitarian community.
We would also like to reaffirm the obligation
to protect all categories of persons protected under
international humanitarian law, taking into account
their specific vulnerabilities, in particular children and
women. We share the Secretary-General’s concerns
that sexual violence, including rape, continues to be a
prominent feature of conflict and remains widespread,
affecting not only women and girls but also boys
and men. As called for in resolution 1820 (2008), the
Security Council should address the root causes of
sexual violence and consider including it as a criterion
in country-specific sanctions regimes where relevant. In
addition, steps must be taken towards full compliance
by all parties to a conflict and full accountability for
violations. Resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirmed the
importance of ending impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We are convinced that the Council should become a
driving force in the area of accountability and promote
an appropriate combination of justice, reparations and
institutional reforms, with a view to satisfying the

11

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

essential rights of victims of such serious violations
and to preventing their recurrence.
Also, timely recourse to fact-finding mechanisms,
including, when appropriate, the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission established by
article 90 of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, is
crucial to ensuring the credibility of the international
community in that regard. It is particularly important,
however, for the Council to act where credible
information has been provided by such fact-finding
mechanisms. The Security Council should also consider
referrals to the International Criminal Court when and
where national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to
investigate and prosecute those most responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
In addition, humanitarian access remains a critical
challenge. In many cases, access continues to be
difficult, and there has been a marked deterioration in
the past 10 years. In today’s armed conflicts, securing
and maintaining such access in order to help and assist
civilians is becoming increasingly more difficult. We
urge all parties to conflict to allow and facilitate rapid,
full and unimpeded access so as to allow humanitarian
actors to reach civilians in need, consistent with the
well-established guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance.
Before concluding, the Group of Friends would
like to recall that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with the State. Enhancing
the capacity of national Governments to sustain longerterm efforts to protect civilians should always be the
key objective of international action. To reach that
objective, international assistance requires a spirit
of cooperation based on mutual acknowledgement
and national ownership that transcends the actions of
individual actors involved in protection. The support
of the international community should be based on the
recognition that security and development are closely
interlinked, mutually reinforcing and key to attaining
sustainable peace and, therefore, to preventing situations
where civilians might face the threat of violence.
Conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes are also key to the protection of civilians.
The international community must vigorously and
continuously seek to exhaust all diplomatic means
available to ensure the protection of civilians under
the threat of violence. United Nations peacekeeping
operations have an important role to play in enhancing
12

the host Government’s capacity to protect its civilians,
including through the strengthening of national rule-oflaw and security institutions. We should therefore
strive to ensure that missions have the capabilities and
resources they need to discharge their mandate related
to the protection of civilians as effectively as possible.
(spoke in French)
I should now like to speak briefly in my national
capacity. The full text of my statement has been
circulated in the Chamber.
I should like to begin with the issue of accountability
in the case of Syria. In view of the escalating violence
and the absence of any prospects of credible criminal
prosecution, Switzerland, supported by 57 other States,
recently called on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
No lasting peace is possible in Syria if determined
action is not taken to ensure accountability and prevent
impunity. We hope that other countries will join this
initiative by signing the list of supportive States and that
the Council will act by taking the necessary measures.
We would also like to share our deep concern
about the ever-worsening situation with regard to
humanitarian access in Syria. It is unclear how the
delivery of assistance is coordinated and implemented
in disputed areas or so-called areas under the control
of opposition groups. We must therefore find ways to
minimize the number of persons who are beyond the
reach of humanitarian aid.
Securing continued access to the population is
also pivotal in the context of Mali. Despite the speedy
progress of military operations there, we should not
forget the significant needs of vulnerable populations.
We are witnessing once again how difficult it is
to prevent atrocities, protect civilians and ensure
accountability for violations. We welcome the fact
that Mali has referred the situation to the International
Criminal Court.
In general terms, enhancing compliance with
international humanitarian law remains the greatest
challenge. Switzerland is therefore pleased to report
that its joint initiative with the International Committee
of the Red Cross to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law has gained momentum,
with an increasing number of States engaging in
substantive discussions on this issue. A second meeting
of States will take place in June in Geneva to strengthen
the dialogue on this important issue.
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Non-State armed groups constitute a particular
challenge with regard to compliance with the rule of
law in most modern conflicts. We must find a way to
ensure that those groups comply with their obligations
and allow humanitarian access. The latest report of the
Secretary-General is insightful. Whenever the issue of
engagement with non-State armed groups is raised, the
consequences for civilians should be the most important
criterion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Mr. Spoerri for
their respective briefings. I also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches great
importance. We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) that was adopted earlier today and in
particular the establishment of systematic reporting on
this issue every 18 months.
Portugal, naturally, shares the views that will be
expressed by the European Union later on, but let me
underline some aspects of particular significance to my
country.
As emphasized today by our briefers, civilians have
in recent months continued to represent the majority of
the victims of conflicts. Too often, men, women and
children are not spared the effects of hostilities and are
still frequently deliberately targeted by various parties.
Despite international efforts, sexual violence continues
to be used as a tactic of war, and the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts are still a reality in several
countries. Such flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law fuel further instability,
violence and conflict. Attacks against civilians are
unacceptable wherever they take place — in Syria, in
Mali, in Somalia, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or in the areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance
Army — and should be vigorously condemned, as
they were condemned in the past, in Libya or in Côte
d’Ivoire.
It is clear that in today’s world, when civilians
are under threat, the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular must respond promptly. It is
therefore even more frustrating that, in the case of Syria,
the Council has not responded to the expectations of the

13-23027

international community and to the hopes of civilians
on the ground.
Learning from past situations such as those in
Rwanda and Srebrenica, the Security Council has
developed a normative framework and concrete
instruments to conduct its action in this area in an
effective and accountable manner. Resolution 1894
(2009) provides a solid normative framework for United
Nations peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.
Eight peacekeeping missions on three continents are
endowed with strong protection mandates; we welcome
the consistent baseline guidance and predeployment
and in-mission training being developed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to enhance the
understanding — and improve the implementation — of
the concept of protection of civilians. Local strategies
and improved engagement with communities have been
devised, and all of those tools have had a significant
impact on enhancing the protection of civilian
populations. But more can and should be done regarding
the prevention of conflicts. Peacekeeping missions
are a remarkable tool but a limited one that cannot be
multiplied ad infinitum.
Furthermore, the prevention of conflict is always
the most effective way to protect civilians, and the
Council can use very efficiently its existing tools,
including presidential statements, resolutions, briefings
and consultations, to convey robust political messages
when the situation demands it or the protection of
civilians is at stake. It can also be proactive, and
develop new tools to increase its role in the protection
of civilians by addressing more situations of concern.
The work of the Security Council in promoting
accountability for violations of humanitarian and
human rights law represents another important aspect
of its efforts to protect civilians. The role of the Council
in this area has been central to progress, since it has
established significant precedents by requesting that
fact-finding mechanisms be created to investigate
alleged violation and that reparations be provided
for victims, and by promoting individual criminal
responsibility. At a workshop that Portugal organized
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in November 2011, this practice of the Council
aimed at ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
was reviewed. Some interesting ideas on promoting
consistency and avoiding the perception of selectivity

13

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

in the Council’s actions were put forward and would, in
our view, merit further discussion.
Countering impunity, whether through national
institutions or the International Criminal Court (ICC),
does indeed have a deterrent effect at the domestic,
regional and international level, and is a fundamental
tool for preventing further violations. In that regard,
Portugal would once again like to stress the important
role of the ICC in fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes. We would also like to highlight the crucial
role that the Human Rights Council is playing in the
fight against impunity; the international commissions
of inquiry on Côte d’Ivoire, Libya and Syria have
investigated human rights violations, established the
facts and circumstances of those violations and have
made recommendations on accountability measures.
The Council has certainly benefited from the work of
the commissions, which will, it is to be hoped, not only
contribute to enhancing accountability but also help
to promote peaceful and durable solutions to existing
crises.
There is no question that the international
community, as a whole, and the Security Council, in
particular, is dealing with a growing responsibility to
protect civilians, especially women and children, in
the context of armed conflicts. Here I would like to
recall the concept of responsibility while protecting put
forward by Brazil in November 2011 (see S/PV.6650),
which merits thorough consideration in the context
of the responsibility to protect, specifically of how to
improve its implementation when the use of force is
authorized by the Security Council.
When the Council has had at its disposal the tools
necessary to protect civilians under attack and has
received sufficient, credible and timely information
regarding situations of concern, it has found the
political will to take effective action in many dire
situations. But not always. Either through preventive
diplomacy aimed at influencing the parties to conflict
to comply with international law, or by acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, it is fundamental for the
Security Council’s credibility that it act consistently
and with resolve to protect all civilians — women, men
and children — whether directly targeted or accidental
victims of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

14

Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements. I
would also like to thank the presidency for organizing
this open debate. The fact that it is traditionally held
twice a year enables the Council to address an issue that,
as we unfortunately see in many conflicts, continues to
demand its attention.
The fight against impunity is one of the fundamental
pillars supporting the effective implementation of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. It is States that have the primary responsibility to
comply with it, and protecting civilians is incumbent
on all the parties to a conflict. However, I wish to
underscore that in the event of a failure to exercise that
responsibility, the Security Council can act, and must
do so consistently. This involves careful follow-up on
the conclusions of international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions, and, when appropriate,
referral of the facts to the International Criminal Court.
Accountability and the assigning of responsibility
undoubtedly have an impact on support for and
compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. However, this is not enough. I would
therefore like to draw attention to the existence of other
instruments that can contribute to protecting civilians
more effectively. At times, resorting to inclusive
mediation — in the sense described in the United
Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation — can
play a preventive role in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Spain, which is a staunch supporter
of the available instruments for conflict prevention,
is an active member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, and is promoting a mediation initiative in
the Mediterranean that is holding its first seminar on
mediation in the region right now in Madrid. I hope that
the Council will take the outcomes of such initiatives
into consideration inasmuch as they may offer ways of
effectively protecting civilians in conflict situations.
I would like to express particular concern about three
facts that represent serious obstacles to the application
of the modern concept of the protection of civilians.
First is the use of bombs and explosives in urban areas
to kill or maim civilians, destroy basic infrastructures
such as hospitals, schools and water-storage facilities,
and displace huge numbers of civilians. Spain deplores
this grave violation of international humanitarian law,

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

especially when it is used deliberately as a way of waging
psychological warfare on the civilian population, and
believes that the Council must continue to focus on this
practice and to explore and exploit all possible means
to put an end to it.
Secondly, it is the elderly, women and children who
suffer most in such conflicts. Sexual violence continues
to be used as a weapon in conflict and even as a military
strategy, leaving victims with scars that last into the
post-conflict period. Spain believes that this is an issue
to which the Council and the commissions of inquiry
should pay special attention, since it can come up
against victims’ reluctance to report incidents for fear
of stigma in their communities. Among the groups that
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of conflict, I
would like to stress the issue of people with disabilities.
This year the General Assembly will host a highlevel meeting on disability and development, which
Spain, together with the Philippines, has the honour to
co-facilitate. This is also a good opportunity to note
that in the area of the effective protection of civilians,
the special needs of this group should be taken into
account.
Thirdly, attacks on medical staff and installations
and on humanitarian personnel, and constraints
imposed on their activities, are also an indirect attack
on the civilian population. The Security Council has
the means necessary to enable humanitarian actors
to carry out their work, guaranteeing their safety and
promoting an environment conducive to their rapid and
unimpeded access to civilians in need. My Government
calls on the Security Council to assess the possibility of
recalling the content of the resolution on health care in
danger adopted at the 31st International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011.
Spain has always considered it a very positive fact
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Spain’s experience in this area, resulting from our
extensive involvement in peacekeeping operations,
has shown us that there can be no stable and lasting
peace if human rights are not respected. The protection
of civilians should therefore also be part of the
international community’s approach to post-conflict
situations as it could become a tool of prevention with
a view to avoiding a resurgence of the previous combat
situation.
Spain associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
13-23027

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): It is deeply concerning
that there remain so many civilians around the world
who are victims of deliberate and targeted attacks.
The ongoing conflicts in Syria and Mali serve as
immediate reminders of the threats that far too many
people continue to face. Other contexts, such as the
Sudan and South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Afghanistan — where threats to people,
basic human rights, to their physical security and to
their lives continue unabated — should serve as stark
reminders of the work that remains undone.
The conflict in Syria continues to take a terrible
toll on the civilian population. Despite collective
condemnation of the Al-Assad regime and calls to
end the violence, the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
worsening. There are now 4 million people who require
humanitarian assistance, and half of those are children.
Those numbers are staggering and should remind the
Council of the urgent need to act. Health care and
educational facilities continue to be targeted, and there
are disturbing reports of cases of rape and other forms
of sexual violence. The growing number of deaths
and the unwillingness of the regime to allow full, safe
and unhindered access to humanitarian organizations
underscore the appalling impact of the Al-Assad
regime’s effort to repress the people of Syria.
The resulting outflow of Syrian refugees is causing
considerable strain on the countries of the region, and we
commend their generosity in hosting so many refugees
on their soil. Humanitarian organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the United
Nations agencies and many local Syrian organizations,
are making heroic efforts to meet the urgent life-saving
needs of those affected by the violence. Their efforts
are to be commended. However, those efforts continue
to be obstructed by the regime. Canada, along with the
international community, calls on those in a position
of power in Syria to immediately ensure full, safe and
unhindered access to all communities in Syria so that
humanitarian actors can do their life-saving work. That
includes expediting administrative, visa, travel and
customs procedures in order to facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid.
Canada is also deeply concerned by the current
crisis in Mali and its impact on the civilian population.
Malians living in the north have, over the past year,
been subjected to brutal treatment by terrorists and
15

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

armed groups. The humanitarian situation in Mali
is deteriorating. Over 385,000 Malians remained
displaced, both within Mali and in neighbouring
countries, and 2 million people are at risk of food
insecurity. Amid that crisis there are disturbing reports
of human rights abuses and other crimes against the
local population, including extrajudicial killings and
amputations, accounts of rebel groups recruiting child
soldiers and an alarming rate of sexual violence against
women and girls. As a result of the insecurity, thousands
of Malians have chosen to flee their country and seek
refuge outside its border. We commend neighbouring
Governments for their generosity in welcoming those
seeking safety. We recognize the burden that this
places on host countries and call on them to continue to
provide refuge for those fleeing the crisis.
(spoke in French)
While Syria and Mali are perhaps the most blatant
examples of the current obstacles to the protection of
civilians, there remain a number of other cases that
merit our attention and require sustained action on our
part. We must act to defend the rights of vulnerable
religious minorities persecuted for their convictions
in armed conflict situations. In that respect, we call
on United Nations specialized agencies to take better
account of the persecution of religious minorities in
order to prevent the displacement of populations. The
terrible consequences of violence and conflict for
women and children, including rape as a weapon of
war, also require our urgent attention.
Canada remains steadfastly determined to improve
the living conditions of girls and women. We have
therefore contributed to peacekeeping units for African
women, helped women to participate in peace processes,
and assisted victims of sexual violence by improving
their access to justice, particularly through courts and
truth commissions. Similarly, Canada’s diplomatic and
development efforts are progressing, especially given
the need to put an end to early and forced marriages,
which have affected millions of girls throughout the
world.
The protection of civilians is essential to the
promotion of liberty, democracy, human rights and the
primacy of law. We must do a better job of applying
the many directives and best practices that have been
developed in Security Council resolutions in order to
improve specific measures aimed at protecting civilians.
Moreover, reports of the Secretary-General on the

16

protection of civilians can be very useful in focusing
attention on issues related to protection. At the same
time, we must clearly and firmly identify countries
and actors who commit violations against civilians,
including suicide attacks, and hold them accountable for
their actions. Canada will not be silenced in identifying
and condemning those who commit deliberate, wanton
acts of violence against civilian populations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, allow me to
thank the Secretary-General and other speakers for
their interventions today. Estonia welcomes this timely
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and thanks the presidency of the Republic of Korea for
its comprehensive concept paper (S/2013/75, annex).
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I shall concentrate today mainly on the two
important issues raised in the concept paper: compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law to protect civilians, and accountability.
Despite a strong international normative framework
and steps taken by the Security Council, as described
in the concept paper, civilians, particularly women and
children, still constitute the majority of the victims in
conflicts. Estonia agrees that the achievements at the
normative level must now be translated into deeds.
We acknowledge that the primary responsibility to
protect its people lies with the State. By the same token,
international humanitarian law and human rights law
must be obeyed not only by national authorities, but by
all parties involved. Unfortunately, too often parties to
armed conflicts fail to comply with their obligations,
resulting in devastating loss of human lives.
Estonia is particularly concerned about the
implications of an armed conflict for the most
vulnerable groups. There is a growing understanding
that women and children are impacted uniquely and
disproportionately by the effects of conflict and its
aftermath. Due to the changing nature of conflict,
children are often killed and injured in the course
of military operations, including in crossfire, aerial
bombardment and shelling. Another most worrisome
trend is the rise in suicide attacks and the use of
children to carry them out that lead to the death or
serious injuries of children.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

We are deeply concerned that, according to the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732), sexual violence and
the threat of sexual violence continue to be employed as
a tactic of conflict across a range of contexts. Although
sexual and gender-based violence is a gross human
rights violation, in many areas there is still a culture of
silence and denial in that regard. Changing it takes time
and much effort on the part of all parties: the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and, most
importantly, local leaders and national authorities.
In light of the aforementioned concerns, I would
like to commend the invaluable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui. Their work and commitment can in no way
be underestimated.
In his most recent report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376), the SecretaryGeneral points out the devastating consequences that
non-compliance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law has on health care and education.
Estonia strongly condemns the violence against health
workers. Speaking more concretely about education,
according to a recent UNICEF assessment in Syria,
21 per cent of schools were not serving as learning
environments because they were either damaged,
destroyed or used as shelters. Where schools remain
open, parents have been reluctant to send younger
children and girls due to insecurity. Estonia therefore
commends the decision of the Council, taken in
resolution 1998 (2011), to extend, in 2012, the scope of
grave violations for which parties to conflict were listed
in the Secretary-General’s reports on children and
armed conflict to include recurrent attacks on hospitals
and schools and recurrent attacks or threats of attacks
against protected persons in relation to hospitals and
schools.
Estonia has focused its development coordination,
humanitarian assistance and human rights activities
on supporting the most vulnerable groups, including
through continuity of education for children in conflict
areas such as Afghanistan, South Sudan, Mali and Gaza.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, just recently,
at the Kuwait conference, Estonia pledged €300,000 to
support Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries. Part

13-23027

of that pledge will be donated to UNICEF to support
continued education for children.
We believe that the international community
can do more in enforcing compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights
law at both the national and international levels. The
Secretary-General’s report contains very relevant
recommendations in that regard. The increased use of
accountability mechanisms is one of the most important
tools to strengthen compliance with international law
by all parties to conflict.
Despite the growing proportion of civilian
casualties, individuals responsible for war crimes and
other atrocities are rarely being held accountable.
Peace is often presented as a precondition for justice,
but there can be no lasting peace without justice and
there is no justice without accountability. Estonia
recognizes the critical role the Security Council
can play in ensuring and promoting accountability
and encourages the Council to consistently promote
individual accountability for international crimes.
Two recent resolutions on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict adopted by the Council underline the
essential relationship between the protection of civilians
and ending impunity for the most serious crimes.
Estonia strongly commends the mandate given to the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali to
support national and international efforts, including
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), to
bring perpetrators of serious human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law to justice.
That is a clear acknowledgement that justice must be an
integral part of the solution to the crisis in Mali.
Serious violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law and alleged crimes against
humanity and war crimes have been committed in
Syria. Those responsible for those crimes must be held
accountable. Many actors have underlined the need for
accountability, which requires strong commitment from
the international community. The Security Council can
take action to make that a reality. We commend the
consistency of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, who was
among the early proponents of a Council referral of
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. Ms. Pillay’s call for a referral was joined by
58 countries when they co-signed the petition initiated
by Switzerland that was sent to the Security Council

17

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

on 14 January 2013 requesting it to refer the situation
in Syria to the ICC. Estonia would like to reiterate its
support for the initiative and recall that expressions of
support and association with it are highly welcome.
Independent fact-finding is an important tool in
the fight against impunity. The invaluable work of the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic in collecting and preserving
evidence and keeping track of violations is necessary
to ensure that the alleged perpetrators of violations
do not go unpunished. The results of its work shock
our conscience and encourage action. At the upcoming
Human Rights Council session, Estonia will support
the extension of the mandate of the commission of
inquiry in Syria.
Estonia acknowledges the important role of
peacekeepers in protecting civilians. There are a
growing number of missions that have the protection
of civilians as an integral part of their mandate.
Peacekeepers are also the first to observe and promote
compliance with international law and human rights
law by all parties. Mandating peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians is among the most important actions by
the Council to enhance the protection of civilians on the
ground. Estonia would encourage the Council to take
even stronger leadership in guiding the international
response in cases where the civilian population is in
danger.
In conclusion, I express my sincere hope that
today’s debate will contribute to enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including by ending impunity for international
crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset to welcome
Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea, and to thank him for presiding
over this important meeting. I also welcome you, Sir,
my colleague Ambassador Kim Sook, in presiding over
the work of the Security Council this month. I further
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
Rwanda, Azerbaijan and Brazil at this important debate.
I have listened carefully to the statements made by
delegations in this debate on the important topic of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I am compelled
to underline the following fundamental points.
18

First, I wish to thank all those of goodwill who have
referred to the crisis in my country, Syria, and offered
constructive points of view on how to protect Syrian
civilians from the consequences of the crisis shaking
the country. As for other colleagues who see the crisis
in my country through the prism of mere criticism and
superficial humane theorizing and reckless accusations,
I should like to stress that their Governments are an
integral part of the creation, escalation and expansion
of the crisis in my country, be it through coercive,
unilateral sanctions imposed on the Syrian people or
by allowing their own fundamentalist and terrorist
Takfiri citizens to come to my country through open
borders under the noses of every intelligence agency
in the world. They have also allowed those terrorists
to cross Syria’s borders with neighbouring countries or
armed, funded, abetted and advocated on their behalf
in the media.
The ideal way to protect civilians in armed conflict
and to spare them the scourge of war lies fundamentally
in preventing armed conflicts and adopting peaceful
means to settle existing ones. Those Governments
that have initiated and continue to initiate and incite
such conflicts must be held accountable. Moreover,
the civilians in armed conflict will never be protected
without strict respect for the principles of international
law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principles of respect for the
sovereignty of States, sovereign equality among States,
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
It is utterly unacceptable for such an important issue
to be addressed in a discretionary or, indeed, selective
manner, or in a way that voids it of its meaning and
content and makes it nebulous enough to accommodate
numerous forms of abuse and misapplication. The
experience of protecting civilians in Libya is still fresh
in our minds.
One of the most important principles of sovereignty
is that the State has the exclusive and primary
responsibility to protect its own citizens. That is a
fundamental rule of international law that was agreed
upon by the founding fathers of the Organization.
Practical experience has proved that the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict or unrest has
been used as a pretext to serve intrusive and suspect
agendas and the interests of certain States that seek
to aggravate and manipulate tensions. Indeed, the
practices adopted by the Governments of some of
those countries have drifted from some of the most

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

fundamental principles of international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law.
We have begun to see fevered attempts to market
political propositions that do not enjoy international
consensus, such as the so-called responsibility to
protect and humanitarian intervention, which are now
being touted to shape public opinion that will pave the
way for NATO military intervention in the domestic
affairs of developing countries and to overthrow ruling
national Governments.
The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
must be addressed in a holistic manner that encourages
the peaceful settlement of conflicts and condemns
and holds accountable the Governments of States that
support armed violence and terrorism and use the media
to incite sectarian provocation. It also means putting
an end to actions by countries that infringe upon the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States,
as well as military interventions or invasions that kill
hundreds of thousands of people and displace millions
of others, under the pretext of protecting them.
The protection of civilians also requires not
subjecting them to suffering a slow death by depriving
them of the necessities of daily life, including
food, medicine and fuel, among others, through the
imposition of unfair unilateral coercive measures by
some countries that have been confirmed as illegitimate
by the United Nations.
On this occasion, my delegation would like to see
renewed emphasis on the need to provide protection for
civilians languishing under Israeli occupation in the
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, as well as on putting an end to the aggressive
practices of the occupying authorities against those
civilians.
Despite our opposition to the exploitation by
some delegations of the subject of our discussion
today, and comparing that to the regrettable events
currently being witnessed in Syria, let me point out
that caring for Syrian civilians, if it is serious, cannot
be compared to the policies being pursued by wellknown Arab, regional and Western countries that boast
publicly about providing arms, funding, training and
safe havens to armed terrorist groups that are crossing
borders in order to target all aspects and sectors of the
Syrian State, utilizing civilian populated areas as bases
for terrorist operations and using civilians as human
shields.

13-23027

We believe that concern for Syrian civilians cannot
be expressed by sponsoring terrorism or extremism
or by derailing settlement efforts or through exerting
pressure in order to undermine any possibility for an
inclusive national dialogue that alone would be able to
restore security and stability in Syria and allow Syrians
to determine their own future through a Syrian-led
political process among Syrians, as backed up by
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
There is a difference between the protection
of innocent civilians — a noble task and duty of all
Member States — and the protection of insurgents,
terrorists and fundamentalists who recruit children,
attack civilian aircraft and diplomatic missions and
primarily target the very safety of civilians and
destroy the State infrastructure that has been built to
fundamentally serve them.
The Syrian Government continues to carry out its
constitutional duties in protecting its own citizens from
acts of terrorism and sabotage. The Government is
working to restore security and stability. It is doing its
best despite unilateral, unjust measures and enormous
pressure to meet the needs of its citizens, to provide
shelter for those forced by the distressing events and
terrorist actions to leave their homes and to facilitate
their voluntary return.
The Syrian Government has also provided
all the necessary facilities for the relevant United
Nations specialized agencies, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, in order to
help in that regard. Furthermore, the national committee
that is investigating the current events is continuing its
task to ensure that those proven to be involved in acts of
violence are prosecuted and held accountable, without
exception.
Finally, the unethical political trading in the
situation of Syrian refugees and the organizing of
media press conferences only to announce pledges that
in most cases go unfulfilled are inconsistent with the
effort to protect civilians. The fact is that many of the
countries that have announced pledges of donations are
themselves the basic reason for the displacement and
suffering of the refugees.
In conclusion, let me say that the arrogance of
the Israeli representative has made him fall victim
to the illusion that he is Salah Al-Din, Hammurabi

19

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

or Nebuchadnezzar, or indeed Abraham Lincoln,
Gandhi or Simón Bolivar; and that his country’s acts
of aggression and occupation and its repression of the
Palestinian people are examples to be followed by all
Member States. He misses the fact that the resources
spent by the Organization to discuss the very means
of ending Israeli occupation and aggression have taken
from the Organization and the Security Council millions
of work hours and produced hundreds of resolutions.
However, the Israeli representative, with his
ignorance and his arrogance, now believes that his
country’s policies are above the Charter of the United
Nations and above the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. He also believes that the so-called international
community must thank Israel for its occupation and
aggression and that it must lionize Israeli State terrorism
against Arabs in the occupied territories.
Israel provides aid, arms and sponsors Takfiri
extremist
fundamentalist
groups
that
work
fundamentally from the separation line in the Golan.
Israel is an integral part of those acting to use and
abuse the crisis in Syria to perpetuate the occupation
of Palestinian land and to prevent forever the creation
of a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
I would like to thank the Republic of Korea for
having taken the initiative to discuss this very important
topic in the Security Council. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their briefings.
It is very timely to address the issue of the protection
of civilians because, while there have been some
positive developments, many concerns remain. Despite
the progress, we need to continue our efforts to translate

20

normative progress into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground.
Let me start by expressing that the EU is appalled
by the increasingly deteriorating situation in Syria,
which is primarily due to the unprecedented use of
force by the regime. The EU also condemns all attacks,
including terrorist acts that indiscriminately target
civilians.
The EU remains deeply concerned about the
widespread and systematic violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that, according to
the independent international commission of inquiry,
may amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The EU recalls that all those responsible for
such crimes must be held accountable and that there
should be no impunity for such violations and abuses.
The EU has repeatedly stated that if concerns about war
crimes and crimes against humanity are not adequately
addressed on a national level, the International
Criminal Court should deal with the situation. The
Security Council can refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court, as requested in the
letter from the Permanent Mission of Switzerland of
14 January 2013 (S/2013/19, annex), at any time. The
EU calls on the Security Council to urgently address
the situation in Syria in all aspects, including that issue.
Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by the parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Where national
authorities fail to take the necessary steps to ensure
accountability, the Security Council can, as appropriate,
play a more proactive role.
In more general terms, the frequent failure of parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under
applicable international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and refugee law to respect and protect
civilians is a concerning trend. We call on all parties
to armed conflict to respect fully their obligations,
including by securing humanitarian space and ensuring
access to humanitarian assistance for those in need.
The situation is serious in many countries, including in
Afghanistan, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and elsewhere, where
civilian populations, in particular women and children,
continue to be subject to various forms of extreme
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

violence, causing a grave humanitarian crisis with huge
displacements of populations.

populated areas. That issue should be addressed in a
more systematic and proactive way.

With regard to the situation in Mali, the EU is
alarmed by allegations of human rights violations and
calls on the Malian authorities to make investigations
into the matter. The EU stands ready to provide
appropriate support to combat such abuse. It stresses the
importance of complying with international law and,
in particular, reminds the Malian authorities of their
primary responsibility to protect civilian populations.
All perpetrators of human rights violations must be
held responsible for their actions. The EU welcomes the
decision by the International Criminal Court to open
an inquiry into violations and encourages the Malian
authorities to cooperate.

An important factor in regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is the ongoing negotiation
on the arms trade treaty. We are deeply convinced that
the arms trade treaty has the potential of contributing
to the improvement of living and security conditions
of hundreds of thousands of people around the
world — mainly civilians, women and children in
particular — by ensuring that arms are traded in the
most responsible way. At the final United Nations
Conference, in March, we hope to achieve a treaty that
sets the highest common standards for the regulation of
the international trade in arms, while also combating
illicit trafficking, thus reducing human suffering and
improving international peace, security and stability.

Stressing accountability is key. But the need for
accountability and justice, sadly, applies to situations
in which there has been a failure to protect civilians and
crimes have been committed. In addition to bringing
perpetrators to justice, we strongly believe in early and
decisive action to try to prevent such crimes from being
committed and in the need to forcefully remind the
authorities responsible of their primary responsibility
to protect civilians or be held to account. There is
also much room for improvement in the way that the
United Nations system responds to early warnings and
evolving situations, as underlined in the recent report
of the Secretary-General’s internal review panel on
United Nations action in Sri Lanka, which described
a systemic failure in adequately responding to human
rights violations and ensuring the protection of
civilians. The fact that the United Nations, to its credit,
has commissioned and made public a report of that kind
opens the way to reviewing and improving the response
of the United Nations system to such situations in the
future.
The EU wishes to express its grave concern for
the continuous attacks against, and other interference
with, medical personnel and facilities and the increased
threats to journalists in situations of armed conflict.
Experiences from recent conflicts raises the question
of how the principle of distinction is implemented in
practice, in particular when conducting warfare within
densely populated areas. We furthermore continue to be
very preoccupied by the humanitarian impact of the use
of weapons in densely populated areas. We take note
of the view expressed by the International Committee
of the Red Cross that the use of explosive weapons
with a wide impact area must be avoided in densely

13-23027

The mandates of many peacekeeping and other
missions have included protection-of-civilian activities
for a number of years. Many challenges remain in terms
of the effective implementation of such protection
mandates that we need to continue to address.
Mission-specific comprehensive strategies are a very
useful tool to facilitate such tasks. Reporting on the
protection of civilians by missions is key not least to
keeping the Council and troop-contributing countries
informed about the situation on the ground. In that
regard, the EU looks forward to the completion of the
guidance on reporting on the protection of civilians, as
requested in resolution 1894 (2009).
In many ways, training is the cornerstone of
improving the protection of civilians by missions. In
that regard, the EU welcomes the establishment of
protection-of-civilian training modules to better prepare
peacekeepers for that task. It is important that those
training modules also cover humanitarian principles
and the basic norms of international humanitarian law.
In order to make progress, it is up to Member States to
ensure that their peacekeepers receive proper training
before deployment. We also welcome the fact that
mission-specific and tactical-level predeployment and
in-mission training modules are under development.
For its part, the EU has also integrated that dimension
in its training programmes. In addition, the EU training
mission in Mali will, for instance, include training on
human rights, the law of armed conflict, gender, child
soldiers and the protection of civilians.
Implementing protection-of-civilian mandates
also requires better planning support to missions,

21

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

harnessing
lessons
learned
effectively
and
improving the understanding of how to support
host States in protecting civilians. Also decisive are
effective dialogue and better coordination between
protection-mandated missions and the humanitarian
organizations undertaking protection activities. We
note with satisfaction a recent comparative study
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support on the coordination
mechanisms in United Nations peacekeeping missions
related to the protection of civilians. The relevance of
the whole-of-mission approach is clearly demonstrated
by such findings. At the same time, the neutrality
and independence of humanitarian activities must be
maintained to ensure adequate access.
The Security Council should continue to request
the Secretary-General to explicitly report on the
implementation of protection-of-civilian mandates by
peacekeeping operations. The protection of civilians
should also be a standard benchmark against which we
measure the success of a peacekeeping operation.
Let me end by saying that we need to focus our
efforts on making sure that we translate normative
progress into concrete improvements in the protection
of civilians on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mbalati (South Africa): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the delegation of the Republic of
Korea for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay; and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Spoerri, for their statements. We are grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, and the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, Rwanda and Brazil for
their presence and their presentations.
At the outset, my delegation wishes to acknowledge
that the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular have made significant strides in
an effort to ensure that civilians are protected in times
of armed conflict. While significant progress has been
registered, particularly since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), challenges persist.
South Africa agrees that it is extremely important
for the Council to periodically evaluate our response
22

to the protection of civilians for the purposes of
improving, adjusting or eliminating adverse practices.
Protecting civilians from the scourge of conflict is
at the core of the mandate of the Security Council,
namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security. Surely, if the Council, the United Nations
and its partners do not play their roles in protecting all
civilians, we will have failed communities.
The Council has made notable contributions through
the inclusion of protection-of-civilian mandates in its
decisions. Peacekeeping operations such as the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
both include that component. In addition, several other
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have developed
comprehensive protection-of-civilian strategies. That
has put into operation the commitment made by the
Council in resolution 1894 (2009).
While making such important advances in
protecting civilians, we must at the same time ensure
that those efforts are not lost in furthering the objectives
of the scope of that noble and moral endeavour. On the
contrary, we must ensure that the protection of civilians
is not selectively pursued, as that would erode the
credibility of the Security Council.
A further challenge relates to the abuse of
protection-of-civilian mandates, which erodes not only
the credibility of the Council when it acts but also its
ability to act. Abusing the authorization granted by the
Council to advance a political or regime-change agenda
is unfortunate. That often creates mistrust within the
Security Council and has led to paralysis and inaction
on its part, particularly when faced with similar
challenges. Moreover, the experience has prevented
the Council not only from acting resolutely but also
from advancing the protection of civilian agenda.
The responsibility for such a failure must therefore
be borne by those that abuse the trust of the Council
with seemingly creative interpretations of protection
mandates.
Another challenge relates to the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles against human targets, which inevitably
leads to the killing of innocent civilians if not properly
managed. That concern is highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General (see S/2012/376) and the United
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi
Pillay is on the record stating that drone attacks raise
serious questions about compliance with international
law.
Those entrusted with the protection of civilians have
a stake in ensuring that our actions do not undermine
the very objectives that we seek to advance. There must
therefore be scrupulous compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law in carrying out
such mandates.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly tasked with mandates to protect civilians
under imminent threat. Peacekeeping operations
mandated with protecting civilians must be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the guiding
principles of such operations. Peacekeeping missions
with such mandates must carry out their task without
prejudice to the sovereignty of the host Government
and its primary responsibility in that regard. The
implementation of such mandates should be supported
by a comprehensive peace process that involves all
stakeholders and is underpinned by national ownership.
As my delegation consistently urges, United
Nations peacekeepers should always remain impartial in
carrying out their mandated tasks. Mandates to protect
civilians under imminent threat could be compromised
if the United Nations were perceived as biased and
found to be unable to perform its protection mandate
due to the lack of requisite resources and capabilities,
in particular air assets.
Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires a mission-wide response and strategy. While
peacekeepers must assist States in providing immediate
protection for civilians in the short term, the African
Union and its subregional organizations have identified
security sector reform and the building of national
institutions in the areas of the rule of law and justice
as critical to ensuring the long-term protection of
civilians.
In conclusion, we wish to underline that it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect the
civilians within their borders. Armed opposition groups
also bear responsibility for ensuring that unarmed
civilians are protected. The failure by both State and
non-State actors to uphold that responsibility should
not go unpunished.

13-23027

Accountability must first and foremost be sought
at the national level. Failing that, the international
community has the collective responsibility to act using
the mechanisms at its disposal, including independent
fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry, as
well as the International Criminal Court.
We would also like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers who lost their
lives while protecting civilians, as well as those who
continue to assist civilians affected by conflict.
The President: I should like once again to remind
all speakers to please limit their statements to no
more than four minutes, as we still have more than
40 speakers on my list.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Kim
Sung-hwan and the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Korea for having convened this debate, especially
given the alarming events of recent days. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Ms. Navi Pillay and
Mr. Philip Spoerri of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their remarks and overall assessments.
Serious and continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
systematic violence against civilian populations, are
occurring daily. It is an unfortunate and unacceptable
reality of our times that civilians continue to be the
main target of armed attacks and account for a high
number of casualties in conflicts. We strongly condemn
such violence and find it both appalling and intolerable.
That is why the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict remains one of the main priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Therefore, we urge all parties to armed conflicts to
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The Organization, and in particular
the Security Council, should take every opportunity
to send the message that crimes committed against
civilians are unacceptable and that all perpetrators
of grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.
Additional efforts are necessary to make
Governments aware of their responsibility to protect

23

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

civilians. Supporting the relevant national institutions
and strengthening their role and capacity to deal with
those issues is of vital importance. The struggle against
impunity is an integral element in the protection of
civilians, which cannot be addressed seriously without
prosecuting those responsible for serious crimes.
Gradual and targeted measures play an important role
in overall efforts as well as in initiatives to improve
compliance with the law by non-State armed groups.
At the same time, Council-mandated action to
protect civilians should ensure that the international
response is proportional to the threat, while the use of
force should be a last resort.
We are deeply concerned at continuing reports of
attacks on schools and hospitals, which are part of the
daily life of children and civilians in conflict settings.
Therefore, we urge all parties to conflict to keep
schools and hospitals as protected areas and zones of
peace. Specific provisions for the protection of children
need to be included in all relevant mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations as well as political
and peacebuilding missions, while the existing childprotection capacity should be strengthened.
We are further alarmed by the reports of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in countries
affected by conflict and the constant increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons. In
that regard, we support the efforts of the international
community to increase its efforts and provide muchneeded humanitarian assistance.
A more consistent and comprehensive approach
to addressing humanitarian access and ensuring
accountability for denial of access is crucial and should
be urgently dealt with.
Existing mechanisms for the protection of civilians
are important elements of the protection of civilian
agenda in peacekeeping. Host Governments need to be
consulted, involved and properly informed about their
functioning. The data collected during their work needs
to be available to national judicial systems.
Strengthening security institutions and their
capacity by providing the necessary training for police
and military forces is critical for the protection of
civilians and the rule of law in a country. Ensuring
the effective protection of the civilian population
is essential for the promotion of inclusive dialogue,
national reconciliation and the restoration of peace and
stability in a country. National judicial systems are the
24

cornerstone of the process for addressing accountability
and impunity. However, the relevant United Nations
bodies need to develop comprehensive and innovative
approaches to support their work.
Finally, the challenges facing the Council with
regard to the protection of civilians call for greater
international cooperation and better coordination
among the Council and other United Nations bodies
and agencies as well as regional and subregional
organizations. To that end, additional efforts should
be made to prevent conflicts and their recurrence and
promote early-warning systems and adequate responses
to situations that specifically threaten civilian
populations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like to congratulate the
Republic of Korea and you personally, Sir, for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. I would like
also to express our appreciation to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea for
presiding over this open debate this morning. I would
also like to commend the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their participation and important statements.
Increasing numbers of civilians continue to suffer
in armed conflicts around the globe. That is particularly
true for Africa and the Arab world, the regions to which
Egypt belongs. It reflects the fact that United Nations
bodies, especially the Security Council, should adopt
more effective measures in this regard.
Since our last open meeting in June on the protection
of civilians during armed conflict (see S/PV. 6790), a
number of alarming developments have taken place.
First, the human toll in Syria has grown
exponentially. In January, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights reported that the number of civilian
deaths had reached 60,000. Today, less than a month
later, she informed us that it is approaching 70,000.
Secondly, armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo captured a major city, Goma. The security
situation there was dramatically affected — there were
reports of looting and abuse — before their withdrawal
pending the negotiation of a comprehensive agreement
mediated by neighbouring countries, the African Union
and the Secretary-General.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Thirdly, in Mali, armed groups seized the strategic
city of Gao before being driven out by the French
intervention, coordinated with the Malian Government,
pending the complete deployment of the African-led
force approved by the Security Council. Again, human
rights abuses have been reported. We welcome the
arrival of human rights monitors in Mali in order to
investigate those claims. Their mere presence could
constitute a good deterrent for such acts.
Fourthly, in November, Israel launched another
brutal attack on Gaza, causing extensive loss of civilian
life and property. The ceasefire mediated by Egypt
helped to stabilize the situation and protect civilians on
both sides. So far, it is still holding. But its provisions
must be implemented in order to ensure a sustainable
improvement in the livelihoods of the Palestinian
population in Gaza and in the situation as a whole.
The United Nations Conference on an Arms Trade
Treaty in July failed to reach agreement on a final text.
We share the hope, expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report of last May (S/2012/376), for a future
Treaty that includes a provision that weapons should not
be transferred when there is a clear risk that they will
be used to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. That would require
clear-cut criteria based on United Nations resolutions
and the extent of the country in question’s cooperation
with the United Nations human rights machinery.
The international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, must ensure
rapid and effective accountability for any violations
against civilians. Impunity aggravates violations and
increases bitterness and hostility between the parties
to a conflict. It complicates the achievement of national
reconciliation after a conflict is over. Commissions
of inquiry should get speedy, tangible and effective
results, including identifying and bringing to justice
those responsible for targeting civilians. The damage
incurred should be assessed and effective mechanisms
for redress and compensation put in place, especially
if the perpetrators of the violations are Member States.
The principle of protection should be extended to the
economic and social situation of civilians not involved
in combat. Accountability should be applied to States
that do not cooperate with the Human Rights Council
or that deliberately undermine its Universal Periodic
Review mechanism.

Human Rights Council, to take decisive action to hold
accountable those responsible for the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also affirm the necessity for ending
Israel’s illegal settlement activities, which constitute a
clear violation of international humanitarian law. We
welcome the completion of the report commissioned by
the Human Rights Council on the illegal settlements
in the occupied territories (A/HRC/22/63) and look
forward to effective action being adopted after its
consideration in the Human Rights Council next month.
Egypt stresses the importance of the contribution
that peacekeeping missions make to the protection of
civilians. We support providing such missions with the
mandates, personnel and equipment necessary to enable
them to become effective early-warning mechanisms
when violations occur. We also stress how important
it is that United Nations peacekeeping missions uphold
the principles of respect for host countries’ sovereignty,
national ownership and culture.
We reaffirm the importance of compliance with
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law by all parties involved in conflicts,
whatever the nature of such parties. Every party in a
State must comply with the principles of distinction and
proportionality in armed conflicts. Every party must
refrain from targeting medical facilities and must grant
access for humanitarian assistance. The violation of
those rules by a party or a non-State actor should never
justify similar violations by other parties.
We share the concern expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report about the increasing use of drones and
its implications for the nature of conflicts, the impact
on civilians and accountability. We welcome the start of
a process to prepare a report on the issue by the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism.
Finally, we look forward to more attention being
paid in future to the new and emerging challenges
attached to the protection of civilians during armed
conflicts, in addition to the current core challenges
identified in the Secretary-General‘s report. We urge
pre-emptive approaches be adopted, including a focus
on the just and comprehensive resolution of protracted
conflicts that threaten to erupt in regular rounds of
violence that mostly affect innocent civilians.

Egypt calls on the Security Council and the
United Nations bodies concerned, in particular the
13-23027

25

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to wish you success, Mr. President, in the important
responsibility you have assumed in presiding over
the Security Council in February. We have no doubt
that your natural leadership will be appreciated by
your colleagues on the Council and in the entire
Organization. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Masood Khan,
whose presidency also represented a time of strength in
thought and action in the service of world peace.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
on behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States.
I would like to welcome this open debate that the
Council has been kind enough to hold on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, at a time when civilian
populations in areas of tension are fighting for their
survival in an increasingly troubled world. My
delegation is also grateful for the quality of the briefings
by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, who have done
an excellent job of informing us about the challenges
we face.
The
protection
of
civilians
in
armed
conflict — a major objective of the Fourth Geneva
Convention — continues to suffer from serious and
unacceptable shortcomings, to the detriment of
non-combatant populations. The various reports of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as those of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, attest to the
continuing challenges that this haunting issue presents.
In fact, deliberate murders of civilians, attacks on
schools and health centres, obstacles to the distribution
of humanitarian aid, and sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as the forced disappearances and
other ways of drafting children, are continuing along
with the increasing spectre of violence in theatres of
operations. We see the constantly increasing growth in
the number of those internally displaced by conflicts,
which in 2011 reached 26.4 million people, according to
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the subject
(S/2012/376).
The world continues to confront a heavy
humanitarian burden, eloquently illustrated by the

26

situations in Afghanistan, Mali, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan, the Gaza Strip and Syria. That brings
me to reflect on the remark of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon that the fate of civilians in many of
today’s conflicts continues to deserve attention and
justify intervention. That reminds us forcefully of the
pertinence of his recommendations on the five core
challenges in his 2009 report (S/2009/277), reiterated in
his report for 2010 (S/2010/579). My country, like many
Member States, believes that this is essential in order to
improve the current situation and to ensure respect for
international law on the part of all, including non-State
armed groups. It is also necessary to strengthen the
protection of civilians by improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping missions and to
facilitate access for humanitarian aid, while focusing
on accountability when violations occur.
In order to considerably reduce the grave risks
that armed conflict poses for civilian populations, we
must establish a holistic strategy for prevention. That
could be based, among other things, on a number of
concrete actions that we should all strive to consider.
In my delegation’s view, we should first track, control
and limit the trafficking in arms, particularly with
regard to non-State armed groups. Clearly, the fewer
uncontrolled weapons there are in circulation, the easier
it will be to protect civilian populations. In that regard,
Senegal believes that during the final United Nations
Conference on an arms trade treaty, to be held from
18 to 28 March, Member States should display the will
and flexibility needed to overcome the obstacles that
emerged from earlier negotiations in order to conclude
a treaty.
We should also effectively implement the principle
of due diligence formulated by the Secretary-General,
which, in addition to the importance of protecting
human rights, would also recognize the imperative
need to ensure security, which is essential to any viable
enterprise.
Bearing in mind the impact of mines on the tragic
situation of civilians in areas of conflict, it would be
judicious for the States parties to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects to maintain positive and appropriate followup to their decision to re-examine the issue of mines
of all types, and not only anti-personnel mines but
also munitions and other unexploded ordinance.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The fundamental reason, need I recall, is that all the
devices that I have just mentioned present an ongoing
threat to the lives of civilians, impede the adequate
distribution of humanitarian assistance and undermine
any reconstruction. The actions I have mentioned
should therefore be underpinned by inclusive national
dialogues that represent the various sensitivities of the
countries directly affected, with the unanimous and
multifaceted support of the international community,
particularly neighbouring countries.
Finally, I would like to underscore the vital need to
undertake those various actions to reduce the causes of
violence, in the conviction that the many efforts made
to try to stamp out a crisis at its climax may suffice to
put an end to lingering tension. Therefore, the time has
come to strengthen preventive diplomacy by refining
the concept of a conflict-prevention mission — a
concept that has shown itself, on many occasions, to be
of real interest to many Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the initiative taken by your country, the Republic
of Korea, to organize this debate on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, whose
importance is clear to all. I would like to welcome
Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of the Republic of Korea, who has come to New
York to preside over this important meeting.
I would also like to welcome the concept note
prepared by the Mission of the Republic of Korea
(S/2013/75, annex), as well as the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2012/376). I take this opportunity
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
courageous statement at the beginning of this debate,
which more than ever before confronts the international
community with its responsibilities with regard to the
violence and unacceptable threats to human life and
dignity in areas of conflict around the world.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates that
civilians account for 90 per cent of the victims of armed
conflict, of whom women and children constitute
80 per cent. That regrettable reality is, unfortunately,
true of our subregion in West Africa as well, which has

13-23027

seen several armed conflicts since 1990, including in
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau, Côte d’Ivoire
and recently in Mali. Given those situations, in which
civilians have been massacred, the States members of
ECOWAS responded in 1991 by adopting the Declaration
of Political Principles in Abuja, which addresses the
basic human rights of the citizens of ECOWAS. That
was followed in 1999 by the adoption of the Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security
in the subregion, which institutionalized the ECOWAS
intervention framework by creating the ECOWAS
standby force. The Mechanism was complemented in
2001 by the supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance and in 2008 by the ECOWAS
Strategic Framework for Conflict Prevention.
The legal framework and mechanisms for specific
action set up by ECOWAS, which make up our
collective subregional security system, have endowed
us with the instruments necessary to prevent conflict
and the appropriate means to establish peace. Those
ECOWAS structures have evolved within the larger
context of close cooperation with the United Nations,
pursuant to the relevant provisions of its Charter, and
remain essential tools for strengthening the protection
of civilians in our subregion.
Experience compels us to admit that armed conflict
in our subregion is, undoubtedly, linked to a series of
causes: first, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; secondly, a lack of democracy; and thirdly,
poverty. Violence and other human rights violations of
which civilians are the victims are the consequences of
those factors, and that is why I would like to not only
express the full support of ECOWAS for the principles
and efforts made by the United Nations in general and
the Security Council in particular, but also to underscore
the need to effectively strengthen cooperation between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
In that regard, ECOWAS, of course, fully supports
the five main requirements identified in the report
of the Secretary-General to assure more effective
protection of civilians: first, respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law;
secondly, respect for the international rules on the
protection of civilians by non-State armed groups;
thirdly, the protection of civilians by United Nations

27

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

peacekeeping missions; fourthly, humanitarian access;
and, fifthly, the obligation to ensure accountability.
With respect to our subregion, we note that it was
on the basis of those five major principles that the
Security Council, in the context of the post-election
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire, adopted resolution 1975 (2011).
The Economic Community of West African States
rightly welcomes the exemplary action taken by the
United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire under that resolution,
which made it possible to spare an incalculable number
of human lives by bringing a swift end to the postelection crisis in Côte d’Ivoire.
With respect to the recommendation in paragraph
76 of the Secretary-General’s report, ECOWAS believes
that the terms used should be qualified somewhat,
taking into account the responsibilities of the States
Members of the United Nations within the framework
of cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Indeed, the
current crisis situation in Mali, of which the Security
Council is seized, is of great concern to ECOWAS,
as it raises the issue of the respect for the rules of
international law by non-State armed groups that have
clear links with terrorist organizations. The Economic
Community of West African States cannot deny the
pressing need for access to populations by humanitarian
actors, but it is also important that the physical integrity
and security of those actors be protected.
With respect to the obligation to ensure
accountability, ECOWAS supports that principle to
the extent that we believe it in many ways to be the
cornerstone of the fight against impunity. In that regard,
the protection of civilians in armed conflict would be
more effective if we strengthened cooperation between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court. Indeed, we agree that it is not possible to
improve respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law without strengthening
the means to ensure the accountability of those who are
responsible for such violations, including parties to a
conflict and people who have acted individually.
In conclusion, allow me to return to the causes
of armed conflict and to underscore that ECOWAS
remains convinced, with respect to our subregion,
that the fight against the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons must be the basis of any strategy to
sustainably protect civilians in situations of conflict.
It is that concern which led ECOWAS in 2006 to
transform the moratorium on small arms and light
weapons into a convention, which should be seen as a
28

legally binding instrument to regulate the transfer and
manufacture of small arms and light weapons in our
subregion. Moreover, ECOWAS expresses the wish that
the future arms trade treaty, whose final negotiating
session will resume in a few weeks, might incorporate
elements of the ECOWAS convention, which seeks to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Economic Community of West African States is
ready to contribute to such an objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this debate on a question that has to do with
the very raison d’être of the United Nations. Being a
civilian, whether a journalist, doctor, nurse, woman,
girl or child, can today be truly nightmarish in conflict
situations. The international community must therefore
deal with that issue.
We associate ourselves fully with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to make a statement in my national capacity
on three specific issues, namely, humanitarian access,
accountability and the future arms trade treaty.
First of all, as the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic reaches unprecedented levels of horror,
Belgium would like to recall the clear terms of resolution
1894 (2009), whereby the Security Council expressed
“its willingness to respond to situations of
armed conflict where civilians are being targeted
or humanitarian assistance to civilians is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at the
Security Council’s disposal in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations” (resolution 1894
(2009), para. 4).
Belgium calls on the Council to undertake its
responsibilities in order to find a solution to the Syrian
crisis and thus effectively support the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative, Mr. Brahimi. Furthermore,
we regret the fact that the Council was unable, at the
beginning of February, to issue a press statement
in support of the pressing calls by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for greater
access by the United Nations to all of Syria.
Over the past few months, Belgium has been
shocked, as has been the rest of the international

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

community, by the unimaginable violations of
international humanitarian law in Syria and has taken
action to encourage all parties to the conflict to respect
and fully protect access to medical care and medical
centres. With other partners who share that concern,
Belgium is currently working in Geneva to draw up
a joint statement for the Syrian Humanitarian Forum,
which will meet on 19 February. The statement, which
we hope will be supported by as many States as possible,
will recall, on the one hand, that the principles of
international humanitarian law must be respected by all
parties, with particular focus on access to medical care
for all persons in need, and, on the other hand, that all
of us, as States, must ensure respect for those principles
by using our influence with the parties involved.
My second point has to do with a major component
of the protection of civilians, namely, the principle of
accountability for perpetrators of grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. Here
again, I must, unfortunately, mention the Syrian Arab
Republic. We are counting on the Security Council to
ensure that, one day, justice is done in Syria. That is
why Belgium is among those calling for the situation to
be referred to the International Criminal Court. In Syria
as elsewhere, the Security Council is also called upon
to encourage and assist the authorities in establishing
national mechanisms for justice.
Moreover, Belgium calls on all parties involved in
other conflicts — I am thinking in particular of Mali and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — to respect the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law and human rights. It is our view that national
prosecutions of those who have violated international
law require effective and more sustained international
legal cooperation. That is why our country, together with
the Netherlands and Slovenia, is pursuing an initiative to
conclude a multilateral instrument strengthening legal
international cooperation to prosecute such crimes.
I would also like to emphasize the importance
of recording civilian casualties, which is an essential
aspect of accountability. Belgium shares the view that
that tool should be further developed and implemented
on the ground. On the basis of my personal experience,
I would like to add that the Peacebuilding Commission
can also make a useful contribution to efforts to promote
accountability, and should be further encouraged in
that respect.
Finally, with respect to the protection of civilians,
I would also like to mention the arms trade treaty, in
13-23027

as much as the relevant final negotiations will take
place next month. The overwhelming majority Member
States have expressed their determination to conclude
such a treaty. The campaign is not about making the
arms trade illegal. The right to legitimate individual
and collective self-defence is a fundamental principle,
and it requires that States have the means to implement
it. However, we also have a responsibility to ensure that
the arms trade is carried out with the greatest possible
degree of transparency and will not serve to oppress
populations, unleash wars of aggression or perpetuate
violence directed against defenceless populations.
With respect to the elements covered by such a treaty,
Belgium attaches particular importance to the question
of child soldiers, as their recruitment is, in fact, a war
crime.
To conclude my statement in this debate on the
protection of civilians, I would like to pay special
tribute to Dr. Denis Mukwege, director of the Panzi
hospital in Goma. His work to assist victims of sexual
violence in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo makes him a great protector of civilians.
Dr. Mukwege is a tireless advocate for the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
calls on political leaders to ensure better protection for
women and children in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
convened this open debate, presided over by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, and for
promoting the adoption of the presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2013/2). I also
take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of
the Secretary-General this morning and his statement,
as well as the participation of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
The protection of civilians is a matter that affects
all of us, and no one can be indifferent to it, since it is
part of the very essence of the notion of humanity and
international humanitarian law, which is universally
accepted. Between the primary responsibility of the

29

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

State to exercise such protection and the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, there
is an endless array of standards, mechanisms and
actors who, on an daily basis, both individually and
collectively, are making good faith efforts to prevent
or minimize the harm done to civilians as a result of
conflict.
It is regrettable that, despite the important advances
seen in recent years — for example in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, to which we, as a troop-contributing
country, can bear witness — the civilian population
remains the main victim of armed conflict and counts
the majority of victims. Sadly, the situation in Syria
reminds of that every day.
Prevention is the best remedy for this scourge.
Preventing massive human rights violations is
an extremely complicated and, in many cases, an
impossible mission. However, the question that comes
to mind is whether we could do more in that respect.
The timely identification of signals from the ground
and sending appropriate early reminders to participants
of their obligation to respect peoples’ physical and
moral integrity are crucial.
Peaceful solutions, inclusive political dialogue,
strengthening State institutions and thereby the rule
of law, and promoting sustainable socioeconomic
development and reconciliation are inseparable
elements of prevention and fundamental in establishing
a strong protective environment. However, it is clear
that too often prevention is lacking or falls short. In such
cases, facilitating access for humanitarian personnel
must be prioritized along with respect for international
humanitarian law on the part of all participants and in
all situations in order to ensure appropriate security
conditions as they carry out their tasks.
Another basic element in preventing the most
serious human rights violations is accountability. In
that respect, competent bodies must consistently use
the tools established by the international community,
including the International Criminal Court and factfinding mechanisms. The registration of victims is
among the areas of growing interest and possible
benefit in terms of the protection of civilians. My
country appreciates the importance of such activity
in line with the principles of humanitarian law. In
view of its relation to some of the most basic values of
human dignity and its potential practical effects, such
a registry could clarify the causes of harm inflicted on
30

civilians and the measures necessary to end such harm
and to prevent its recurrence.
Lastly, and bearing in mind the Council’s
agenda in the coming weeks, Uruguay reiterates the
importance — in the upcoming and final United Nations
conference on the arms trade treaty — of bearing in
mind the human cost of the lack of regulation in the
arms trade and the broad availability and wrongful
use of such weapons. The humanitarian dimension
must be rightly prioritized in the treaty, for example
through criteria banning arms transfers in the case of a
clear risk of the use of such weapons to commit serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights norms.
The protection of civilians is not a political concept,
yet it is regrettably becoming increasingly politicized.
It is therefore crucial that, on the one hand, we receive
in the most transparent and precise manner possible
information from conflict zones through competent
humanitarian and human rights authorities. On the
other hand, we must step up our efforts to strengthen
consensus and trust in the concept of the protection of
civilians, based on respect for universally recognized
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law, and human rights and refugee law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his incisive briefing earlier in the day, and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their briefings.
The right to life is one of the fundamental rights
enshrined in the constitutions of a vast number of United
Nations Member States, including my own. It is, in
fact, the foundation of any social order. Unfortunately,
situations of armed conflict continue to wreak havoc
and put the lives of innocent civilians at risk.
At the same time, the instances where civilians
are at greatest risk today do not involve States, but
non-State actors and belligerents who are not necessarily
combatants under international humanitarian law. That
makes the task of the international community, and the

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Council in particular, so much more difficult as it needs
to act within established principles of international law.
Civilians have always suffered the most in
conflicts. Notwithstanding the development of
international humanitarian law and Security Council
mandates, civilians continue to suffer even today.
Even more unfortunate is the fact that civilians, or
non-belligerents, suffer a disproportionate share of the
casualties, as compared to belligerents. It is they who
bear the brunt of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Protecting civilians encompasses tasks that are
both preventive and remedial. The conduct of warring
factions towards civilians, challenges of impunity,
weak or absent State authority, the political will of
the international community and a lack of the means
necessary to reverse the spiral of violence together
make the task that much more difficult.
India, a partner of United Nations peacekeeping
from its very inception, has contributed through ideas
and resources to global efforts towards protecting
civilians. Our soldiers have been at the forefront in
translating Security Council mandates into action
in challenging circumstances. Our troops and police
personnel have always upheld these mandates and
protected civilians. Our peacekeeping experience
brings to the table a quantum of experience in actually
protecting civilians in peacekeeping missions that is
unique in its relevance, variety and depth.
United Nations peacekeepers have been playing
a key role in protecting civilians from the scourge
of war, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost a national
responsibility and requires institutions and conditions
in which the institutions can function. Peacekeepers,
in spite of their best efforts, cannot possibly protect
everyone from everything. To do that, it is necessary
to strengthen the capacities of States and their national
institutions to enable them to fulfil their responsibility
to protect their populations.
Since 1999, the Security Council has provided for the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions. However, merely adding words and sentences
to the mandates will not enable peacekeepers to fulfil
protection mandates. Protecting populations is a
resource-intensive enterprise. It requires sufficient
personnel, proper equipment and suitable capacities.
The political will of the international community and

13-23027

its ability to provide adequate resources are critical to
the success of missions in fulfilling their protection
mandates.
Civilians are protected best in an ecosystem of
peace where all its elements work and contribute in
tandem. The Security Council’s efforts should therefore
address the multiple dimensions of conflicts in a
comprehensive and proportionate manner.
In the protection of civilians, we need to respect
the fundamentals of the Charter of the United Nations
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member
States. We must also be clear that the United Nations
has a mandate to intervene only in situations where
there is a threat to international peace and security.
We also firmly believe in the accountability of
those who elaborate mandates; their responsibility does
not end with the generation of mandates. They should
be held accountable if unachievable mandates have
been generated for political expediency or if adequate
resources are not made available. It is equally important
that the principles of protecting civilians be applied in a
uniform manner by all parties to the conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Council’s responsibility to protect civilians does not
end with a military or police response. Civilians require
the humanitarian wherewithal for survival. In that
process, multiple stakeholders should be involved, not
just the military. In dealing with a conflict situation,
the engagement of all warring factions in a nationallyowned and inclusive political process is of paramount
importance. Such an inclusive approach to national
reconciliation, anchored in State sovereignty, is the
only way to move forward to ensure the protection
of civilians in an effective, pragmatic and enduring
manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Republic of Korea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. Also allow me to
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their valuable briefings.
Indonesia would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with that to be

31

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

delivered by the representative of Norway on behalf of
countries supporting the initiative entitled “Reclaiming
the protection of civilians under international
humanitarian law”, resulting from the seminar held in
November 2011 in Buenos Aires, which was sponsored
by the Governments of Argentina and Norway.
Today’s debate once more underlines the critical
role of the Security Council in setting out effective
norms on civilian protection through its resolutions,
statements and mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as strengthening the
support and equipment required for those operations.
I am hopeful that today’s deliberations will
contribute to clearer guidance for and improvement of
practical measures on the protection of civilians.
Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
1265 (1999), there has been considerable progress on
the subject of the protection of civilians. However,
that progress has not consistently been translated
into more effective, better coordinated and properly
supported protection efforts on the ground. The core
challenges, as identified in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/376), have yet to be fully addressed at
the global, regional and national levels. The figures
given in the report illustrate the urgency of doing better.
On the three issues highlighted in the Council
President’s concept note (S/2013/75, annex) — namely,
bolstering accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law; enhancing the
implementation of protection mandates by peacekeeping
and other relevant missions; and ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law
to protect civilians in armed conflict — I would like to
offer some of my delegation’s observations.
First, on the very important challenge of
ensuring accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, we note that
the Secretary-General’s report urges the Council to
encourage and assist States in ensuring accountability
with regard to violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law at the national level.
Achieving that goal will be a daunting task. Apart
from the insufficient capacity to ensure accountability
usually present in conflict-affected countries, tension
usually exists between the justice and political
authorities. Leaders are often pressured politically into
maintaining so-called stability rather than pursuing

32

accountability, which can easily deepen confrontations.
The traditional method of conflict settlement through a
trade-off between justice and politics has been seen as
an attractive political option.
The best kind of assistance and encouragement that
the Council can provide may be tangible support and
capacity-building to improve the preventive functions
of justice and strengthen the rule of law and education,
which mitigate the culture of violence in the first place.
Nevertheless,
accountability
must
be
an
indispensable component of peace and lasting
reconciliation. International and national prosecutions
are not the only methods for ensuring accountability,
however. Our continued dialogue in this and other
United Nations forums can explore all possible options
on viable accountability measures, ranging from the
mechanisms of prosecution to truth and reconciliation
commissions and victim rehabilitation.
Secondly, the mandates on the protection of civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence assigned
within the United Nations peacekeeping operations
framework are vital. Indonesia supports the call of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in its
2012 report (A/66/19) that the protection of civilian
mandates should be implemented without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of host Governments to
protect civilians.
We reiterate the responsibility of the Security
Council and the United Nations peacekeeping secretariat
to furnish the needed equipment, training and resources
to peacekeepers, along with clear guidelines. We also
stress the imperative of close cooperation with national
authorities in the implementation of all mandated
peacekeeping tasks.
There need to be greater efforts in the promotion
of knowledge of, respect for and observance by all
countries and relevant actors of their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations, international human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law. Indonesia fully supports those efforts and continues
to actively participate in the global efforts of protecting
civilians in armed conflict through United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, Indonesia concurs that there must be
compliance on the part of the parties to a conflict with
their obligations under international law, particularly in
their conduct of hostilities.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

It is a tragic fact that, owing to the lack, if not
the absence, of effective preventive measures and the
exercise of the rule of law, women and children remain
the most vulnerable persons in conflict situations. In the
Council eight months ago, the Secretary-General made
a strong appeal to all of us to do more to protect women
and children. To expect conflict parties to voluntarily
comply with international norms without cross-sector
interventions and monitoring is unrealistic. We hope
that our continued exchanges on that particular issue
will yield concrete proposals and frameworks to better
protect women and children in times of crisis.
Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
Indonesia’s high appreciation and admiration to all
humanitarian actors, operating within and outside the
United Nations system, for their steadfast devotion
and work to ensuring that conflict-affected people
are protected and that their basic needs of living with
dignity are provided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
We would first of all like to congratulate the
Republic of Korea on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and to express our appreciation
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
the Republic of Korea for presiding over the open
debate this morning. We would also like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their participation and important statements.
The character of armed conflict is changing. Today,
the majority of conflicts are in fact civil wars. They
are often fought not on a clearly defined battle-ground
but in populated areas, using guerrilla tactics. Too
often in such situations the principles of international
humanitarian law, such as distinction, proportionality
and precautions in attack, are not respected and
civilians suffer. We call for full respect of international
humanitarian law and human rights law by all parties to
armed conflict. The obligations to protect the civilian
population during armed conflicts and the need to take
particular measures to protect especially vulnerable
groups, such as women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities, must be respected.

13-23027

The parties to an armed conflict must allow and
facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial
humanitarian assistance. In particular, we recall the
obligation to respect the wounded and the sick, as
well as healthcare personnel and facilities and medical
vehicles, and to take all reasonable measures to ensure
safe, prompt and unhindered access to health care for
the wounded and sick. Syria is of course a case in point.
The risks faced by civilians will differ depending
on whether they are boys or girls, men or women.
The implications of sexual assault during warfare
are horrendous, both for the victims and for entire
communities, and must simply stop. The implementation
of international humanitarian law with a gender
perspective will enhance the protection of civilians.
Women and girls who become pregnant after being
raped as part of warfare in an armed conflict must have
access to adequate sexual and reproductive healthcare services. Above all, we need to eliminate the
widespread impunity of perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict. The Nordic countries strongly support
the work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura.
We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
with regard to the use of explosive weapons with
wide area effects in densely populated areas. We
recognize the need to gather data on the use and impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas, including
recording civilian casualties. We request the SecretaryGeneral to include in his next report to the Council
recommendations and analysis on the impact of the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas, as well as
the practice of United Nations bodies, States and other
actors on civilian casualty recording.
Negotiations on the arms trade treaty will resume
in March. We expect the adoption of a strong and robust
treaty that incorporates very strong provisions on
human rights and international humanitarian law. Such
a treaty is likely to reduce illicit trafficking and human
suffering in conflicts.
We should insist that those that commit war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable. Impunity
must not be an option. We recall that the State has
the primary responsibility to ensure accountability in
every situation. If the State is unwilling or unable to
investigate and prosecute such international crimes,
the international community should offer its support.

33

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
international tribunals play a crucial role. The Security
Council must do its part to ensure accountability when
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law have occurred.
The Nordic countries are horrified by the continuous
atrocities in Syria and urge the Council to take decisive
steps to ensure accountability for those responsible. We
welcome the decision by the Prosecutor of the ICC to
open an investigation into the war crimes in Mali and
encourage the Malian authorities to cooperate with the
Court.
Accountability requires facts and investigations.
We welcome the international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions carried out under the
auspices of the Human Rights Council, as well as those
initiated by the Secretary-General. They are important
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. We would also like
to draw attention to the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission. That mechanism under the
Geneva Conventions has unique and extremely useful
features as it is composed of experts in international
humanitarian law, medical treatment and criminal
investigation and is an option open to the parties to the
conflict.
In the end, however, only preventive measures
and full respect for international law will ensure that
civilians are protected in armed conflict. Where a
State is not willing or able to protect its population,
the responsibility to protect must still be regarded as
a principle for the international community to uphold.
In that regard, preventive actions by the international
community will increase the protection of civilians.
Capacity-building in host countries is an important
preventive tool.
The comprehensive rule of law strategies of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions should
include assistance in the areas of access to legal
institutions and legislative reform, alongside support to
policing and the justice chain. To make that effective,
the peacekeeping operation in question must also
receive the relevant resources and training.
We look forward to the next report of the SecretaryGeneral on this topic. We believe that it would be very
useful for the Secretary-General to report regularly
on the state of play and the implementation of the

34

recommendations made in relation to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his presentation. The established practice of receiving
information from the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the Council also greatly pleases us. We also
appreciate and believe the information provided by the
International Committee of the Red Cross to be of great
importance. In addition, we thank the Mission of the
Republic of Korea, as President of the Security Council
for this month, for having convened this open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
circulated by the representative of Jordan as President of
the Human Security Network. In our national capacity,
we would like to underscore the following additional
elements.
We acknowledge the multidimensional nature of
conflict and the increasing need to respond with more
complex mandates for peacekeeping missions that
include clear protection aspects. As the concept note
before us (S/2013/75, annex) points out, some of the most
significant elements are establishing early warning
mechanisms, supporting the efforts of host country
national authorities to implement their responsibilities
in protecting civilians, and assisting the host country in
the effective functioning of its rule of law and security
institutions.
The international community must put further
emphasis on the necessary national capacity-building
in order to ensure accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, in
particular the most serious breaches. It must also work
not only on security sector reform but also on reforming
the judicial sector and on establishing specific capacity
for the prosecution and trial of the most serious crimes
against humanity.
As we have indicated on previous occasions,
justice is necessary for peace to be sustainable. To
fully exercise its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council has the duty to
promote the full exercise of the rule of law and justice,
at both the national and international levels.
Concerning the international response, the Security
Council should play a more proactive role, establishing

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

or strengthening international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions and following up on their
findings. These all are tools that the Council can use
with greater regularity and frequency.

kinds of actors often have the advantage of being
involved from a very early stage. That is particularly
true of civil society organizations, which can work
more closely with their counterparts on the ground.

Greater consistency is also needed in referring cases
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and in terms
of follow-up and support, including financial support
and the establishment of cooperation obligations with
the Court. The relationship between the Court and
the Security Council should be governed by unbiased
principles of general application. That is why we
support the idea of establishing a verification protocol
or checklist for the consideration of referrals. We once
again urge the Council to establish a subsidiary body in
order to provide follow-up on such cases.

The experience of those organizations in developing
methods for the protection of civilians without resorting
to the use of armed force is also very valuable in order to
prevent the risk of the “bunkerization” of humanitarian
operations. As indicated by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 20 of the annex to his report, we must enhance
our capacity to build acceptance among communities
and the parties to conflict in the context of sustained
processes and to explore that type of approach more
broadly.

My Government remains concerned at the serious
situation in Syria and by the lack of accountability with
regard to breaches of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We reiterate our
request that the Council refer the Syrian situation to the
ICC, and we hope that the Council will respond to the
call made by a significant number of countries in this
area. The number of civilians affected by the conflict
and by the actions of both parties has now reached
shocking numbers, as highlighted this morning by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
As it has been necessary to broaden traditional
military objectives for peacekeeping missions and
provide for a greater civilian presence in that context, we
also believe that it is key, as indicated in the President’s
concept note, to broaden the range of actors involved
in the task of protecting civilians and strengthening
the ties and cooperation of the United Nations in that
area with Governments and regional and civil society
organizations.
As indicated in paragraph 52 of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376), peacekeeping missions
are not the only protection actor on the ground. Other
United Nations entities and humanitarian organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross
and a number of non-governmental organizations, have
for some time played a recognized role that is of vital
importance.
In some places where civilians face serious threats,
it is not actually viable to establish a peacekeeping
mission. In such circumstances, the protection of
civilians might be very much enhanced by the presence
of disarmed civilians working towards that end. Those

13-23027

My delegation cannot but mention in this context,
as did the Secretary-General in his statement, the
invaluable opportunity presented by the upcoming
United Nations Final Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty, to be held next March. That Conference will
represent a significant opportunity in the context of
the protection of civilians. As noted in paragraph 25
of the report, the poorly regulated arms trade and the
widespread availability and misuse of weapons have
a human cost. We must demonstrate our commitment
to the protection of civilians by reaching a robust
agreement at the Conference.
Finally, Costa Rica welcomes the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/2) adopted earlier. We would
like specifically to highlight the elements thereof that
we deem important: the reference to armed forces and
groups that persist in committing violations and abuses
against children; the call concerning the importance
of cooperation between States and the International
Criminal Court; the commitment to ensuring effective
follow-up of the Council’s decisions in that respect;
the reaffirmation of the Council’s readiness to adopt
appropriate measures aimed at those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights
law; and the reaffirmation of the provisions on the
responsibility to protect contained in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1).
The President: As we all are aware, it is now
6.38 p.m, and 20 more speakers remain. I wish once
again to request all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously at this late
hour of the evening.

35

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Mørch Smith (Norway): Norway aligns
itself with the statements previously made by Sweden,
on behalf of the Nordic countries, and Switzerland, on
behalf of the Group of Friends.
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and my own country,
Norway.
The tremendous human suffering inflicted
on civilians in armed conflicts across the globe is
unacceptable. Much more can, and must, be done to
protect the civilian population. It is broadly agreed
that the provisions of international humanitarian law
afford civilians significant protection from the effects
of military operations, provided that they are faithfully
implemented. That said, the complexities of today’s
armed conflicts raise a number of new challenges.
For that reason, we believe that it is necessary
to engage all relevant actors, including the military,
humanitarian organizations and civil society, in a
discussion on how the implementation of international
humanitarian law can and should be strengthened in
practice.
That is why our countries have taken an initiative
called “Reclaiming the protection of civilians under
international humanitarian law”. The aim is not to
negotiate new legislation, but to agree on practical
measures that will effectively improve the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts. We believe that full
compliance with international humanitarian law is
essential and possible.
In order to identify practical measures and
recommendations so as to effectively address the
humanitarian challenges at hand, we believe that it is
necessary to build our discussions on experience from
the field in the different regions. To that end, seminars
have been held in Jakarta, Buenos Aires and Kampala.
Vienna will be the venue for the fourth regional
seminar on 21 and 22 February. An essential aspect of
the seminars has been contributions from individuals
and organizations with first-hand experience in dealing
with the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Participants from the military, as well as the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and other humanitarian organizations working
in the field, have provided highly useful input.

36

The discussions in the regional seminars
conducted so far have identified a number of possible
recommendations. First, in order to fully implement
international humanitarian law, including its rules of
distinction and proportionality, it is important that we
focus, in practical terms, on how military operations
can be conducted with less risk for the civilian
populations concerned. Furthermore, it is essential that
practical and scenario-based training in international
humanitarian law be promoted at all levels within the
military.
Secondly, we need increased engagement and
dialogue with non-State armed groups in order to
increase respect for international humanitarian
law among such actors. International humanitarian
law is binding on every party to an armed conflict,
whether it be a State actor or a non-State armed group.
Ensuring respect for international humanitarian law on
everyone’s part remains a key measure for improving
the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, in complex conflict situations, States
should strive to apply all the applicable law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
in a manner that affords civilians the best possible
protection.
Fourthly, it is essential to ensure that the conduct
of military operations is properly documented and to
strive for increased transparency, both during and after
an armed conflict. This is necessary in order to prevent
further violations, protect civilians and promote
accountability in post-conflict situations.
Our initiative will culminate in a global conference
in Oslo on 23 and 24 May. All States, as well as the
United Nations, the ICRC and civil society, will be
invited. Our aim is to agree on strong and concrete
recommendations on how international humanitarian
law should be understood and implemented so as to
address the pressing humanitarian concerns at hand.
We hope the Council will join us in this urgent task,
which requires our continued and concerted efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to take this
opportunity to convey my congratulations to the
Republic of Korea on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Malaysia is concerned over the increasing number
of civilian casualties injured, maimed and displaced
due to armed conflict, and in that regard we join other
nations in underscoring the importance of protecting
civilians from such dangers. Today, even with 15 United
Nations peacekeeping operations being conducted
around the world, and with a continuing emphasis
placed on protecting civilians in conflict areas, the
number of casualties among them remains high.
Malaysia agrees that the Security Council’s
provision of civilian protection mandates to
peacekeeping operations is vital to curbing violence
against civilians. On that note, my delegation is of
the view that mission leaders should ensure that their
operations, in particular those with a civilian-protection
mandate, are conducted without undermining that
responsibility. We would also urge a greater emphasis
and focus in the implementation of those mandates on
reporting on and monitoring the protection of civilians
against established benchmarks and key performance
indicators, which could be relayed to this Council on a
regular basis.
While the implementation of such protection
measures is carried out via the various peacekeeping
operations, efforts must continue to educate all
stakeholders on the importance of protecting civilians,
especially women and children, in armed conflict.
My delegation particularly deplores the deliberate use
of sexual violence against women and violations and
abuse of children.
More must also be done to enhance compliance
with international law on the part of all parties involved
in armed conflicts. My delegation also shares the view
that those who violate international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, or
who deliberately target civilian population centres
and humanitarian personnel, must be held responsible
and accountable. An absence of accountability allows
violations to thrive with impunity. Malaysia also
believes that secure and unhindered access for United
Nations humanitarian personnel is imperative for the
provision of humanitarian assistance. My delegation
is of the view that the Council should also explore the
possibility of strengthening provisions to ensure the

13-23027

safety of humanitarian personnel within the framework
of the protection of civilians.
The world cannot turn a blind eye to the issue of
protecting civilians in conflict-affected areas. For
example, we continue to witness some of the worst
attacks on innocent civilians being made today carried
out by the occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Israel is proven to have violated article 4 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, an international law that also
encompasses international humanitarian and human
rights law. Recently, during the universally condemned
Operation Pillar of Defense, hundreds of Palestinians,
including women and children, were murdered in the
Gaza Strip, while thousands more were displaced by
this inhumane, illegal and criminal military operation.
That was just one of the many occasions when Israel
has unleashed disproportionate military power against
the helpless Palestinian population in the occupied
territory. It has been reported that, as a rule, 84 per
cent of casualties resulting from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas are civilians. As we deplore
the killing of civilians, the Council should ask if we
have done enough to protect them. The world will judge
us on both counts — that is, what we have done and
what we have not done to protect innocent civilians.
Malaysia continues to be concerned about the loss
of civilian lives in the conflict in Syria. The staggering
number of civilian lives lost is appalling, and we
condemn the indiscriminate attacks by the parties
concerned on population centres in the knowledge that
they would result in civilian casualties. My delegation
holds that there is still a chance of protecting other
Syrian civilians from the scourge of war. I urge the
parties involved to adhere to the spirit of the Action
Group for Syria’s Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex). The communiqué remains
an important document for all sides to implement.
My delegation underscores that finding a Syrian-led
political solution must be the primary goal of all parties
involved.
Malaysia has been contributing to United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1960. Currently, the
men and women of the Malaysian armed forces and
the Royal Malaysian Police are deployed in seven such
operations worldwide. In every operation, Malaysian
observers and peacekeepers have always given priority
to the protection of civilians, and that important
pillar of peacekeeping is a very visible part of our
peacekeepers’ training. On that note, I wish to assure

37

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

the Council that Malaysian personnel in current and
future peacekeeping missions will continue to uphold
those missions’ sacred duty. Winning the hearts and
minds of the local population by protecting them during
armed conflict will go a long way to ensuring that the
United Nations will continue to be well received.
In conclusion, Malaysia will continue to insist
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is as
important as making and keeping peace. We underscore
the significance and importance of Security Council
resolutions 1738 (2006), 1910 (2010) and 1894 (2009)
for ensuring that civilians are protected during armed
conflict. We look forward to contributing further to
developing concepts for the protection of civilians,
initiatives and mandates in peacekeeping operations
and to supporting countries in transition, in order to
ensure sustainable and long-lasting peace in the many
theatres of conflict worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by joining
other delegations in congratulating the Republic of
Korea on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, for scheduling this important open
debate. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General, as well as to the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings this
morning.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The concept of the protection of civilians is founded
on the universally accepted rules of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, set out in
a range of international legal instruments, in particular
the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional
Protocols, which contain specific rules for the
protection of civilians. In situations that are not covered
by these treaties, in particular internal disturbances,
civilians are protected by the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law, by most religious values and ethics,
and by human rights law. Ironically, a large number of
civilians nevertheless continue to be exposed to the
atrocities of conflict.

38

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
many situations, women and children in particular
continue to be subject to various forms of violence. We
are deeply concerned by the availability and use of arms
and explosive weapons in populated areas as a violation
of international law, by increasing threats against the
security of health care facilities and the delivery of
health care services, and by the failure to comply with
international humanitarian law. Efforts should be made
to reduce the illegal arms trade, which causes casualties.
We stress the need to combat impunity, safeguard
access for humanitarian assistance, and protect the
safety of humanitarian aid workers. For example,
the total disregard and rejection of humanitarian and
international laws and values, especially as practiced
by occupation forces in the occupied territories of
Palestine for years, are a disgrace to humanity and to
the people of Israel.
It is encouraging that the Council’s informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians has continued
to meet regularly. In the period since the 2012 open
debate (see S/PV.6790), it has considered the mandates
of seven United Nations missions: the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.
Bangladesh reaffirms its commitment to the
protection of civilians. In order to ensure the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, my delegation would like
to highlight few issues.
First, protection relates to prevention and the
building of a mindset focused on the culture of peace.
The culture of peace is designed to inculcate a mindset
of tolerance, diversity, friendship, love and respect for
others, as all violence emanates from a mindset of hatred
and intolerance. The preventive capacity of the United
Nations must be enhanced and the Member States need
to take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.
Second, as one of the largest troop-contributing
countries, Bangladesh believes that there needs to
be a closer dialogue between the Council and troop-

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

contributing countries, which can provide valuable
information about the situation on the ground. The
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State’s ability to protect its citizens.
I take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the allfemale Bangladeshi formed police units working in
peacekeeping missions in Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Third, protection mandates and compliance by
United Nations peacekeepers should be strengthened.
Fourth, international efforts, including the use of
force, should be the last resort, while respecting the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
If peaceful means and mediation are exhausted, force
could be used with the proper authorization by the
Security Council or, in exceptional circumstances, by
the General Assembly, in line with resolution 377 (V).
Fifth, considering that all civilians affected by
armed conflict deserve help, enhanced humanitarian
access on the part of the States and parties concerned,
in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, should be ensured.
Sixth, accountability for violations of the law
should be ensured.
Seventh, it may be recalled that, in assigning such
mandates, adequate provision should be made for the
security and safety of the peacekeepers.
In conclusion, my delegation urges all parties
to conflict to comply with the letter and spirit of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law so as to ensure protection of the lives and property
of civilians and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid.
We call on the parties to conflicts to strengthen the
protection of civilians through heightened awareness at
all levels, particularly through training for and orders
and instructions issued to armed forces.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming the convening of this open debate
on the important topic of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We thank your presidency, Sir, for
circulating a concept paper on the topic (S/2013/75,
annex) and highlighting the pressing need to strengthen
the regime of civilian protection.

13-23027

Conflicts, and especially armed conflicts, are an
increasing global phenomenon. The situations in Syria,
Mali and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo are
chilling reminders of the plight of civilians in armed
conflicts. These conflicts kill, maim and displace
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
who often become the deliberate targets of such
hostilities. It is important therefore that we continue to
devote sufficient attention to this issue in our search
of better ways of reducing such harm. In this regard,
we welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts (S/2012/376)
and its recommendations.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
our collective responsibility. It is an undertaking
that must be informed and guided by our respect for
and observance of the well-established standards of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Extrajudicial executions of civilians; attacks on health
facilities, school and infrastructure commonly used by
civilians; and sexual and gender-based violence such
as rape, torture and forced disappearances must not
be tolerated. Where appropriate, the Security Council
should not hesitate to take the required actions, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
authorize robust mandates for peacekeeping missions
and to ensure timely intervention to bring such
violations to a halt.
It is said that peacekeepers cannot protext everyone
from everything. That would be an unrealistic
expectation if it were so. But when no one can protect
anyone, peacekeepers who are deployed in a region
must have the robust mandate to act. It is for that reason
that the tragedy in Rwanda still haunts all of us today,
because we all failed.
While proceeding with efforts to protect civilians
in on-going armed conflicts, we must also continue to
invest in the following.
First, we should continue to promote democratic
good-governance and the rule of law at all levels. Most
conflicts arise because citizens are denied their basic
rights and freedoms, including the right to participate
in decision-making processes and the freedoms of
expression and assembly, as well as because of a lack of
transparency and accountability in managing national
resources.
Secondly, we should invest in pacific settlement
of disputes, and not merely talk about it. The General

39

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Assembly has, in two consecutive sessions, devoted
attention to this theme. The Council should support
these efforts by holding joint consultations with the
Assembly to discuss the challenges and chart the
way forward. When parties to a dispute resolve their
differences peacefully, as was the case recently between
the Sudan and South Sudan, many civilians are spared
from harm.
Thirdly, we should revive the disarmament and
arms control agenda. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict should go hand in hand with the debate
towards the total elimination of weapons of mass
destruction. While a total ban on these weapons awaits,
we should ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. In addition, next
month we should muster the necessary courage to adopt
a robust arms trade treaty to regulate the transfer of
arms.
Finally, we should hold the perpetrators of heinous
crimes to account in a non-selective way. The world
and particularly the victims of those crimes deserve to
see that justice is done. The Council has a special role
to play in that endeavour by referring those culprits to
the International Criminal Court. I should like to say
a final word in that regard. The effectiveness of the
International Criminal Court in fighting impunity
will be enhanced when the Court achieves universal
membership. We reiterate our call on members of the
Council that have not done so to join the Rome Statute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Considerable progress has been achieved in
protecting civilians in recent years. However, to the
countless civilian victims of ongoing conflicts that fact
is of little, if any, comfort. There remains a significant
gap between the relevant international legal framework
and its implementation. It is therefore imperative that
the Security Council continue to address the issue on
the basis of a regular reporting cycle, with due analysis
of the problems encountered and lessons learned, doing
its utmost to garner political will for closing that gap.
The Council should systematically request
information on the protection of civilians from all

40

relevant United Nations entities and develop a more
robust collaboration on the matter with the United
Nations human rights machinery. Creating mechanisms
to track civilian casualties could be considered.
Accountability is fundamental to improving the
protection of civilians. Consistency and determination
in tackling impunity are a way of sending a strong
signal of deterrence to would-be perpetrators. When
respective Governments are unable or unwilling to
hold the perpetrators to account, the Council has
a responsibility to act, using the various tools at
its disposal, including fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry, targeted sanctions, referral to
the International Criminal Court and others.
Lithuania was one of the 57 States to sign a letter
in January, calling upon the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). My country continues to support the
role of the ICC as an effective instrument for pursuing
international criminal justice, and encourages the
Security Council to develop consistent and coherent
practices when it considers referrals to the ICC.
Journalists play a crucial role by informing the world
of the plight of civilian victims in conflict zones, and
often end up themselves the objects of armed attacks,
abductions and even killings. Lithuania supports the
call of the Secretary-General on the Council to address
attacks against journalists on a more regular basis and
to develop a more proactive approach to that issue.
My delegation is profoundly concerned by the
obstruction of humanitarian access and the deliberate
targeting of health-care facilities and medical personnel.
We call on the Security Council to systematically
condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on medical
facilities and vehicles and the killing of humanitarian
and medical workers.
Furthermore, my delegation is deeply troubled by the
continued exposure of women and children to extreme
hardship and violence, including the widespread use
of sexual violence and rape as a means of warfare.
Protecting children in conflicts is a moral imperative
and a legal responsibility. We stress the importance of
the Paris Commitments and the Paris Principles as a key
standard in combatting the unlawful recruitment or use
of children by armed forces or armed groups, as well
as in securing the release of children concerned and
ensuring them the necessary protection. Lithuania also
calls on all States to further enhance their efforts aimed

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

at implementing resolution 1325 (2000) with respect
to ending impunity and guaranteeing accountability
for serious crimes against women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations.
With regard to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we encourage the United Nations to further
develop the necessary doctrine, guidance and training
to ensure that peace operation mandates relating to the
protection of civilians can be implemented consistently,
coherently and effectively.
At the national level, Lithuania carries out
mandatory training in international humanitarian law
and rules governing armed conflicts, both in general
military education and in specific predeployment
training for troops leaving for international missions.
In Afghanistan, for example, such training enabled our
troops to take a proactive stance towards protecting
civilians by providing medical care, conducting
demining and supporting the rule of law.
The poorly regulated trade in arms and widespread
availability and misuse of weapons play into the
hands of the perpetrators of crimes against civilian
populations. Lithuania calls for the adoption of a
strong and legally binding arms trade treaty that would
enhance the protection of civilians in conflict and postconflict situations by strengthening controls on the
availability of arms. We also call for stronger action
in response to the growing use of explosive weapons
in high-density population areas, in defiance of the
international humanitarian law principles of distinction
and proportionality.
Finally, let me note that while seeking to reduce the
suffering and damage inflicted on civilians in armed
conflicts, we should also endeavour to develop more
proactive forward-looking approaches aimed at the
prevention of such crimes from taking place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): While aligning myself
with the statement made by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, Mr. Kim Sung-hwan,
for having taken the initiative of convening this debate.
I would like to focus my comments today on two
issues: first, the accountability of those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
and, secondly, the prevention of conflicts through the

13-23027

strengthening of human rights instruments and the rule
of law. Those two subjects are, of course, interrelated.
Accountability based on the rule of law provides a solid
basis for justice being done. The High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (see A/67/PV.3),
held in September 2012, emphasized the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. States
should respect and promote the rule of law and justice
and ensure equal access to justice for all, including
members of vulnerable groups. Raising awareness
about legal rights is an important element of that.
That also means that we have an obligation, in our
view, to engage with and give assistance to all parties
to armed conflicts in order to remind them of their
responsibility to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Too often,
the absence of accountability creates an atmosphere
in which people think they can get away with raping
women, torturing children, threatening doctors and
nurses, and using disproportionate force. We therefore
cannot let these atrocities go unpunished. The threat
that those crimes pose to peace, security and the wellbeing of citizens must be addressed by prosecuting
the perpetrators and those who order or condone those
crimes.
Preferably, the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes are executed on a national level,
but if a State is unable or unwilling to do so that duty
falls on the international community. On the basis of
the principle of complementarity, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) functions as a court of last resort.
We firmly support the ICC, and we call upon States to
ratify the Rome Statute and the Kampala amendments
and ensure their full implementation.
Meanwhile, the international community must
call upon the Government of the country where the
crimes were committed to strengthen the security
sector as a whole and assist that country in doing so in
order to establish the prerequisites for the protection
of its civilians in the future. To facilitate domestic
prosecution, the Netherlands, together with Belgium
and Slovenia, has started an initiative to strengthen
the international legal framework covering inter-State
cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes.

41

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

One way to document violations is through casualty
counting. The practice of United Nations bodies, States
and other actors of recording civilian casualties can
be further improved through joint monitoring and
data analysis. We also support the use of international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions as
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
Sadly, in Syria the counting of casualties
continues at a horrendous pace. I would like to take
this opportunity to call upon the Security Council to
overcome its disagreement on the situation in Syria and
take concrete action by referring the situation in Syria
to the ICC while respecting the integrity of the Rome
Statute in its referral.
Let me add that we are pleased that the Security
Council reaffirms the provisions of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
including its paragraphs 138 and 139 regarding the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
This is, as far as I am aware, the first reaffirmation
of the responsibility to protect since the intervention
in Libya and will, we hope, provide an opportunity to
have a positive impact on the further operationalization
of the concept and the application of the responsibility
to protect in real-life politics.
The Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands, Lilianne Ploumen,
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
week. She met with Dr. Denis Mukwege, a human rights
activist and doctor who has been repeatedly attacked
and threatened because he spoke out for women who
were raped and violated. Later on during her visit,
Minister Ploumen spoke to the Minister of Defence
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo about the
sexual violence committed by members of the armed
forces and urged him to hold suspected perpetrators
accountable. The protection of civilians is an important
normative element in international relations, but in
the end, it is in the implementation on the ground that
we make a difference. People like Dr. Mukwege and
his clients should be able to count on protection and
security to live a life free of violence and fear.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.

42

Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by congratulating the Republic of Korea
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month and in particular for its initiative to hold
an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The number of participants today — this
morning, this afternoon and, certainly, tonight — is a
very clear indication of the importance and interest that
the international community attaches to this topic and
above all to the need for the Security Council to take it
into account in its daily work.
I also welcome the participation of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
believe that her frequent participation in the Council’s
work contributes in no small part to enabling the
Council to comply with its protection responsibilities,
in particular for civilians, and to prevent violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Finally, we welcome the participation of the Director of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and his
contribution to this important debate.
Speaking on behalf of Mexico, I would like to
limit my comments, first, to recognizing the fact that
significant progress has been made in terms of the
normative framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The adoption of comprehensive
mandates and strategies in peacekeeping missions
and the use of selective sanctions against individuals
and entities responsible for violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are examples of
such efforts. Moreover, it is important to recognize
the commitment of troop- and police-contributing
countries to enhancing training for their own troops,
along with the Secretary-General’s initiatives to
coordinate deployment more appropriately and to
strengthen tools such as human rights guides, mission
strategies and operational guides, which have helped
improve the situation in several regions.
Nevertheless, our participation in today’s debate
is also aimed at highlighting the fact that we must
continue to deal with the challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report on the topic
(S/2012/376), and I would like to highlight the following
challenges.
We believe that we must strengthen compliance
with international humanitarian law by parties to a
conflict, whether State or non-State actors, in order
to protect the civilian population. It is also necessary
to guarantee that missions on the ground have the
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

necessary human, material and financial resources to
fulfil their mandates and that they address the issue of
exit strategies, as mission drawdowns frequently leave
civilians unprotected. Missions should also have strong
leadership and promote cooperation and coordination
with other actors on the ground, both those from within
the United Nations system and other international
actors.
Access to humanitarian assistance by the civilian
population should be timely and guaranteed by means
of humanitarian corridors, agreements on the cessation
of hostilities and exchanges of information. It is
important to continue to focus particular attention on
the impact of armed conflict on women and children,
recognizing them as the most vulnerable members of
society and thus those most affected by conflict. It
is vital to strengthen accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law in the context of armed
conflict. Mexico would therefore like to highlight the
relevance and usefulness of the International Criminal
Court being seized of such crimes when a State cannot
or is not prepared to do so.
Finally, I would like to stress the urgency of
concluding negotiations on an arms trade treaty at the
final conference, which is to be held within a few weeks’
time. As highlighted by a number of representatives
today, the adoption of an effective and robust arms
trade treaty that effectively prohibits the transfer of
arms when there is a risk of their being diverted to
the illicit market or being used or possibly being used
to commit violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law cannot, in our view, be postponed.
The Security Council, as I said at the beginning
of my statement, has an indispensable role to play in
promoting and implementing measures to optimize the
protection of civilians. A significant part of that work
has been done, and the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2013/2) is part of that effort. The
presidential statement underscores the importance of
condemning all violations of international law against
civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence,
which is used for political reasons and as a tactic of war.
I myself hope that, in the future, these efforts of
the Security Council will be better coordinated with
the rest of the membership, which could participate in
these debates and exchanges before the Council adopts
measures so that States not members of the Council feel
as if they are truly participating.

13-23027

In conclusion, given the wide array of tools available
to the Organization to ensure international peace and
security, we would also support the Council’s recognition
of the importance of strengthening coordination with
regional and subregional organizations and among
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Mexico would like to see the Council continue to use
all of the resources and instruments available to it in
order to achieve that goal. We believe that this work is
the key to ensuring the legitimacy and credibility of the
missions themselves and the United Nations system as
a whole, and to achieving real and lasting peace, which
is the final objective of deploying such missions on the
ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their active involvement
in addressing this important subject. This open debate
offers an opportunity to reflect on our experience in
dealing with the issue of the protection of civilians and
to highlight priority aspects for united and practical
actions. Armenia strongly condemns deliberate attacks
on and killing of civilians through the disproportionate
use of war, which is a gross violation of international
humanitarian law in any conflict in any part of the
world.
We remain alarmed by the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria. We condemn all attacks and terrorist
acts that indiscriminately target civilians, including
minority groups and are deeply concerned over the fate
of Armenians living there. Today they are struggling
for their lives, together with many Syrian citizens. We
continue to receive refugees from Syria who are gravely
worried about the escalation of violence in that country.
We are convinced that, in order to address that situation,
we must abandon the selective approach to violations
of international humanitarian law. There must also be
strict adherence to human rights standards.
The peaceful resolution of any conflict is not an
easy enterprise and requires strong political will and
painful compromise on both sides. We believe that the
time has come to replace the unchanged propaganda
rhetoric and hollow allegations with constructive steps

43

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

aimed at an environment more conducive to peaceful
settlement.
The statement made by the Azerbaijani Foreign
Minister this morning, replete with a long-established
distortion of facts, came as no surprise to us. References
were made to a 1992 military event where, according to
the then-Azerbaijani President Mutalibov, responsibility
for the slaughter of the civilians of the city of Khojalu,
near Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorno Karabakh, falls
fully on the Azeri opposition group. It is completely the
responsibility of Azerbaijan to thoroughly prosecute
the persons responsible for the killings of Azerbaijanis
in Khojalu, as well as for the atrocities and violence
against Armenians in Azerbaijani cities and towns.
Exactly 25 years ago, in response to the peaceful
and constitutional demand of the people of Nagorno
Karabakh to exercise their right to self-determination,
the Azerbaijani authorities organized an armed mob
that launched pogroms against defenseless Armenians
living in the city of Sumgait. A savage attack was
launched upon the minority Armenian community
living quietly at home, attacked for no reason other
than their ethnic origin. Massacres in Gianja, Baku,
Kirovabad and other cities between 1988 and 1991 were
far more barbaric and massive and led to the deportation
and ethnic cleansing of over half a million Armenians.
Those atrocities were followed by an unprecedented
Azerbaijani military offensive and operations against
the civilian population, which were designed to
implement a military solution to the question of Nagorno
Karabakh. Once again, it was Azerbaijan that started
an armed aggression against Nagorno Karabakh. As a
result of that aggression, in the early 1990s Armenia’s
entire border was transformed into a battlefield.
Innocent civilians were subject to barrages of heavy
artillery, missile shelling and bombing. Today, 20 years
later, Azerbaijani snipers continue indiscriminate
attacks and weapons-fire against homes, schools,
kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances in the
inhabited areas of Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh.
In his recent report (S/2012/376), the SecretaryGeneral refers to attacks against civilian objects and
facilities, which, according to a study of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, is one of the most complex
and least recognized humanitarian issues. We join the
Secretary-General in calling on the Council to assume a
more proactive approach in preventing and responding
to such incidents. We also call upon Azerbaijan to
immediately cease its subversive activities and attacks
44

against civilians, health-care facilities, vehicles and
other types of providers, as well as threats against
civilian aircraft.
In that context, let me remind the Council that on
various occasions, the co-chairs of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk
Group called for the parties to the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict to undertake confidence-building measures,
particularly those that would remove threats to the
civilian population. To that end, the co-chairs’ proposal
to refrain from provocative actions, remove snipers
from the line of contact and establish a mechanism for
investigating ceasefire violations could save the lives
of many civilians and military personnel on both sides.
In concluding, let me mention that Armenia
remains committed to the peaceful resolution process
and strongly believes that the fundamental solution of
the problem will be achieved only by peaceful means
based on the principles of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea as
President of the Security Council, and are confident
that he will achieve every success in his work.
We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
With respect to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the State is solely responsible for guaranteeing
the protection of its civilians based on the obligations
enshrined in its national constitution and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
identified as non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, respect for national sovereignty, refraining from
the threat or use of force, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
We disagree with those who claim to ignore or
conceal the role of the sovereign State in the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Parties to conflict,
whether Governments or armed groups, are responsible
for preventing any harm to the civilian population
during a violent conflict.
In recent decades, we have witnessed with concern
how technical military categories are manipulated
to dilute responsibility for the disproportionate use
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

of force through indiscriminate bombing that kills
innocent civilians. The so-called collateral damage
punishes defenceless civilians and is used as a war
tactic. Venezuela condemns the use of indiscriminate
and disproportionate force in armed conflict situations
affecting civilians populations, especially vulnerable
groups such as women, children and the elderly. Such
actions, practiced in various part of the world with
impunity, violate international law, international
humanitarian law and in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.
Venezuela stresses the need to promote the
peaceful settlement of armed conflicts, with a focus
on dialogue and negotiation among the parties that
leads to a political settlement ending these disputes
and addressing the root causes of the violence. Recent
history shows that military intervention and external
support for armed groups are not conducive to protecting
civilians or preventing armed conflict. Civilians cannot
be protected when weapons are provided to parties
attempting to overthrow a legitimate Government from
within.
Venezuela recognizes that peacekeeping operations
can serve as helpful tools in promoting a solution to an
armed conflict. Their guiding principles of impartiality,
the consent of the parties, and the non-use of force
except in legitimate self-defence purposes must be
strictly followed. Peacekeeping operations should be
deployed in full compliance with international law.
In that regard, respect for the principles of sovereign
equality, political independence, the territorial integrity
of all States, and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States is fundamental.
So-called counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency
plans often lead to the death of innocent civilians and
massive violations of human rights. Mr. Ben Emmerson,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism, reported on
an investigation into the impact of unmanned aerial
vehicles, known as drones, on civilians and their
human rights. He denounced the drones, due to the lack
of transparency in their use.
Venezuela
applauds
that
initiative.
The
investigation, according to the Special Rapporteur, will
focus on 25 attacks in which drones were used against
civilian populations in Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia,
Afghanistan and the occupied Palestinian territory. In
13-23027

Emerson’s view, some of those attacks are particularly
cruel and could be considered war crimes.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is concerned about the fanciful idea of
incorporating, as a norm of the Charter of the United
Nations, the notion of the responsibility to protect.
Venezuela reiterates its firm opposition to that concept,
which has served to undermine the sovereignty and
independence of States and has been used to overthrow
legitimate Governments by imposing interests that are
expansionist, imperialist and colonialist.
The Bolivarian Government of Hugo Chávez
Frias reaffirms that the use of force should be avoided
at all possible costs and should only be resorted to
under extraordinary circumstances that are carefully
considered prior to its use. Venezuela believes that
dialogue and negotiation are the most appropriate
means of finding a solution to the current conflicts in
the Middle East, in order to end the tragic humanitarian
situation that is being experienced in a number of
countries.
If we look at the origin of the armed conflicts
affecting some countries, we will discover that in
most cases they stem from an underestimation of the
social dimension of development and the plundering
role played by international corporations that sack the
riches of countries of the South.
Venezuela believes that it is important to take into
account social as well as political aspects in a holistic
manner when addressing armed conflicts. Promoting
sustainable development, eradicating poverty and
overcoming inequality are, among other things, policies
that would contribute to international peace and
security by generating climate of stability in societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I thank the Republic of Korea
for scheduling this debate and for the concept note
(S/2013/75, annex). I will make a number of comments
pertaining to the Secretary-General’s report of last year
(S/2012/376).
Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union, and I will abbreviate my
remarks to respect the time limit. A full version of our
statement will be circulated in the Chamber.
It is States that bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Where
45

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

States are willing but unable to discharge their primary
responsibility to protect civilians, peacekeeping
missions can play an important role in building up State
capacity and institutions. There are also situations
where a State is able but may be less than willing to
discharge its responsibilities or to cooperate fully with
the peace operation on the latter’s protection mandate.
In that regard, Ireland is concerned by reports that
the African Union–United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur has repeatedly been prevented from accessing
areas in northern Darfur. We call on the Government
of the Sudan to allow the mission unhindered freedom
of movement throughout Darfur in accordance with the
status of forces agreement.
For various reasons, many States do not take
sufficiently resolute action to deal with the crime of
sexual violence in conflict situations. We are deeply
distressed by the finding of the International Rescue
Committee that many Syrians identified rape as a
primary reason that their families fled the country.
Yet we are encouraged by the work in other places of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, to foster the necessary cultural change and
encourage the political ownership and leadership at
the national level that are crucial to tackling conflictrelated sexual violence.
States also bear the primary responsibility for
ensuring accountability at the national level for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Secretary-General’s 2012 report urges
the Council to identify ways to encourage and assist
States to ensure accountability at the national level.
But where that is not forthcoming, the Council must be
prepared to act.
Last month, Ireland joined 56 other countries in
calling upon the Security Council to refer the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. We repeat
that call today. We believe that a referral to the Court,
signalling clearly that atrocities will not go unpunished,
would be a dynamic element that could potentially save
lives in acting to deter future atrocities.
An imperative in any armed conflict is respect by
the parties for international humanitarian law and for
humanitarian workers. Ireland is deeply concerned by
the plight of Syrians living in areas worst affected by
the fighting, who have been unable to receive sufficient
humanitarian assistance. Ireland’s commitment to

46

the Syrian people is steadfast and underscored by
our humanitarian support, which amounts to almost
$9.5 million over the past 12 months.
From Syria, too, there are reports of the deliberate
targeting of medical personnel, vehicles and facilities;
of doctors prevented from accessing hospitals; and of
attacks on patients and those seeking medical treatment.
Access to medical care and facilities is a matter of life
and death for civilians. We call on all parties to the
conflict to honour their legal obligations.
Even at a time of severe resource constraints, there
are smart approaches that relatively small peacekeeping
missions can use to better cover their sometimes vast
areas of responsibility and to enhance their protection
of civilians. Examples include the increased use
of unmanned aerial systems to enhance situational
awareness to the benefit of improved protection of
civilians, the mission deployment of more women
peacekeepers to increase reach into local communities
and a greater focus on preventing crimes being carried
out against civilians through early warning and decisive
early positioning.
Finally, the reports published over the past two
years by the Secretary-General’s Panel of Experts on
Accountability in Sri Lanka and by the Internal Review
Panel on United Nations Action in Sri Lanka have cast
the tragic events in Sri Lanka into sharp relief. But
while we seek to learn from that particular failure, we
also know that the failure to protect civilians has cost
countless lives across many conflicts.
Protecting civilians in the extreme environment
of armed conflict is both a daunting challenge and a
grave responsibility. It falls to all of us, the wider
United Nations membership led by the Council and the
United Nations family itself, to work together to better
discharge that responsibility. We owe it to all civilians
who have died in conflict for want of protection to learn
the harsh lessons and to ensure that we do much more
to protect vulnerable civilians in Syria, Mali, the astern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all
areas afflicted by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made earlier on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends on Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict and Norway. Austria would like

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

to thank the Republic of Korea for organizing today’s
important debate.
In view of the many situations of armed conflict that
urgently require our attention, we regret that the Security
Council, in contrast to its established biannual practice,
held only one debate on the protection of civilians in
2012. In addition to country-specific discussions,
we deem it extremely important for the Council to
regularly take up the protection of civilians in a broader
and more inclusive manner that allows for an exchange
of views on new trends and obstacles, including in
addressing the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General. We therefore welcome the standing
reporting requirement provided for in the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2013/2), which we
hope will contribute to more predictable discussions in
the Council.
We
thank
the
Secretary-General,
High
Commissioner Pillay and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their instructive briefings. However,
we believe that the humanitarian aspect is equally
important for our discussions. We therefore encourage
the Secretary-General and the Council to continue the
practice of inviting the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator to brief the Council.
Since the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), more
than three years ago, significant progress has been made
in implementing the provisions of the resolution, which
relates to peacekeeping operations with protection
mandates, and equipping such missions with the tools
necessary to effectively implement their mandates. The
elaboration of protection-of-civilians training modules
is one such important step.
In other areas, however, the assessment is less
positive. In resolution 1894 (2009), the Council not
only affirms its strong opposition to impunity but
also underlines its own role in ending it. As for the
situation in Syria, the Security Council has not lived
up to that commitment. Therefore, in the Swiss letter
of 14 January (S/2013/19, annex), Austria, together with
more than 50 countries, asks the Council to act upon
its responsibility and to urgently refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.
Austria shares the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that explosive weapons with a wide
area impact should be avoided in densely populated
areas due to the appalling civilian suffering that they

13-23027

cause. We believe that there must be more systematic
data collection in that respect. On the issue of civilian
casualty recording by parties to armed conflict, Austria
would like to reiterate the suggestion made in the
statement by the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians last year that the next report of the SecretaryGeneral provide an overview of existing practices (see
S/PV.6790).
As announced last year, Austria has developed an
interdisciplinary training course on the protection of
civilians, which is open to national and international
participants. The training course was piloted in
December last year in Stadtschlaining, Austria, with
the participation of senior decision-makers of the armed
forces, police, civilian administration and other civilian
stakeholders and experts. In the light of the successful
accomplishment of the pilot course, Austria has decided
to run the course on an annual basis, with the next one
to be held late this year. Austria will also continue to
cooperate closely with the Secretariat to support the
ongoing shaping of the protection of civilians training
landscape for all operational levels.
In conclusion, Austria wishes to thank Norway for
the initiative “Reclaiming the protection of civilians
under international humanitarian law”, which is
aimed at the identification of practical measures and
recommendations to improve the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. We look forward to the fourth
regional workshop of the initiative, organized jointly
by Austria and Norway, which to take place next week
in Vienna.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to thank the
presidency of the Republic of Korea for taking the
initiative on the vitally important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In our view, the topic is
often at the core of the Council’s primary mandate with
regard to threats to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their interventions.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier this afternoon by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to make additional remarks in my
national capacity.

47

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

While international humanitarian law establishes
a comprehensive legal framework to protect civilians
from the effects of military operations, that stands in
stark contrast to the situation that civilians in conflictaffected areas face on the ground. Nowadays, in the
conduct of armed conflict, it is civilians who more
often than not become the targets of armed attack and
atrocities, such as murder, deportation, ethnic cleansing,
rape and sexual violence, not only as a consequence
of war but as a method and means of conducting war.
Such atrocities were once the exception in the conduct
of armed conflict, while today they have frequently
become the rule.
Individual States have the responsibility to protect
their populations from the atrocities I have mentioned.
At the same time, the international community also has
the responsibility to help protect populations and to
take collective action through the Security Council if
and when national authorities manifestly fail to protect
their population. Therefore, Croatia firmly believes that
those violating human rights in armed conflicts today,
including in Syria, should know that they will face
justice tomorrow. From that perspective, we joined the
appeal to the Security Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court, as requested
in the Swiss letter of 14 January (S/2013/19, annex).
Unfortunately, our own experience during the early
1990s has taught us that the impact and experience
of such conflict are not the same for all civilians but
can vary enormously among members of the different
groups, depending on whether they are men or women,
young or old, or living in an urban or a rural area. Not
least, it will depend on the conduct of the combatants
and the extent to which they endeavour to target or
to protect civilians during hostilities. In that regard,
Croatia is particularly committed to the protection of
those most vulnerable, namely, women and children.
Regrettably, the reality of children being affected by
armed conflict is inevitable. The unlawful recruitment
and use of children as soldiers continue to be a
widespread problem. A further and growing concern
related to the protection of children is the attacks
against schools and other educational facilities. In that
respect, as an emerging donor, Croatia, in collaboration
with local partners, has focused its assistance in
Afghanistan on the education of girls.
Equally alarming is the increase of attacks on
humanitarian workers, as well as the widespread
lack of respect for medical missions during armed
48

conflict. Also, the increase in deliberate attacks against
journalists working in conflict zones is a serious
concern that must be addressed.
Croatia would also like to stress the need for further
emphasis on the use of mines and explosive remnants of
war. Croatia has much experience in the issue of mine
clearance at the technical level and the rehabilitation of
mine victims. One needs to keep in mind that such silent
killers kill and maim long after the end of a conflict and
that their victims often tend to be civilians.
On the basis of our experience, we are convinced
that United Nations peacekeeping activities should
contribute to the enhanced protection and security of
civilians, as well as the reduction of atrocities directed
at the civilian population. In our view, that is clearly
one of the important aspects and goals of peacekeeping.
We strongly believe that, in the future, there
should be even more emphasis on civil and military
cooperation and civilian engagement in United
Nations peace missions and operations, with the aim
not only of ensuring the effective preservation of
peace and sustainable post-conflict reconstruction and
development but also to provide adequate focus on
the protection of civilians and to create a favourable
environment for the enjoyment of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms. In that regard, a comprehensive
and integrated approach should be ensured that allows
for the active involvement of the police, judicial
officials, diplomats and other members of civil society
in peace, reconstruction and development efforts and in
protection-of-civilian activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow me to join other
delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I should like to join the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire in supporting the initiative adopted by the
members of the Economic Community of West African
States as a group with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
This debate is very timely given that, in
contemporary armed conflicts, which have been
exacerbated in recent times, innocent civilians,
especially women and children, often constitute an
overwhelming majority of the victims.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

My delegation also thanks the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Ms. Navi Pillay, and the Director
for International Law and Cooperation of International
Committee of the Red Cross, Philip Spoerri. In their
informative briefings, they brought to the fore the
heavy price that civilians pay as they face daily threats
of violence and death when they find themselves
inadvertently caught up in the middle of a conflict.
Nigeria welcomes the Secretary-General’s progress
report (S/2012/376) and commends its analytical depth
and recommendations. Judging from its wide-ranging
perspectives, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is an important yet daunting global challenge. Despite
being protected under international humanitarian and
human rights law, civilians continue to be victims of
violence. Therefore the efforts to build consensus on the
subject and the progressive development of normative
frameworks to address civilian protection challenges,
including resolutions 1738 (2006), 1888 (2009) and
1894 (2009), are encouraging developments.
We recognize the importance of the collective
efforts of the various entities of the United Nations
to ensure apposite protection of civilians from the
terrors of war. The Security Council has set important
precedents for the protection of civilians through its
resolutions and the mandates of United Nations peace
operations. Resolution 1265 (1999) and 1674 (2006)
were resolute and comprehensive in their provisions
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Other
United Nations organs and entities, in particular the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, in which Nigeria plays an important role,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
have included civilian protection in their agendas and
enhanced their efforts to protect endangered civilian
populations.
Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians are still casualties of
conflict and the direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments have underscored the failure to comply
with the law. We continue to encounter obstacles as
we endeavour to address the five core challenges
articulated in the Secretary-General’s report.
The assault on civilians, especially women and
children, and the denial of humanitarian assistance
in conflict zones illustrate the magnitude of the task

13-23027

of civilian protection. Therefore, difficult protection
challenges remain in the Congo, Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia and many other areas of conflict. Indeed, in
our own subregion, the situation in Mali may present
serious protection challenges for which the international
community must be prepared. As stakeholders in
international peace and security, our efforts should
be directed at addressing the constraints that militate
against the effective protection of civilians.
Nigeria has made great strides in the area of
protecting civilians through its contributions to various
peacekeeping operations around the world. At the
subregional level, the Economic Community of West
African States has also, through its steady intervention
in conflicts, continued to remind States and other
parties to conflict of their obligations to respect and
protect civilians, as well as support them in meeting
those obligations. Therefore, in order to rededicate
ourselves to the moral undertaking to protect defenceless
civilians in conflict situations, it is imperative that the
international community, especially the United Nations,
deepen its commitment to bolstering accountability for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. It is time to translate our words into action
and adopt standardized measures to bring persistent
perpetrators of violations against children to justice.
In that connection, the Council should take the lead by
adopting targeted measures against such perpetrators.
Going a step further, we are cognizant of the
fact that State and non-State actors alike can and do
instigate and prosecute wars and armed conflict of
which civilians bear the brunt. It therefore behoves
the Council to move beyond discussing the impact of
conflict and begin to adopt resolutions that criminalize
war. Such action would serve as a means not only of
potentially settling disputes but also as a measure of
protective, preventive diplomacy.
I must stress that our growing understanding of
the needs and vulnerabilities of civilians in armed
conflict must be marked by the ability and capacity to
protect those same civilians. There is a legal obligation
to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law, where the protection of civilians,
including, in particular, health-care providers, women
and children, is the main focus. Parallel, and equally
important, is the moral obligation we also have to prevent
attacks against health-care facilities and providers;
violence against women and children, especially sexual
violence, from which women and girls suffer; and the

49

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

other various forms of debasement to which innocent
civilians are subjected in times of conflict.
It is important that we consolidate and ensure the
implementation of the existing normative framework
on the protection of civilians, bearing in mind the
challenges. The international community should
remain vigilant and bear its fair share of our collective
responsibility to protect civilians. If we act purposefully
and in concert, we can better shield civilians from the
ravages of armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker on my list is
the representative of Jordan. However, he is unable to
deliver his statement, owing to the lateness of the hour.
At his request, the text of his written statement will be
circulated.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
would like to thank you for having organized today’s
important and timely debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
Director for International Law and Cooperation for
their interventions.
Montenegro fully associates itself with the statement
made by the European Union. Let me, however, make
some additional comments in my national capacity.
It is a sad reality that civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts. Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and sexual and gender-based
violence are just a few examples of the worrisome trend
of the frequent failure of parties to conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and refugee law to
respect and protect civilians.
Despite some positive developments and the
important progress achieved since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), reflected mainly in
advancements at the normative level, the abysmal
state of the protection of civilians has changed little,
as the Secretary-General pointed out in his 2012 report
(S/2012/376).
The suffering of civilians, especially women and
children, and the harsh conditions they endure in
50

many of today’s conflicts requires our continued close
attention and decisive action. Of particular concern
is the deteriorating situation in Syria. Montenegro is
alarmed and condemns the widespread and systematic
violations of human rights and international law in
Syria, which, according to the independent international
commission of inquiry, may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes under the Rome Statute of
International Criminal Court.
We would like to emphasize that all perpetrators
of such crimes, without exception, must be held to
account and that there should be no impunity for such
violations and abuses. Bolstering accountability serves
as an integral component in strengthening compliance
by parties to armed conflict, including individual
perpetrators, with their international obligations.
Moreover, without accountability there can be no
sustainable peace. When national authorities fail to
take the steps necessary to ensure accountability, the
international community, and the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court above all, has a role to
play in ensuring an appropriate international response.
Since accountability through national processes was
not guaranteed in Syria, Montenegro has decided to
support the Swiss initiative calling on the Security
Council to refer the situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court. In addition, Montenegro
is of the view that utilizing independent commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions, especially early
in a crisis, along with taking the necessary follow-up
action, can indeed help to end further violations and
provide accountability.
Ensuring safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance is fundamental to the
protection of civilians and an effective humanitarian
response. We emphasize how important it is for States
and other parties to conflict to prevent attacks on or
interference with medical and humanitarian personnel
and journalists, and to prosecute those responsible for
such acts. We also call on the parties to conflicts to
honour their obligations in refraining from the use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
The final United Nations Conference on an
Arms Trade Treaty, to be held in March, presents
a vital opportunity for enhancing the protection of
civilians as we seek to address the human cost and
dire consequences resulting from a poorly regulated
international arms trade. We hope that the Conference
will produce a strong treaty with the highest possible

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

common standards for regulating the global trade in
arms, so that it can make a real difference to the lives
and security of millions of people around the world.
We recognize the valuable progress that has been
made in the area of enhancing the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
and other missions. We need to achieve more
effective interaction and better coordination among
protection-mandated missions, host States, political
missions and humanitarian organizations undertaking
protection efforts, in a spirit of joint endeavour, in order
to continue to improve the protection of civilians from
physical violence. One step to that end would be the
increased use of training modules on the protection
of civilians by Member States sending personnel to
protection-mandated missions.
As the Secretary-General stated in his 2012 report
(S/2012/376), international humanitarian law requires
parties to a conflict to protect the civilian population
from the effects of hostilities. A failure to do so can
result in deaths and injuries to civilians who are directly
targeted or otherwise caught in the fighting.
We recognize the importance of translating
normative progress into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground through strong
leadership on the part of the Security Council and a
focus on the five core challenges and recommendations
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report. I would like
to conclude by expressing Montenegro’s commitment
and readiness to contribute constructively to ensuring
greater effectiveness in the protection of civilians, which
is a core responsibility and priority in the mandate of
the Security Council and the United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Berger (Germany): It is a pleasure to see you
preside over this open debate, Sir, and let me say that
the large number of delegations taking the floor, even
at this late hour, shows how pertinent it was for the
Korean presidency to organize it.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by that
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. We
also welcome the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/2) and the establishment of a standing
reporting procedure.

13-23027

Many of us recall a photograph that went around
the world very recently. It is of a small boy walking
down a street, staring straight at the bodies of dozens
of slaughtered men, found in a river near Aleppo.
It is just one example of the horrors that children
continue to face each and every day in Syria and of the
psychological trauma that that war will have on a whole
future generation. The civil war in Syria is intensifying
and, as we heard from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights today, the pain and suffering it inflicts
on the civilian population continue to increase in scale
and scope. The war has moved into the major cities.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilians, especially women
and children, often caused by the use of explosive
weapons with broad impact in densely populated areas,
remain the most appalling aspect of the Syrian conflict.
According to the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the disproportionate and
indiscriminate killing of children in the course of
military operations may amount to war crimes. In
Syria, boys and girls are being bombarded in their
neighbourhoods. We recall that the Syrian uprising itself
was triggered by children in Dara’a being subjected to
torture, some of them for weeks. Schools and hospitals
must be zones of peace where children are granted
protection even in times of conflict, as is stipulated in
resolution 1998 (2011). Yet in Syria the United Nations
has documented Government attacks on schools and
the denial of access to hospitals for civilians. In some
cases, anti-Government armed groups have targeted
school buildings. During her recent visit to Syria in
December, the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict learned from the Syrian Government
that at least 1,300 school facilities had been damaged
since violence broke out.
In Syria we are also witnessing the devastating
consequences that deliberate attacks on hospitals,
health workers and ambulances have for the sick
and wounded. All parties responsible for targeting
medical personnel, punishing medical personnel for
performing their duties or attacking or misusing the
Geneva Conventions’ emblems should know that such
acts constitute war crimes. We remain convinced
that accountability for such grave violations must be
ensured.
In that context, we wish to recall that States from all
over the world have requested that the Council refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

51

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

The President: The time is now nine minutes past
eight and we have about 15 more speakers. I would
therefore like once again to request that all speakers
limit their statements to no more than four minutes.
Delegations with longer statements are kindly requested
to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. On behalf of Benin, I would like
to thank the Republic of Korea for organizing this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Benin agrees with the Secretary-General’s
analysis of the issues in his latest report of May 2012
(S/2012/376) and in his statement this morning on the
protection of civilians. It is essential that we follow up
on his recommendations, including those concerning
the responsibility to protect. I have some remarks to
make on the topic.
Faced with conflict situations, the Security Council
should have the determination to assure civilians
as reliably as possible that they are protected. The
effectiveness of its action depends on the authority
that international humanitarian law, particularly the
1949 Geneva Conventions and its Additional Protocols,
carries in the eyes of the parties to a conflict. To
reinforce it, the Council should make violators of that
law pay a heavier price. Those responsible for serious
crimes should be excluded from conflict settlements and
tried, including by the International Criminal Court,
depending on the seriousness of the crimes committed.
Benin would like to express its gratitude to
France for the priceless contribution it has made to the
liberation of the Malian people suffering under the yoke
of international terrorism and for the efforts it continues
to make, together with the Malian and African forces
taking part in the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, to restore security in the cities that
have been retaken and help to build peace in the country.
Peacekeeping operations should be given a clearcut mandate and appropriate resources for its execution
so that they can ensure the protection of civilians when
they are under imminent threat of violence. In that
connection, Member States must achieve consensus
on issues pertaining to the rules of engagement of
52

peacekeeping operations, so that the United Nations
will not be forced to standby helplessly while the
cardinal principles of the Organization are being
flouted, as is the case currently in Syria. It is important
for peacekeeping operations to ensure the safety and
inviolability of humanitarian assistance personnel in
order to discourage the acts of violence that are often
committed against them. The action undertaken on
their behalf should be carried out with wisdom in order
to preserve the neutrality of humanitarian assistance
and of those individuals who are trying to provide it.
In low-intensity conflict situations that do not
require the deployment of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations could rely on civil society organizations
to ensure the protection of civilians through daily
mediation among the communities on the ground. In
that connection, the concept of unarmed peacekeeping
performed by civil society organizations is making
headway. We have to find the necessary guidelines in
order to take advantage of the opportunities available
for helping the peace process at a lower cost to the
international community.
The Council should address the question of the
use of explosive devices by warring parties in densely
populated areas, which have a disproportionate effect
on the civilian population. We should also pursue
the efforts under way to criminalize the use of such
weapons. We need to take appropriate steps in due
course to carry out demining and the retrieval of
non-explosive devices, which expose civilians to
considerable danger in both conflict and post-conflict
situations. Benin has a regional demining centre, which
is prepared to cooperate with the United Nations in that
sphere.
The protection of civilians requires us to fight
effectively against the use of children in armed conflicts
and the sexual exploitation of women and young girls
and against acts endangering the vulnerable living
conditions of the elderly. The Council must continue its
efforts to ensure the effectiveness of steps undertaken
in implementation of resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820
(2008) designed to shield children and women from
certain particularly harmful forms of human rights
violations.
In conclusion, I can only say that the best
protection of civilians is that which is ensured above
all by the prevention of conflicts, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1625 (2005), the promotion
of a culture of peace and sustainable development,
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

as a guarantee for human security and the stability
necessary for their full development.
The question of good governance is of crucial
importance, as are the strengthening of resilience to
external shocks and efforts to combat the proliferation
of small arms. In that regard, we urge States to work
towards a consensus for the adoption of a robust and
balanced arms trade treaty during the forthcoming
final conference planned for March. The entire United
Nations system should endeavour to strengthen
the effectiveness of the efforts of the international
community in that sphere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council during the month of February
and wish you and your country much success. I would
also like to express my gratitude for the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Argentina,
who is with us in the Chamber at this late hour listening
to her colleagues discussing this issue.
We align ourselves with the statement made
by Ambassador Mohammad Khazaee, Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Nicaragua is a firm and respectful supporter of the
sovereignty of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, international law, human rights,
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Any measure or action that is adopted
in order to address evolving situations or crises with a
view to protecting civilians in armed conflicts or for
whatever other reason must be undertaken in strict
accordance with those postulates and principles.
We firmly believe in the resolution of conflicts
through peaceful means and in the importance of
dialogue and negotiation as the basis of coexistence
among States. We are also firm believers that
Governments have the main duty and responsibility to
protect their citizens without the intervention of third
parties or entities. If assistance is required, the explicit
consent of the State in question for such assistance is
imperative.
In principle, the concept of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be a laudable concept.
However, as we have all witnessed in recent years, its

13-23027

implementation has been completely manipulated. The
action taken has contradicted the stated purpose and
proposed objectives and has exacerbated the problem,
with outcomes that are the opposite of protection. That
is the great challenge at hand in this area.
We should recall what happened in Libya, where,
under the pretext of protecting civilians and by using
the mislabelled “responsibility to protect”, a war was
waged against a sovereign country. Its airspace, which
was called an “exclusion zone”, was used to assassinate
men, women and children — the very civilians who
were supposed to be protected. Its head of State was
assassinated, the existing regime was changed and
a country with one of the highest levels of human
development in its region was destroyed. And, as if
that were not enough, the region was flooded with
arms, and terrorist groups, which were listed as such
by the Security Council, were promoted to the status
of liberation armies, the consequences of which we
are seeing on a daily basis today. That has all led to
suffering on the part of the peoples of that the region.
Let us briefly now turn to the case of Syria, where
some members of the Security Council and their allies
are carrying out interventionist actions — intervening,
boycotting the negotiations process, supporting terrorist
groups with sophisticated weapons and escalating the
humanitarian problem in order to then shield themselves
with pretexts and bald arguments for the need to protect
civilians and implement the responsibility to protect. It
is the same script that was used in Libya.
Let us now consider Palestine. The Palestinian
people have struggled for self-determination and the
establishment of their State, with Jerusalem as its capital,
for more than six decades and with immeasurable loss
of innocent lives. Regarding that case, the Security
Council has taken no significant action to resolve the
situation and protect Palestinian civilians from the
genocide of which they are the victims.
We have many questions on the issue being debated.
Many of the issues are of concern to us. Can the
protection of civilians perhaps be applied selectively?
Is the responsibility to protect applicable in some cases
and not others? We should ask ourselves why this organ
does not invoke the concept of the protection of civilians
in cases where innocent civilians, mainly children, are
being assassinated by the infamous unmanned aerial
vehicles. Why do we not discuss the actions of those
who bring about the vast majority of conflicts with
their sophisticated arms, their financing of terrorist
53

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

groups and their intelligence advisors and agencies
at work inside sovereign countries for the purpose of
overthrowing Governments that have independent
political visions?
Allow me to say that we believe that the work of
the Security Council on the issue under consideration
and the impact of the implementation of the so-called
responsibility to protect has only given rise to greater
divisions and suspicion within the international
community. That should lead us to reconsider our
analysis of it, its intended purpose and the functioning
of this organ in implementing these concepts.
That will require political will, legal certainty and
impartiality when it comes to implementation — and
not the development of new concepts and measures that
undermine the stability and sovereignty of peoples.
Achieving true international peace and security
must start with a truly holistic view of the international
situation. We must commitment ourselves to not
provoke more conflicts, not to intervene in countries
in order to illegally procure resources and not to seek
regime change for Governments that displease us.
Instead, we should prioritize providing assistance for
the sustainable development for peoples and complying
with all the legal commitments we undertook when we
signed the Charter of the United Nations. If we did that,
we could turn all of our efforts, energies and resources
towards solving the serious economic and financial
crises that affect both developed and developing
countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Espinoza (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate the Republic of Korea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and for convening this important debate. We
welcome the participation this morning by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea and the
ministers from Azerbaijan, Brazil and Rwanda. Their
presence highlights the importance of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We would also like
to express our gratitude for the statements made
by the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
distributed by the Permanent Representative of Jordan

54

on behalf of the Human Security Network, of which
Chile is a member.
The protection of civilians is a responsibility of
the international community that is based on respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
My country believes that all States and all parties
involved in a conflict should comply with it and fully
respect it without questioning it, bearing in mind that
the primary responsibility always falls to the State
affected by the conflict situation, which must take all
the necessary measures to ensure the protection of the
civilian population.
My country acknowledges the progress that
has been made in terms of the formal recognition of
standards for the protection of civilians. However,
we reiterate that we are seriously concerned by the
facts that we must face on a daily basis and the tragic
circumstances of thousands of people around the world.
The principles of distinction and proportionality, which
inspired the concept of the protection of civilians, seem
to have been forgotten by many and subjected to the
sole political will of the parties to a conflict. In that
respect, we reiterate our call on parties to a conflict,
regardless of where it may be occurring, to comply
with international humanitarian law and human rights,
in particular by allowing and facilitating access for
humanitarian missions and organizations, providing
for the protection of the most vulnerable groups, such
as women and children, and refraining from attacks on
medical facilities and their staff, which is one of the
most complex humanitarian issues, as noted in the 2011
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
We also urge parties to a conflict to refrain from
using explosive weapons in densely populated areas,
given both the number of victims they cause and their
indiscriminate nature and because we believe that that
is a significant factor in the displacement of persons
and the serious consequences that arise from that.
We support the decision of the Council to provide
peacekeeping missions with a mandate to protect
civilians. However, that important responsibility
requires clarity and precision in terms of the tasks
assigned, sufficient logistical and economic resources
to meet the challenge and coordinated efforts with
other entities on the ground. We would also like to
stress the importance of mandates including earlywarning systems and the capacity to assist an affected
State in complying with its obligations and duties in

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

protecting civilians. We recognize such missions’
potential to contribute to the establishment or gradual
strengthening of an environment that protects civilians
by supporting the rule of law and local institutions.
My country believes that any violation of the
responsibility to protect civilians in armed conflict is
something that should be prosecuted and tried, and that
those responsible for such violations must be brought
before justice, either at the national or international
level. In that regard, we highlight the importance
of, and support the establishment of, international
investigative commissions and fact-finding missions.
That tool has demonstrated its usefulness when it
comes to encouraging national authorities to take the
necessary measures to put an end to violations and
promote accountability.
We support the call by the Secretary-General to
provide assistance to States in establishing national
mechanisms to ensure transparency and accountability
for breaches of international humanitarian law or
international human rights law.
With the same insistence, we recognize the
fundamental role of the International Criminal Court
in preventing impunity for such acts, above all as an
important element in deterring such violations. We call
upon the Security Council to use the tools available
to it and to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court when the protection of civilians is not being
ensured by the parties to the conflict. We would also
like to recall the letter sent to the Security Council
dated 14 January 2013 (S/2013/19, annex), in which 57
countries, including Chile, requested that the situation
in Syrian Arab Republic, where there have been over
60,000 deaths to date, most of them civilian, be referred
to the Court.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s commitment
to full respect for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We urge support for the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report of May 2012
(S/2012/376) as logical and useful guidelines in this
area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Lee (New Zealand): New Zealand is pleased
that your country, Mr. President, is highlighting the
protection of civilians during its presidency of the
Security Council. We know that civilians in your
country suffered terribly in the 1940s and 1950s. New
13-23027

Zealand stood with you then. We know the strength of
your people, and we welcome your determination to
improve the situation of civilians in future conflicts.
We also welcome the presence with us today of the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). The ICRC is the custodian of one
of the most important developments in human history,
namely, the body of law and practice designed to limit
the terrible impact of war and, in particular, to protect
civilians. That body of law is now almost universally
accepted as binding, not only for participants in wars
between States but also for participants in those of a
non-international character.
Far too often, those rules are not applied. Let us be
blunt — breaches of those rules through the targeting
of civilians, the use of high explosive weapons without
regard to likely civilian casualties and attacks on
medical personnel or facilities are all war crimes. And
war crimes are, in a sense, crimes not only against
the victims, but against us all. Serious war crimes are
subject to universal jurisdiction. We all therefore have
moral and political responsibilities when they are being
systematically committed in a conflict — wherever that
conflict may be.
That is why today’s debate is so important. The
members of the Security Council have assumed special
responsibilities with respect to international peace and
security. The Charter has given members of the Council
extraordinary powers to act decisively on our behalf.
And we join others in calling on the members of the
Council to exercise more actively their responsibilities
when civilians are manifestly the targets of armed
attacks.
The Council’s thematic work on the protection of
civilians is an important element in that campaign, but
it is not enough. A more active focus on protection in
the Council’s work on country specific situations is
what is really needed.
New Zealanders are practical and constructive
people. We know that the Security Council, despite its
wide powers, has real limitations. We know that the
Council’s efforts to protect civilians are also dependant
on the actions of peacekeepers in the field. There is a
pressing need for practical and constructive measures
to ensure that United Nations peacekeepers are ready
and able to respond quickly and effectively to emerging
threats. It is not good enough for missions to hide
behind the “within available resources” provisions in

55

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

mandates and do nothing while atrocities are being
committed against civilians.
There many examples of United Nations
peacekeepers responding with extraordinary courage
and commitment to defend civilians in times of
crisis, such as the efforts of Ghanaian and Canadian
peacekeepers during the 1994 Rwandan genocide,
whose resolute action saved thousands of civilians. We
must ensure that current and future peacekeepers are
best placed to emulate those brave efforts. The option
of doing nothing can never be justified.
The Council is also reliant on the Secretariat’s
being more courageous. The 2000 Brahimi report (see
S/2000/809) warned that the Secretariat must tell the
Council what it needs to hear and not what it wants
to hear. Sadly, the Secretariat’s recent conclusions
regarding its role during the conflict in Sri Lanka show
that Mr. Brahimi’s advice was not taken as much to
heart as it should have been.
We recognize also that the Council is not a legal
body and is not well suited to determining the legal
character of events, especially in the midst of a conflict.
But the Council can play an important role in building
accountability, as it has done in the past. Referral to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) is one option
available to the Council in that regard. As we observed
to the Council last October, such referrals are not
always the best mechanism, and where they are made,
their timing must be carefully judged, particularly in
situations of on-going conflict. Nevertheless, there are
practical steps that the Security Council can take to
bolster accountability, including extending the mandate
of its working group on tribunals to cover ICC matters.
We also recognize another limitation faced by the
Council, namely, the tension it often faces between its
role in executing its responsibilities to end conflict
and establish peace, on the one hand, and its duties to
ensure that such conflicts are conducted in a manner
consistent with international norms, particularly those
limiting the impact on civilians, on the other hand. Both
dimensions are important, and neither should become
an excuse for ignoring the other.
It is natural that in different situations Council
members will focus more on one dimension than the
other. But Council members have a high responsibility
to the broader membership and to the people we
represent; those differences must not be allowed to
become a reason to give up. We have seen that far too

56

often — during the war in Sri Lanka and today in Syria.
It is not good enough to say that the Council is blocked
and to move on to other business, as we have seen it do
far too often. If the Council is deadlocked over how to
end a conflict, then all 15 members have all the more
responsibility to find ways to address the protection
needs of civilians.
Finally, it is important to note that not every conflict
is conducted in a manner involving atrocities against
civilians. That is important, because it gives us hope
and shows that some combatants, even in civil wars,
abide by the basic norms of international humanitarian
law. Moreover, it gives us scope for a new practical
focus for the ongoing thematic work of the Council.
The Council will be taking up the protection of
civilians again later this year, and the Secretariat is
producing a new report with recommendations for
the Council’s consideration. It would be helpful if the
Secretariat could not only address cases of grievous
breaches of humanitarian law, but also explore cases
where such breaches have not occurred. Serious
analysis of the factors determining why atrocities occur
in some cases but not in others might be helpful to the
Security Council in developing its tools for prevention
and management of conflict, as well as for protection of
civilians in specific cases.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Since it is so late in
the day, I wish to assure you, Sir, that I will be very
brief. I wish to join delegations that have taken the
floor before me in sincerely commending your country
for organizing this open debate and for assuming the
presidency of the Council. We particularly thank you
for inviting stakeholders, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
because such stakeholders are heavily involved in
issues relating to the protection of civilians.
Botswana attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We accordingly welcome
the informative report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) and its insightful recommendations. The
convening of the open debate today could not have
come at a better time, given the continuing gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
of innocent people resulting from ongoing conflicts
around the world, including particularly in Syria. My

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

delegation believes that the issue should remain high on
the agenda of the United Nations for as long as heinous
crimes continue to be committed.
The international community must step up efforts
aimed at offering protection to civilians in armed
conflict and in particular the most vulnerable groups
at risk, namely, women and children. The perpetrators
of violence continue to undermine international
humanitarian and human rights laws by violating the
rights of those vulnerable groups, who often lose their
lives. It is deeply regrettable that the perpetrators
continue to use children as killing machines or as
human shields. The use of rape or sexual violence as a
weapon of war is equally unforgivable.
It has been observed that the absence of
accountability is a leading factor in undermining the
rights of civilians in armed conflict. It is for that reason
that my delegation calls on the Security Council to
aggressively promote accountability by thoroughly
investigating and prosecuting persons responsible
for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity
and other serious violations of international law and
international humanitarian law.
There should be greater collaboration between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). As the Charter body with responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council’s role in referring situations
that threaten international peace and security to the
International Criminal Court is critical. Here I must
add that Botswana is among the signatory countries
of a letter (see S/2013/19) submitted to the Council
requesting referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians not only highlights concerns and
challenges affecting civilians in armed conflict but has
also contributed to the advancement of debates through
its identification of five core challenges, which are:
first, enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; secondly, enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups; thirdly, enhancing protection
by United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions; fourthly, improving humanitarian access; and
fifthly, enhancing accountability for violations.
My delegation notes with concern the challenges
faced by the international community in that regard.
Consequently, we of the view that while strong

13-23027

normative frameworks have been put in place for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a lot
still remains to be done, as the situation endured by
civilians calls for urgent and drastic measures. Almost
all conflicts are now not between States but within
national boundaries, and for that reason, my delegation
wishes to reiterate the primary responsibility of States
to respect and ensure protection of human rights for all
individuals within their territory.
A recent UNICEF report highlights the fact that
in Syria more than 60,000 people, mostly civilians,
have been killed since the uprising against President
Bashar Al-Assad began in early 2011. The escalating
conflict has left more than four million people in
need of humanitarian assistance; an estimated 50 per
cent of those are children, according to the report. In
that connection, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
importance of accountability on the part of States in
order to end impunity and of thoroughly investigating
and holding accountable persons responsible for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.
My delegation acknowledges that there are
challenges to civilian protection owing to the
complexity of the operation, and those challenges
cannot be ignored. Perhaps the design of specific and
comprehensive strategies to address the challenges can
help, given that the success of a peacekeeping operation
is measured by its ability to protect civilians. It is for
that reason that peacekeeping missions should put
protection of civilians at the core of their operations.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
commitment and unwavering support to the Council’s
endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by recalling that article 2 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 sets forth a number
of fundamental rules with regard to its application.
First, its provisions are applicable to any armed conflict
that arises between two or more contracting parties.
Secondly, the provisions of the Convention are to be
applied in all cases of the complete or partial occupation
of a territory by one of the contracting parties. Thirdly,
it unequivocally states that, if one of the parties to the
conflict is not a party to the Convention, those parties
that are party to the Convention must abide by the
provisions in their mutual relations.

57

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Those provisions clearly determine the international
Convention’s vast scope of application, which was
designed to grant as much protection as possible to the
civilian population in the event of an armed conflict. It
is worth pointing out that no provision of the Geneva
Convention allows for an exception with regard to the
protection of a country’s national security vis-à-vis its
real or imagined enemies, much less granting the State
the option of killing its own citizens or foreign citizens
under the pretext of preventive measures or precautions.
For their part, the second and third paragraphs of
the preamble to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court clearly state that throughout the last
century millions of children, women and men were
victims of atrocities that defy the imagination and that
profoundly move humankind. Such atrocities have
posed a threat to the peace, security and well-being
of humanity. Therefore, such crimes should not go
unpunished, regardless of who commits them.
On 21 February 2012, the Permanent Representative
of Brazil organized an informal discussion to analyse
the concept of the responsibility to protect, which
is designed to address the failure to protect. The
Brazilian proposition, to which my country attaches
great importance, is based on the three key principles
set forth in General Assembly resolution 60/1 of 2005.
First, the State has the main responsibility to protect its
people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity and to prevent the incitement
of such crimes; secondly, the international community
has the reponsibility to encourage and help States in
the exercise of their responsibility; and thirdly, the
international community has the responsibility to use
diplomatic, humanitarian and other appropriate means
to help protect populations from those crimes.
In the Ecuadorian delegation’s view, the contribution
of the Brazilian Mission consists in maintaining
those three singular principles intact; restricting the
interference of the international community to those
cases in which intervention is necessary, without
illegitimate or illegal invasions of sovereign States; and
ensuring that force will be used only as the last resort
to protect the civilian population and that force will not
be the first option exercised by those who believe that
they have the right to change a Government or impose
an ideology or any other form of political organization
that no one, no one, has requested.
We believe that it is essential to highlight that
important contribution from a country of my region to
58

an issue that impacts all of us. It is the international
community’s responsibility as a whole to uphold those
principles. At this time, we believe that an important
questions arises we discuss the legal and moral value
of the policies of selective assassination. Do those
policies form part of the powers of any Government in
such a way that we can kill each other without those
acts having any legal or moral implications? To the
contrary, such selective assassinations are not only acts
of international terrorism, but they are also without any
moral legitimacy or legal foundation.
Ecuador attaches the greatest importance to the
protection of civilian populations throughout the
world, without discrimination of any kind and without
according any legitimacy to crimes committed in the
name of absurd and unsustainable interpretations of
the right to legitimate defence. The protection of the
civilian population should not be applied with double
standards, nor should political justifications be used
in order to protect some, while massacring others.
Likewise, the protection of the civilian population
should be a firm and rational commitment held by
the international community, based on international
principles and without making any distinctions between
victims or those who victimize. It should never be a
simple pretext to kill people in other countries and
deprive other countries of their independence and their
natural resources.
To that end, we believe that it is particularly
important to adhere to all of the Geneva Conventions
and the amending Protocols to those Conventions. All
of those instruments provide protection to victims
from the scourge of war and recognize the victims
as innocent. Moreover, Ecuador is persuaded that the
International Criminal Court is the only body that can
end the impunity with which criminal Governments
kill their own people or other people and can restore
the rights of victims after crimes have been committed
against them. We therefore insist that the Rome Statute
be ratified by all States Members of the United Nations.
I cannot conclude this statement without mentioning
substantial aspects in the debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. National sovereignty,
clearly stated in paragraph 1 of Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations, is an element that must be taken
into account in any case of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. That element is a characteristic inherent
in the very existence of a State. The international
community’s adherence to and respect for that aspect

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

is not subject to qualification or the unilateral decision
of any country.
Paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides with absolute clarity that no provision
of the Charter shall authorize the United Nations to
intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State. On that basis, the collective measures provided
for in Chapter VII and referred to in Article 2 should
be limited exclusively to what is stipulated in Article
39 of the Charter — namely, any threat to the peace,
breach of the peace, or act of aggression — in such a
way that the ideological orientation of any Government
or its sovereign decisions over its natural resources or
the legitimate use of technologies for peaceful purposes
cannot be sufficient grounds for a State or a group of
States to decide to use force to change that regime
or to force it to subject itself to the interests of other
Governments.
For those reasons, any action by the international
community to protect civilians in conflict situations
should strictly adhere to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including full
respect for the sovereignty of States. If the international
community decides to intervene to protect vulnerable
populations, its decision must be substantiated by fair
and legitimate grounds, not by broad and incorrect
interpretations of Security Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all
to thank the Republic of Korea for having convened
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their informative presentations.
The topic of today’s debate is a primary concern
of my delegation for reasons easy to imagine. That is
why my delegation welcomes the interest repeatedly
expressed by the Security Council in discussing
the protection of civilians and in making it a central
element of its peacekeeping missions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, more
than in other conflict zones across the world, thousands
of people fall victim to war every day. With more than
8 million people killed in 15 years of successive wars
13-23027

inflicted on my country, the massacre of civilians in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of
the grimmest spectacles that humankind has seen
since the Second World War. Furthermore, the war
situation currently prevailing in the eastern part of
my country, more specifically in North Kivu province
and its surrounding areas, has given rise to recurring
violence and new forms of criminal activity, whose
primary victims are women and children. The most
frequent violations, usually perpetrated with complete
impunity by rebel groups and their external backers, are
killings, systematic rape, kidnappings, sexual torture,
unlawful arrests and detentions, forced displacement,
the enlisting of children and extreme forms of torture
and cruelty.
As the Governor of North Kivu province has
underscored, there are approximately 3 million
internally displaced persons and almost 500,000
Congolese have been forced to cross the borders.
Frequently without assistance, those blameless men,
women, children and elderly people die, some on the
road, others in their camps, often with no effective
support.
There is flagrant evidence of grave human rights
violations committed against the children in North Kivu
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23). The Council has
well-documented proof that one of its members, in this
case Rwanda, is providing direct military assistance
to those M23 terrorists. It facilitates the recruitment
of combatants to the movement, incites and assists
the desertion of soldiers of the Congolese Armed
Forces, provides the M23 with weapons, munitions and
intelligence, and gives it political advice.
From the legal standpoint, we would note the
progress made in the area of international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, international
criminal law and human rights legislation. Be they
nationals or foreigners, the responsibility of the
perpetrators of such actions must be clearly established
in accordance with the basic norms of international
humanitarian law.
To that end, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, which enshrine respect for the individual
during conflicts and advocate that people not directly
participating in hostilities be spared the suffering of
war. They prohibit in particular inhuman treatment,
hostage-taking,
massacres,
torture,
summary
executions, deportation, illegal detention, looting and
the wanton destruction of private property. Attacks
59

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

against civilians and their property have been prohibited
since the adoption in 1977 of the first two additional
Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Protocol
I introduces the basic principle of the distinction
between civilians and combatants and civilian property
and military objectives.

convening this open debate under its presidency. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their helpful statements.

Despite all that progress, civilians throughout
the world have become the primary victims of armed
conflict and are frequently subjected to all kinds of
abuse. It is nevertheless encouraging to learn that
for some time the Council has explicitly pursued a
protection of civilian agenda that includes respect for
international humanitarian law, operational issues
pertaining to peacekeeping operations and access to
humanitarian assistance. The Secretary-General’s
call for increased access for humanitarian assistance
and the establishment of a working group entrusted
with examining ways to translate the Council’s
commitment to protection into tangible results for
populations in danger remains very relevant. It is also
interesting to note that in December 2009, the Council
recognized in resolution 1894 (2009) that it should set
up comprehensive operational guidelines on the tasks
and responsibilities of peacekeeping troops for the
protection of civilians.

The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

In conclusion, my delegation calls for the full
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard, in particular those
urging the Security Council to systematically include
provisions for the strict respect of international
humanitarian and human rights law in all its resolutions
authorizing peacekeeping missions and other United
Nations missions. We also call for the implementation
of the recommendation ordering the referral of grave
cases of rape and other forms of sexual violence
to the International Criminal Court or for targeted
sanctions against States and non-State armed groups
that commit or support such crimes to be considered.
We urge that the aide-mémoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/25, annex)
be applied consistently during deliberations on the
mandates of peacekeeping missions and other United
Nations missions, in draft resolutions and presidential
statements and in the Council’s work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the previous
speakers in thanking the Republic of Korea for

60

The concerns highlighted by the Secretary-General
and the five core challenges identified for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict continue to demand our
serious attention. Similarly, gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, deliberate and collateral
attacks on children, schools, health-care facilities
and the denial of humanitarian access to trapped
populations, inter alia, are a disturbing backdrop to
conflict situations, as has been the case for centuries.
That is nothing new. The history of conflict, invasions
and revolution contains a litany of violence against
women, children and the vulnerable.
Today, the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel has also become an increasing concern. Our
discussion must take all these angles into account. If
not, its value will diminish.
Just as the abuse of women and children in conflict
situations has been widespread, in post-conflict
environments also the challenges faced by women and
children remain formidable. Civilization’s superficial
veneer is often shattered by the base violence that is
unleashed on the most vulnerable in conflict situations.
Conflict often dislocates families, shatters livelihoods
and also leads to sole-breadwinner situations, with the
resulting negative consequences. Mothers are often
made single as the result of conflict, and, in some cases,
this increases vulnerability to sexual harassment,
exploitation and violence. We also should not forget
the sad reality of child soldiers — children who have
been brutally deprived of their childhood and who have
been used to commit the most appalling acts of violence
against family and community. To an increasing extent,
the violence is unleashed by returned service personnel
on those who are closest to them.
It would seem that the status of civilians in conflict
situations in 2012 has not qualitatively changed, despite
the concerted efforts made by the United Nations and
the Security Council in particular. The slow pace of

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

change underlines the reality that the task of protection
cannot be addressed only in theoretical terms or by
relying solely on established standards. It requires an
understanding of a multiplicity of different elements,
ranging from political factors, socioeconomic realities,
psychological shadows, the proliferation of small
arms and the influence of the media. Studies should
be multifaceted, and remedial action must be designed
flexibly.
But one must remember that reports of civilian
trauma may sometimes be the result of deliberately
distorted propaganda. The resort to modern technology
and propaganda methods by rebel groups, in particular
terrorist groups and their networks of sympathizers and
the agitated media, is a reality. That is another factor
that needs to be kept in mind when addressing the
question of violence against civilians.
The protection of civilians poses a difficult challenge
in situations where civilians are used as human shields
and bargaining chips by rebel groups. That has made
the application of the standard principles a nightmare.
Once again, there must be a serious consideration of
practical realities based on the experiences of States,
instead of the theoretical application of a one-size-fitsall humanitarian framework. The Security Council
could make a seminal contribution to the development
of the relevant principles by making a study of those
issues.
Sri Lanka has consistently supported the principles
highlighted in the Council’s thematic resolutions since
1999. Sri Lanka’s commitment is demonstrated in the
way in which our approach to civilian protection evolved
during the conflict with the terrorist Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, especially at its end and in its aftermath. With
adherence to a policy goal of zero civilian casualties
despite the provocations offered, the conflict ended, but
its legacy remains.
I wish also to point out the speedy and efficacious
manner in which Sri Lanka addressed the post-conflict
resettlement of internally displaced persons, the robust
nature of its ongoing post-conflict reconstruction and
development, and the pursuit of accountability and
reconciliation through domestic mechanisms to address
infractions of the law. All child combatants, who are
treated as victims, not villains, have been sent back to
their communities after a period of rehabilitation, in
less than three years. UNICEF played a key facilitating
role in this matter.

13-23027

My delegation hopes that the Council’s discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate a wider
appreciation of the inherent challenges and practical
outcomes based on ground realities. We must also
avoid the convenient and selective application of noble
principles. Reality is to be found not in newspaper
headlines but at the unexciting ground level. It is for
that reason that my delegation has sought to share
some key areas of our post-conflict experience, and we
encourage all to invest greater efforts in understanding
the causes of conflict and in preventing conflicts and
their recurrence, and to respond practically and with
sensitivity to situations affecting civilian populations.
We also continue to emphasize the fact that the nature
of contemporary conflicts poses new challenges to
the established legal principles for the protection of
civilians in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on South Korea’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council, and I thank you
for having convened this important debate.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
Given the lateness of the hour, I will concentrate
on one important aspect of the protection of civilians,
namely, the issue of accountability.
While the Security Council’s primary responsibility
is the settlement of disputes, which constitute a threat
to international peace and security, in situations where
civilians are being targeted the Council must also
take all measures at its disposal to protect the civilian
population until such settlement is reached. Such
measures must include ensuring that the perpetrators
of serious crimes are held accountable in cases where
national authorities fail to prosecute them.
Political reconciliation and accountability are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. It is not
an either/or question. All political solutions, in order to
become lasting ones, must be based on accountability.
There can be no peace without justice. Furthermore,
accountability can serve as an effective deterrent and
may contribute to the prevention of future attacks
against the civilian population.
It is on the basis of the aforementioned principles that
Hungary joined the initiative of Switzerland and signed

61

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

a letter, along with 56 other Member States — almost
one third of the United Nations membership, from all
corners of the world — requesting the Security Council
to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We are heartened to note that
the initiative is now supported by additional Member
States, including members of the Council. It is now the
collective responsibility of the Council to act on this
request when addressing the situation in Syria.
In a similarly disturbing armed conflict situation,
we note with appreciation that based on the request
of Mali, the ICC is now investigating all crimes
within its jurisdiction committed in that country
since January 2012. Key regional and international
organizations have acknowledged the need for justice
as part of the resolution of the crisis in Mali.
It is our fervent hope that in future the Security
Council will increasingly look at the ICC not only
as an important ally that may assist the Council in
its task related to the protection of civilians, but also
acknowledge its indirect role in the prevention of
conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like, on behalf of the Arab Group,
to congratulate your friendly country on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We are grateful to the Republic of Korea, especially
Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan, for organizing this
debate, which provides an opportunity to reinforce
the measures that the Security Council has adopted to
protect civilians. We also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
participation in this meeting.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) notes that civilians form the bulk of the
victims in cases of armed conflict as the result, inter
alia, of deliberate targeting and collateral attacks that
violate international humanitarian law and human
rights law. The report also points out that there is much
work to be done, if we are to deal with the fundamental
and important challenges presented by the protection
of civilians, particularly ensuring the compliance of all
parties to a conflict with the principles of international
humanitarian law. The fact that various parties to

62

conflicts refuse, relying on a culture of impunity, to
comply with the provisions regarding the protection of
civilians should not be ignored and should be dealt with
severely and promptly, since otherwise the parties are
encouraged to threaten civilians.
Despite the progress that has been made in
strengthening the protection of civilians in cases of
armed conflict, the issue continues to pose a challenge to
international law and humanitarian law and requires us
to do more to compel parties to conflict to refrain from
using explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
We cannot talk about the protection of civilians without
taking into consideration the problem of security.
Improving security is therefore not only a humanitarian
task but one that requires various efforts, in particular
the application of the relevant laws aimed at protecting
civilians in armed conflict without distinction at both
the national and the international levels.
It is indeed sad that while we are holding this
debate, many civilians all over the world, and notably
in our Arab region, have to cope with acts of violence
that result in deaths and the displacement of refugees.
Women and children are the most vulnerable to such
risks and the most affected, particularly through sexual
violence and physical and psychological abuse, and they
form the bulk of displaced refugees. People’s houses,
schools and hospitals are being targeted to a degree that
the international community can no longer ignore under
any pretext. Considering the international response so
far, bearing in mind humanitarian principles and the
goal of protecting as many civilians as possible, and
looking beyond the work of the various United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the international community
must, through its international institutions, build on its
positive achievements and continue its efforts to protect
civilians.
The Arab Group urges the Security Council to
continue to strive to take the necessary measures to
protect civilians and strengthen prompt accountability
for any violations against civilians. We also wish to
affirm the importance of mandating United Nations
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians, one of the
most significant measures that the Security Council
can take to strengthen protection.
We would like to touch on two specific cases,
without prejudice to any others. Violence is a constantly
recurring phenomenon in the occupied Palestinian
territory, and since the last meeting of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

(S/PV.6790), the people of Gaza have been subjected
to Israeli aggression. This time, as often before, the
occupying forces showed no regard for the lives of
civilians, as the Israeli air force bombed residential
areas, resulting in the deaths of several hundred men,
women and even children in Gaza. We ask: How long
will Israel continue to believe that it can disregard
the importance of human life and use excessive force
without accountability? The occupied Palestinian
territory has become one of the most egregious
examples of a place where the Geneva Conventions are
violated and international humanitarian law ignored.
In Syria, the threat that Syrians are facing as a
result of the evolution of the current crisis has reached
terrifying proportions. The Arab Summit held in
Baghdad in 2012 called on the Syrian Government to
end all acts of violence, protect Syrian civilians, allow
international organizations immediate access, hold
all those responsible for violations of human rights
accountable and not tolerate impunity. On 12 November,
the League of Arab States expressed its deep concern
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Syria and its serious attendant effects on civilians,
calling on the Security Council to put an end to the
cycle of violence in Syria and provide all necessary
support for the people of Syria to defend themselves
and strengthen and coordinate Arab and international
efforts.
Speaking in my national capacity, I would like to
say that Israel’s repeated acts of aggression against
the Palestinians have gone beyond all humanitarian
principles and standards of international legitimacy.
All kinds of weapons and excessive force have been
used against civilians, notably in the Gaza Strip. The
Israeli Government has refused to halt the crimes
being committed by armed settlers against Palestinian
civilians, who are already suffering from Israel’s
oppressive policies, which threaten their security and
deprive them of the ability to exercise their fundamental
rights. The Palestinian economy is under siege, and
Palestinians’ standard of living has fallen as a result
of the obstacles put in the way of a normal life and
the withholding of their tax revenues. The Gaza Strip
has become an enormous prison in which all civilians
suffer.
Conditions in the sister republic of Syria have,
regrettably, led to one of the major situations where
civilians are in danger. The oppressive policies of the
regime have resulted in the deaths of almost 70,000

13-23027

Syrian nationals, most of them civilians, including
women, children and the elderly; not to mention the
hundreds of thousands of wounded and the detainees;
families that have lost their heads of household and their
houses; the displaced persons and refugees and others
who are suffering from shortages of food and needed
medicines. The approach of the Syrian regime since the
Syrian people’s protests began has been characterized
by a basic disregard for the population and for citizens’
rights, dignity, security and freedom. It has not
complied with international humanitarian principles,
notably the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and has shown a total
disregard for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the collective responsibility of the
international community to observe and protect human
rights for all, as affirmed in paragraph (c) of Article 55
of the Charter: “universal respect for, and observance
of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all”.
Civilians in Syria are increasingly subject to dangers
and threats as the Syrian regime has used its entire
military arsenal, including indiscriminate weapons like
cluster bombs, in residential areas. The regime pursues
oppressive policies that affect only civilians, such as
cutting off electricity, communications and food and
medical supplies, in addition to targeting hospitals and
other medical facilities, which increases the suffering
of civilians who have nowhere to go. They cannot
even seek refuge in hospitals or places of worship. The
unjustified targeting of civilians is one of the most
abhorrent violations of human rights and a flagrant
breach of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, and is a challenge to international
legitimacy, including resolution 1894 (2009) regarding
the protection of civilians.
Furthermore, and taking into consideration the
State’s fundamental responsibility to protect its
citizens, Syria’s deliberate and methodical policies are
in disregard of its responsibility and represent a shabby
attempt to control the country through the use of force,
threats and terrorism. It is indeed regrettable that
women and children in Syria are the most vulnerable to
such oppressive policies. In many cases, rape has been
used by malicious loyalists of the Syrian regime against
women and children. The displacement of more than
700,000 Syrians to neighbouring States as refugees and
of around 2 million more inside the country has affected
the education of hundreds of thousands of children, and
traumatized them and other victims. Not only has the
Syrian regime made life hell for those Syrians who have
63

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

been forced to seek refuge in camps in neighbouring
States, but it also planted mines along the routes they
take to escape those oppressive policies and hindered
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to them.

responsibility to end the violence lies with the regime.
Certainly, the international community should play its
part in extending a helping hand to the Syrian people
in need.

The State of Qatar calls once again on the
international community, and in particular the
Security Council, to assume their role, as established
in the Charter of the United Nations, in maintaining
international peace and security and to respond firmly,
affirmatively and promptly to the dangers faced by the
Syrian civilians. We are of the view that, should the
Council fail to find a solution to the Syrian problem,
the United Nations should take measures to protect
Syrian civilians. In their suffering, the Syrian people
are losing confidence in the international community.

The current level of cooperation with humanitarian
assistance institutions is further aggravating the dire
circumstances. That validates the relevance of the
calls for unhindered access to all areas, by the most
convenient and effective routes, in order to implement
the humanitarian response plan. Bilateral and collective
initiatives should focus not only on the humanitarian
consequences, but also on the political causes of the
crisis, which seriously threaten regional peace and
stability.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing and presiding
over this debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a common concern for us all and constitutes one of
the top priorities of the international community.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts continues to be civilians. We condemn all
attacks on civilians and are deeply concerned about
their destructive effects, particularly on women and
children. Turkey therefore welcomes the increased
attention of the Council to the issue of the protection
of civilians. We believe that the normative framework
on the protection of civilians has been largely
established. There now needs to be an increased focus
on implementation, rather than on norm setting. It is
now time to translate legal commitments into action.
There is no doubt that the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However,
the international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States openly fail to do so. The Security Council
has a particular and inevitable obligation in that regard,
which has consequences on the ground.
Syria is a case in point. The humanitarian situation
in Syria is growing grimmer every day as we approach
the two-year mark for the crisis. The regime has
failed to fulfil its responsibility to protect civilians,
in a grave escalation of violence with use of its heavy
weaponry, aerial bombings and missiles. The primary
64

Regrettably, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also
continues to be a major threat to regional peace.
Central to the crisis is the ongoing occupation of
the land of the State of Palestine and the policies to
maintain the occupation. The illegal blockade of Gaza
is in its sixth year, in defiance of international law,
including resolution 1860 (2009). The recent Operation
Pillar of Defense resulted in the deaths of over 100
Palestinians and severe damage to their livelihoods.
With discriminating regulations in force, as well as
faits accomplis on the ground in the form of settlement
activities, the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people are denied every day not only in Gaza and the
West Bank, but also elsewhere in the region where they
are living as refugees. The obstacles created by the
occupation are incompatible with the dignity and value
of human beings. They must be eliminated without
further delay.
Unfortunately most of our attention and efforts
come when it is time to extinguish crises that have
escalated into violence. The best protection that can be
offered to civilians is to prevent armed conflicts in the
first place and to address their root causes. We need
to place greater emphasis on preventing conflicts from
erupting. That will save many lives and resources.
In that context, the promotion of human rights,
the rule of law, democracy and good governance
should continuously be on our agenda at the global and
regional levels. Those concepts are not only essential
to a functioning and healthy society, but they are also
important to the prevention of conflict, as they are the
building blocks of a society that is least likely to fall
into conflict. Furthermore, in cases when conflicts
cannot be prevented, the presence of those qualities
assists the protection of civilians by decreasing the
13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

intensity of the conflict, the level of violence and the
chances of relapse.
We should also make sure that the perpetrators of
crimes against civilians are held fully accountable for
their actions. That pertains not only to the punitive,
but even more so to the preventive face of justice. The
international community has a duty to do more in that
direction, including through capacity-building and
technical assistance.
The importance of peacekeeping operations in
relation to the protection of civilians has also increased
throughout the years. That is clearly reflected in the
growing number of protection of civilians mandates. In
formulating and planning the implementation of such
mandates, there is a need to listen more to regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant countries that are active in
such crisis areas. They have a better understanding of the
difficulties on the ground and of the cultural differences
and sensitivities of each country. Furthermore, when
tasked with mandates for the protection of civilians,
we must ensure that proper resources and training are
provided to peacekeepers.
Before I conclude my remarks, allow me to
reiterate the clear distinction between the counterterrorism efforts of law enforcement agencies and
armed conflict as regards the application of the
concept of the protection of civilians. Turkey strongly
condemns all acts of terrorism and acknowledges the
legitimate right of Governments to combat terrorism.
Furthermore, the utmost diligence should be observed
in order not to extend any sense of legitimacy to
terrorist organizations. On this note, we would like to
once again underline our position that United Nations
documents should not contain positive references to
non-governmental organizations that are known to
have become instruments for terrorist organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to convey to you, Sir, my congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for having
convened today’s debate on the protection of civilians
in armed confl ict. I would also like to thank you for the
concept paper (S/2013/75, annex) that you have kindly
circulated in order to enrich the debate on this item,
taking into account the fact that 13 years have passed

13-23027

since the Secretary-General submitted his first report
to the Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957).
The successive debates in the Security Council on
this subject seek to promote a global approach to and
an objective vision for the best way to protect civilians
while avoiding any politicization of the concept of
the protection of civilians and any recourse to double
standards in addressing it, because civilians who die,
who are killed by missiles, should be protected by the
Security Council. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has not even lifted a finger in several recent cases. Many
civilian populations have been exposed to danger.
Attacking the underlying causes of conflict and
achieving a comprehensive, lasting and peaceful
settlement of conflict guarantees the protection of
civilians. We fully agree with the concept paper
that the civilian population is the primary victim of
armed conflict. However, we must take into account
the important truth that armed groups target civilian
populations in order to cause civilian casualties,
including women and children, thereby provoking the
international community against Governments and
compelling its involvement in conflict situations. The
best example of this is the armed groups operating
in populated areas in Darfur, which try to provoke
the international community against the Government
by attacking civilians. It is regrettable that none of
those who have taken the floor during this meeting to
talk about the situation of civilians in the two states
of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan has addressed
the underlying causes of that situation, namely, the
resurgence of attacks by armed groups in those two
states. That illustrates what I said earlier concerning
the politicization of the very concept of the protection
of civilians.
In that regard, we note that rebels from the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North),
who are attacking towns in densely populated Southern
Kordofan, are also attacking the offices of humanitarian
organizations such as UNICEF and the World Health
Organization that are located in those towns. That is a
clear example of attacks by such groups against civilian
populations. Therefore, the Security Council must play
its role with respect to the so-called SPLM-North, and
call upon South Sudan to immediately disassociate
itself from those rebel groups in order to enable the
implementation of the agreements reached between our
two countries.

65

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

In considering the question of the protection of
civilians, priority must be given to ensuring successful
peacebuilding and peaceful political settlements, as
well as to requiring armed groups to participate in the
political process and peaceful negotiations in order
to achieve their objectives, rather than resorting to
military action or attempts to manipulate public opinion
by causing civilian casualties.
It goes without saying that the genuine experiences
of a number of countries have clearly demonstrated that
in the absence of peace on the ground, peacekeeping
missions, however large they may be, will not achieve
their objectives, because only peace can truly protect
civilians. Peace on the ground is conducive to the
implementation of recovery programmes, including
reconstruction, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and the application and implementation
of rapid-impact projects to facilitate the employment of
internally displaced persons and returning refugees.

Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): I promise that I
will be brief in my comments. Georgia welcomes this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the delegation of the Republic of Korea in
convening this important meeting. Furthermore, we
warmly welcome Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea,
and other ministers, as well as Ms. Navanethem Pillay
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Their attendance and statements
have undoubtedly contributed to our constructive and
comprehensive deliberations today.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to add some comments in
my national capacity.

My delegation appeals to the Council and through
you, Sir, to all members of the international community
to support the ongoing peace efforts of the Government
of the Sudan. We also call upon the Council to send a
strong message to those who refuse to recognize the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to put down their
weapons and join the peace process.

More than 10 years have passed since the Security
Council convened its initial open debate on the issue
(see S/PV.3977), yet armed conflict still affects
millions of people, depriving them of the necessities
of substistence and their basic human rights. Such
developments urgently call for an increased effort
from the United Nations community to protect affected
populations at international, regional and national
levels.

In conclusion, the principle of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a noble one to which we
all aspire. However, we are concerned over attempts
to use that objective to political ends, such as the
campaign currently under way with respect to the socalled the responsibility to protect. I reiterate that while
the concept of the responsibility to protect is included
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), it is interpreted in many different
ways by Member States, since it contradicts principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the sovereignty of States and their legitimate and total
responsibility to protect their citizens.

Unfortunately my country has not been spared
the effects of armed conflict. Throughout the years,
despite serious concerns raised by relevant United
Nations agencies, hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees remain deprived of
the internationally recognized right to return to their
homes — a right which has been reaffirmed numerous
times by the community of nations. Despite the efforts
of the Government of Georgia to ease the burden of the
displaced where they currently reside, the failure of all
actors to recognize the inherent right to return is an
open challenge to the international rights framework. It
requires our close attention and timely resolution.

It must also be recalled that the right to protect
civilians in armed conflict is only one element of an
integrated whole comprised of interlinked rights and
obligations that are reasserted by that very Outcome
Document. These include achieving sustainable
development, combating poverty and preventing
conflict by addressing its underlying causes.

The good efforts of the co-chairs of the international
discussions in Geneva, including the representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Antti Turunen,
and other facilitators from the United Nations family to
remedy the situation have been repeatedly frustrated.
They require the continued moral, political and practical
support of this body.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.

Yet another vital issue is the international
community’s ability to assess the human rights

66

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

situation in areas where official authorities are unable
to exercise their sovereign rights and that are under the
effective military and or civilian control of other actors.
In such situations, international human rights and
humanitarian law are based on mutual complementarity
and prescribe a minimum threshold level of protection
of the civilian population. To comply with human rights
and humanitarian law requirements, a concerned party
shall provide such protection and guarantee the effective
legal remedy in every individual case of infringement.
Safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
actors to people in need of protection and assistance
is another important element. It is imperative that
populations residing in conflict-affected areas be
provided with unhindered humanitarian aid and that
relevant international actors be allowed to carry out
their activities.
One of the purposes of today’s debate is to further
engage the international community in addressing
all relevant challenges. Here, I would underline that
Georgia fully supports and encourages the continued
efforts of the international community in transforming
the protection of civilians into a reality for all those
who are caught up in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate the Republic of Korea on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February, and to wish you, Sir, full success during
your tenure. Please accept also our appreciation for
convening today’s debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We commend the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
constructive remarks.
Undoubtedly, we all share a fundamental
responsibility to once again take stock of progress on
key protection issues that affect civilians caught up in
conflict situations. We recognize the significant steps
taken by the Security Council to address the challenges
confronting the protection of civilians, in particular
the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), which laid the
foundation for ensuring compliance with international
provisions aimed at safeguarding civilians caught up in
perilous situations.

13-23027

Furthermore, the central challenge identified
in the Secretary-General’s report, contained in
document S/2012/376, remains a critical concern and
underscores the need for a concerted approach to
protecting the safety, dignity, integrity and sanctity
of civilians affected in contemporary armed conflict
through adherence to obligations under international
humanitarian law, refugee law and human rights law.
Those instruments set out the minimum protection
standards applicable, especially where civilians are
most vulnerable, and seek to prevent situations that
might exacerbate vulnerabilities, such as displacement
and the destruction of civilian property.
Despite the systematic engagement of the United
Nations in seeking ways to streamline and improve
peacekeeping protection standards, there are a number
of inherent challenges due to the ambiguity on how the
United Nations should intervene when Member States
lack either the military force or the political will to
halt all forms of carnage against innocent civilians.
Ultimately, the end-state objective of a peacekeeping
mission should include a protection mandate as part of
the international response so as to create an enabling
environment in which to take the appropriate steps to
ensure accountability. In that regard, we owe special
gratitude to the peacekeepers who take on the challenge
of implementing protection functions in the field, and
it is our responsibility to collectively ease the burden
of peacekeepers by matching resources to tasks in
fulfilment of the protection mandate. Peacekeeping
missions should be sufficiently resourced with adequate
mobility to provide the desired operational latitude in
challenging environments.
The development of strategies for a well-structured
protection approach shows an unswerving determination
to assume a more robust protection posture and the
adoption of the aide-memoire in 2010 (S/PRST/2010/25,
annex), together with a comprehensive protection
mandate, is a clear testament to the measures aimed
at enhancing the implementation of the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping and other relevant missions.
Addressing impunity should not be considered
an afterthought; rather, the Security Council should
proactively seek to ensure an appropriate international
response, especially in cases where national authorities
fail to take responsibility under the protection laws.
On that score, Sierra Leone unreservedly calls on
all parties to conflict situations, State and non-State
actors alike, to respect the laws of armed conflict,

67

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as specific domestic criminal laws.
Sierra Leone unequivocally condemns the
increasing attacks on humanitarian personnel, including
health-care providers, women and children, and it urges
Member States to ensure respect for protected persons,
in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We commend the support of the
United Nations and international partners for the work
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Through its
work, the Special Court for Sierra Leone has made a
number of critical contributions to the advancement of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.
In particular, we hail the Special Court for bringing to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against humanity and
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed in Sierra Leone during the course
of conflict.
The United Nations is the only organization through
which the forces of all major Powers, including rising
regional Powers, can jointly participate in providing
stability. The participation of major Powers in missions
would not only enhance rapid deployment but also
signal to potential spoilers that opposition to the mission
carries real political costs. It would particularly hamper
the activities of those who supply arms in situations
where violations of international law can be regarded
as a shared responsibility for the use of their weapons
to target civilians. Success in reducing the human cost
of unregulated arms proliferation will depend largely
on creating a sense of responsibility and accountability
among those who produce and distribute and those who
use arms against innocent civilians.
Next month, the final United Nations Conference
on the Arms Trade Treaty will be held here in New York
in order to finalize the terms of the treaty in an open
and transparent manner. It is hoped that the platform
will comprehensively tie up all loose strings in order to
better serve those for whom we have a responsibility to
protect. If we continue to delay in that respect, we shall
continue to face the risk of the their use in committing
grave violations of national and international law, which
have the potential to destabilize peace and security. We
therefore urge Member States to consider our moral
obligation to humankind as our key guiding principle,
and to sincerely commit themselves to contributing
to the establishment of mechanisms to prevent the
diversion of such weapons into the illicit market.

68

In conclusion, the timing of this debate could not
be more appropriate, given that Africa is still home
to a number of conflicts. In particular, the spate of
extremist activities in northern Mali is regrettably
leading to the extensive loss of lives and massive
destruction of property, including coveted World
Heritage sites. Sierra Leone strongly condemns such
cowardly acts and will continue to work closely with
all partners, particularly within the framework of the
wider international community, in seeking a lasting
solution to protect civilians. Let me further express
the hope that our collective resolve in this open debate
would continue to translate into concrete improvements
in the implementation of international human rights
and humanitarian law to address protection challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the Republic
of Korea on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. At the same time,
I would like to express our welcome to Mr. Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Minister for External Relations of
Brazil; Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Rwanda; and
Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu Mammadyarov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, and to thank them for
their contributions to this debate. I also welcome the
presence of Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Bolivia aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia respects
all its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. Our political Constitution proclaims that
Bolivia is a peaceful country that promotes the culture
of peace and the right to peace, as well as international
cooperation. As one way to prevent harm to civilians,
our Constitution prohibits the installation of foreign
military bases on our territory.
The report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376) underscores

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

ongoing and emerging concerns with regard to the
issue. They include the proliferation and fragmentation
of non-State armed groups, the displacement of the
civilian population within and across borders, the
continuing violence and the difficulties facing women
and children during armed conflicts, as well as the
prevailing culture of impunity.
Bolivia believes that, in analysing and considering
the situation of civilians in armed conflict, it is essential
to define the root causes of many such armed conflicts
that the world has suffered and continues to experience.
We live in a reality characterized by frequent attacks by
an empire, ongoing interference in the internal affairs
of developing States, the plundering of their wealth and
the promotion of regional conflicts for economic and
political gains.
Many wars, and consequently the civilian victims
of those wars, occur because of expansionist goals
and the desire to take over the energy resources of
peoples. That reason causes the continuing destruction
of the infrastructure of the various countries and the
indiscriminate killing of blameless civilians, leading of
course to violations of international law.
One of the topics to be considered at the United
Nations in the near future is the arms trade treaty.
Bolivia hopes that that international legal instrument
does not become, as have some others, a tool of the
arms industry and the multinationals that profit from
weapons and from war.
Bolivia expresses its concern over the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles, which have killed and
wounded blameless civilians. Such equipment and their
operations violate international law owing not only to
their effects but also to the fact that those who command
and control them remain unpunished.

Security Council has acted by choosing which civilians
merit such protection and which do not. That is why
it has often been reported that the Security Council
has taken decisions that have led to a lack of security
on the planet. One colleague, the representative of
another State, very clearly pointed out the outcome
of events in Libya and Syria. Why is there such rapid
action purportedly to protect some civilians in Libya
and similar steps are not taken to protect the civilians
in Palestine? Powerful nations that have unfortunately
shown themselves willing to manipulate international
institutions or to apply such double standards have
frequently committed widespread abuse, while at the
same time denying any responsibility for the killing.
The protection of civilians is sometimes a
smokescreen. We believe that, among others, at least
two tasks are essential if we are truly willing to act in
accordance with our words. The first has to do with
the fact that all countries, in particular those that seek
to protect civilians and to defend democracy beyond
their borders, have not only the moral but also the
international obligation to ratify the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. There are major
countries not party to such international instruments
that are not subject to the same courts as other States
and individuals.
The other issue that we believe is crucial — I am
sure that members have often heard it discussed — is
the vital and urgent need to reform the Security Council.
Such reform would make this body not only more
democratic but also more legitimate. The status quo
may comply with the interests of a handful of States but
not of the international community or the principles on
which the Charter of the United Nations is founded and,
in the case of our debate, the protection of civilians.

We commend the decision to investigate several
of the strikes by those unmanned aerial vehicles. We
wonder whether those responsible will be referred to
the International Criminal Court if the investigation
finds that war crimes have been committed through
the use of such unmanned aircraft. Or are there double
standards in determining which civilian victims merit
international protection and which do not or which
of those responsible for such crimes should or should
not be subject to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court?

We believe that the use of force should be avoided
and that the tragic humanitarian situation facing many
countries should be brought to an end. We are convinced
that the world would be much safer and would of course
have fewer civilian victims if the problems and root
causes of armed conflicts were resolved. It is matter of
the need to respect all human rights, including the right
to water, energy, food, communications and all basic
services. We are convinced, and I confidently reiterate,
that if development and the fight against poverty
prevail, our objective of preventing civilians from
being the victims of armed conflict will also succeed.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot be addressed selectively. In some situations, the

The President: We have come to the end of the list
of speakers.

13-23027

69

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

I now call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to make a further statement.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation rejects the statement made by the
representative of Qatar in his national capacity, as well
as the unfounded lies contained therein. My delegation
affirms that Qatar is one of the countries to have
caused the suffering of civilians in Syria through its
Government’s support for the armed terrorists through
funds, weapons and communications. It has prevented
the crisis from being settled through a dialogue that
would have enabled Syrians to decide their own future.
The practices of the Government of Qatar completely
contradict its stated intentions and commitment to the
Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan, who wishes to make a
further statement.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): It is curious, to say the
least, that the representative of Armenia, the country
that bears primary responsibility for unleashing the
war against Azerbaijan, committing other serious
crimes during the conflict and failing to comply with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, takes
the floor in the Council and tries to lecture others about
such notions as peace and human rights.
My delegation will circulate a written response
containing detailed information on what the
representative of Armenia preferred to pass over in
silence and what he deliberately distorted in his speech,
The position of my Government on the issue is well
known. We are ready to provide interested delegations
with all necessary documents and evidence, which
will afford them an opportunity to make their own
assessment and to draw conclusions about the hopeless
attempts made by Armenia to mislead the international
community.
Finally, I thought it would be pertinent, in the
context of the topic of today’s debate, to recall what
the current President of Armenia, Serzh Sargsyan,
said about his own role in the massacres committed
against Azerbaijani civilians during the conflict. In his
answer to British journalist Thomas de Waal’s question
as to whether he had any regrets about the deaths of
thousands of people, the President of Armenia said: “I
have absolutely no regrets, since such upheavals are
necessary, even if thousands have to die”. Those words,
coming from the person who holds the highest political
70

and military post in Armenia, speak for themselves
and make any statements on behalf of his Government
in the United Nations and other international forums
irrelevant and absurd.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia, who wishes to make a
further statement.
Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to make a
further statement to address the provocative statements
made by the representative of Azerbaijan.
We regret that another attempt has been made
by that delegation to mislead Member States by
misrepresenting the causes and consequences of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and the history of those
years.
Again, to refresh the memory of the delegation of
Azerbaijan, it might be curious, but according to the
then Azerbaijani President Mutalibov, the responsibility
for the slaughter of the civilian population of the mostly
Azeri city of Khojalu, near the capital of Nagorno
Karabakh, Stepanakert, fully falls on the Azeri
opposition group, the Azerbaijani National Front. In
the days following the event, President Mutalibov, in an
interview with Czech journalist Dana Mazalova, said:
“The militia of the Azerbaijani National Front
obstructed and actually prevented the exodus of the
local population through the mountain passages
which had been specifically left open by Karabakh
Armenians to facilitate the flight of the civilian
population”.
While the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan
and his delegation are busy falsifying information in
order to make their propaganda machine even stronger,
there is an abundance of statements and testimony
that in fact point to the Khojalu incident being not
an Armenian war crime but, rather, a twisted, selfinflicted Azeri atrocity. An Azeri human rights activist
wrote: “The town and its citizens were deliberately
sacrificed for a political goal”; that reference appears
in Azerbaijani newspapers dated 1992.
Additional testimony comes from the chairs of
the Supreme Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
who stated that “the tragedy was committed by the
Azerbaijani authorities, specifically by a top-level
official”. That reference appears in an article in the
newspaper Muhalifat dated April 1992.

13-23027

S/PV.6917 (Resumpution 1)

Even former President Heydar Aliyev admitted
that the former leadership of Azerbaijan was guilty in
connection with the Khojalu events. According to the
Bilik Dunyasi news agency, in April 1992 President
Aliyev followed up with a shocking statement: “The
bloodshed will profit us. We should not interfere with
the course of events”.
Without further engagement in polemics, I would
suggest that the representative of Azerbaijan seek the
truth in his own country, with the participation of
political parties and civil society, in order to shed light
on the events of those days.
Last but not least, regarding the Security Council
resolutions in which the parties concerned were urged
to immediately resume negotiations with a view to the
resolution of the conflict under the peace process of
the Minsk Group and through direct contact, I would
like to stress that Azerbaijan itself was in violation
of the provisions. The Azerbaijani representatives
systematically refused to acknowledge the fact that the
measures taken by Armenia met exactly the request
made in those Council resolutions, namely, to use its
good offices with the authorities of Nagorno Karabakh
in order to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to make a further
statement.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I am sorry to ask
for the floor so late in the day. It is unfortunate that
the representative of Armenia has once again used

13-23027

the opportunity of our debate to make groundless,
propagandistic statements. In fact, the delegation of
Armenia has once again abused its right to speak from
the lofty rostrum of the United Nations.
The representative of Armenia did not even want
to take the trouble to listen carefully to what I said and
instead preferred to read out a written text containing
the set of standard falsifications. As a result, we have
heard irrelevant and out-of-context comments that
obviously failed to respond to our arguments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia to make a further statement,
on the condition that this be the last one.
Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I regret to be
taking the floor a second time. What I would suggest
is that instead of making fitful attempts to mislead
Member States and abuse the time allocated for this
debate, we suggest that the delegation of Azerbaijan
abandon its irresponsible means of propaganda
and try to explain to its Foreign Ministry and its
leadership that this Organization is much more suited
to serious deliberations on issues related to multilateral
cooperation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I thank all delegations that participated in today’s
open debate on the protection of civilians.
The meeting rose at 10.20 p.m.

71
