RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

903 (IX). Question of the representation of China in the General Assembly
(21 September 1954) .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . .. . . .. .
904 (IX). Voting procedure on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa: request for an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice (23 November 1954) (item 34) . . .
905 (IX). Report of the Security Council (4 December 1954) (item 11) . . . . . .
906 (IX). Complaint of detention and imprisonment of United Nations military
personnel in violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement ( 10 December
1954) (item 72) . . . .. . .. . .. .. . .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .
907 (IX). Appointment of members of the Peace Observation Commission ( 11
December 1954) (item 24) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . .

903

55
55
56
56
56

Justice to be replaced by a reference to the International Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 7
of the Mandate and Article 37 of the Statute of the
Court;",

(IX). Question of the representation of
China in the General Assembly

The General Assembly

Having expressed, in resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28
November 1953, its opinion "that without United
Nations supervision the inhabitants of the Territory
are deprived of the international supervision envisaged
by the Covenant of the League of Nations" and its
belief "that it would not fulfil its obligation towards
the inhabitants of South West Africa if it were not
to assume the supervisory responsibilities with regard
to the Territory of South \Vest Africa which were
formerly exercised by the League of Nations",

Decides not to consider, at its ninth regular session
during the current year, any proposals to exclude the
representatives of the Government of the Republic of
China or to seat representatives of the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of China.
473th plenary meeting,
21 September 1954.
904 (IX). Voting procedure on questions relating
to reports and petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa: request for an
advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice

Having regard to the opinion of the International
Court of Justice that "The degree of supervision to be
exercised by the General Assembly should not ... exceed
that which applied under the Mandates System, and
should conform as far as possible to the procedure
followed in this respect by the Council of the League
of Nations" and that "These observations are particularly applicable to annual reports and petitions",
Having adopted, by resolution 844 (IX) of 11 October 1954, a special rule F on the voting procedure
to be followed by the General Assembly in taking
decisions on questions relating to reports and petitions
:oncerning the Territory of South West Africa,
Having adopted this rule in a desire "to apply, as
far as possible, and pending the conclusion of an
agreement b~tween the United Nations and the Union
of South Africa, the procedure followed in that respect
by the Council of the League of Nations",
Considering that some elucidation of the advisory
opinion is desirable,

The General Assembly,
Having accepted, by resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950, the advisory opinion 1 of the International Court of Justice of 11 July 1950 with respect
to South West Africa,
Having regard, in particular, to the Court's opinion
on the general question, namely, "that South-West
Africa is a territory under the international Mandate
assumed by the Union of South Africa on December
17th, 1920", and to the Court's opinion on question
(a), namely, "that the Union of South Africa continues
to have the international obligations stated in Article
22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations and in
the Mandate for South-West Africa as well as the
obligation to transmit petitions from the inhabitants of
that Territory, the supervisory functions to be exercised by the United Nations, to which the annual
reports and the petitions are to be submitted, and the
reference to the Permanent Court of International

Requests the International Court of Justice to give
an advisory opinion on the following questions :
" (a) Is the following rule on the voting procedure
to be followed by the General Assembly a correct

1 See International Status of South West Africa, Advisory
Opinion: I.CJ. Reports 1950, p. 128.

65

56

General Auembly - Ninth SeNion

interpretation of the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 11 July 1950:
" 'Decisions of the General Assembly on questions
relating to repo,·ts and petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa shall be regarded as important questions within the meaning of Article 18,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.'"
" ( b) If this interpretation of the advisory opinion
of the Court is not correct, what voting procedure
should be followed by the General Assembly in
taking decisions on questions relating to reports
and petitions concerning the Territory of South
West Africa?"
501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.
905 (IX). Report of the Se4:urity Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 2 of the Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from 16
July 1953 to 15 July 1954.
503rd plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.
906 (IX). Complaint of detention and imprison•
ment of United Nations military personnel
in violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item proposed by the United
States of America as the Unified Command regarding
eleven members of the United States armed forces
under the United Nations Command captured by
Chinese forces when undertaking a mission on 12
January 1953, at the direction of the United Nations
Command,
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 2.

Recalling the provisions of article III of the Korean
Armistice Agreement3 regarding the repatriation of
prisoners of war,
1. Declares that the detention and imprisonment of
the eleven American airmen, members of the United
Nations Command, referred to in document A/2830,'
and the detention of all other captured personnel of the
United Nations Command desiring repatriation is a
violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement ;
2. Condemns, as contrary to the Korean Armistice
Agreement, the trial and conviction of prisoners of
war illegally detained after 25 September 1953;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the name of
the United NationsvJ:o seek the release, in accordance
with the Korj:an Armistice Agreement, of these eleven
United Nations Command personnel, and all other captured personnel of the United Nations Command still
detained;
4. Requests ilie Secfetary-General to make,. by the
means most appropriate in his judgment, continuing
and unremitting efforts to this end and to report
progress to all Members on or before 31 December
1954.
509th plenary meeting,
10 Decem;ier 1954.
907 (IX). Appointment of members of the Peace
Observation Commission

The General Assembly
Appoints as members of the Peace Observation Commission, for the calendar years 1955 and 1956, the
following fourteen States Members: China, Czechoslovakia, France, Honduras, India, Iraq, Israel, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Uruguay.
510th plenary meeting,
11 December 1954.
3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Eighth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document
S/3079.
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 72.
