General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

192

-----

Nations Children's Fund, for their invaluable assistance
to the ongoing work of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women;
4. Urges the regional commissions concerned that
have not already done so to strengthen their programmes for women from within regular budget
resources;
5. Requests all relevant organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system to review their financial and
technical support activities to assess both the involvement of and the impact on women, and to report to the
General Assembly every second year, beginning at the
thirty-sixth session, on the results of the reviews and, as
appropriate, corrective actions taken;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the voluntary
contributions pledged by Member States and appeals to
Member States that are in a position to do so to consider
giving or increasing their support to the Fund in order
to ensure the availability of resources sufficient to meet
rapidly multiplying demands in developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to rep0rt annually on the management of the Fund as well as on the progress in the implementation of its activities;
(b) To continue to include the Fund on an annual
basis as one of the programmes of the United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/138.

Expression of appreciation to the Government
and people of Denm11rk on the occasion of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at Copenhagen from 14 to 30 July 1980,
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Denmark for acting as host to the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/139.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations

---. ----- -

--

-

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, rn
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies with regard
to the participation of youth in achieving the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that
youth can make in promoting co-operation among
States and in implementing the new international
economic order and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 81
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of
channels of communication for the proper information
of youth and youth organizations and their effective
participation in the work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies at the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning of channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations form a
basic prerequisite for the successful preparation, celebration and follow-up of the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
I. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
implement fully, at the world-wide level, the adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth Organizations;
2. Requests !he Secretary-General to assist Governments and the regional commissions in the implementation of the adopted guidelines and to promote that implementation at the national and regional levels;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system, including the regional commissions, to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
adopted guidelines at the international, regional and
national levels;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, taking
into account the views expressed by Governments either
in their replies or in their statements before the General
Assembly, to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session, for adoption, proposals for additional guidelines, consistent with the guidelines already adopted by
the Assembly in its resolution 32/ 135, and on the basis
of the draft additional guidelines contained in the annex
to its resolution 34/ 163, as well as the suggestions of the
Secretary-General in his reports to the Assembly at its
thirty-third/ 2 thirty-fourth 8 -' and thirty-fifth 8 ~ sessions.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 35 of 16 December 1977,
in which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of
the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations,

Recalling its resolutions 33 /6 of 3 November 1978 and
34/163 of 17 December 1979, in which it invited Member States, the regional commissions and regional and
international youth organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council to comment on
the guidelines and to offer additional suggestions
regarding the further development of those guidelines,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/25 of 2 May 1980 concerning co-ordination
and information in the field of youth,

35/140.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is
to promote universal respect for human rights and fun'" A/35/503.
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.
"A/33/261.
"A/34/199
"A/35/503.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

damental freedoms without distinction of any kind,
including any distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social,
economic and political processes of development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also resolution 28 adopted on 30 July I 980
by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women,8 5
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women/"
I. Expresses its great satisfaction that, since the
adoption by the General Assembly in December 1979
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, seventy-nine Member
States have signed the Convention;
2. Notes with appreciation, in particular, that nine
Member States have acceded to or ratified the Convention;
3. Invites all States which have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention by signing and ratifying or acceding to it;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the status of the Convention.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

35/170.

in the Protection of Human Rights, organized by the
United Nations and held at The Hague from 14 to
25 April 1980,° 0
Recognizing that a number of Member States already
have legal provisions and safeguards which reflect the
principles of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
I. Calls upon all States:
(a) To consider favourably the use of the Code· of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials within the
framework of national legislation and practice or directives governing law enforcement agencies;
(b) To make the text of the Code of Conduct available to all law enforcement officials in their own
language;
(c) To instruct, in basic training programmes and in
all subsequent training and refresher courses, law enforcement officiali; in the provisions of the national
legislations which are connected with the Code of Conduct and other basic texts on human rights;
2. Invites Governments in all regions of the world to
consider measures to promote the application of the
Code of Conduct, including the organization of symposia on the role of law enforcement officials in the
protection of human rights;
3. Invites the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control to study the application of the Code of Conduct on the basis of the information received from
Member States, taking into account the recommendations of the national symposia on the role of law
enforcement officials in the protection of human rights,
and to include the outcome of its considerations in its
regular report to the Economic and Social Council.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

The General Assembly,
Aware of the prominent role that law enforcement officials have to play in the protection of human rights, in
particular the right to life, liberty and security of person,
and in the prevention and suppression of torture or
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment, laid down in articles 3 and 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 87
Recalling its resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979,
in which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
Recalling also resolution 12 adopted on 5 September
I 980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 88
Noting the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 84
which in article 5 provides, inter alia, for the duty of
States to include the prohibition against torture in the
training of competent officials,
Noting with interest the conclusions and recommendations of the Symposium on the Role of the Police
"See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.
"A/35/428.
"Resolution 217 A (Ill).
"See A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l, part one, chap. I, sect. B.
"Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

193

35/171.

Report of the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance to all nations of making rapid progress in the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders, in view of the significant increase
in crime, including new forms of crime, in various parts
of the world,
Considering that the phenomenon of crime, through
its impact on society, impairs the over-all development
of nations, undermines people's spiritual and material
well-being, compromises human dignity and creates a
climate of fear and violence that endangers personal
security and erodes the quality of life,
Considering that the international community should
make concerted, systematic efforts to co-ordinate and
stimulate technical and scientific co-operation and
policies directed towards crime prevention in the context
of political, economic, social and cultural development,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United
Nations in crime prevention under General Assembly
resolution 415 (V) of I December 1950, which was affirmed in Economic and Social Council resolutions 731 F
(XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXH) of
2 August 1961, and in the promotion and strengthening
"' ST/HR/SER.A/6, chap. Ill.
