A/70/359–S/2015/684

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
1 September 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Item 39 of the provisional agenda*
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventieth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report of 10 June 2015 ( A/69/929S/2015/422). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
During the reporting period, positive developments supportive of a possible
peace and reconciliation process, notably, the holding of direct talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban, ultimately gave way to increased
uncertainty following the announcement of the death of the Taliban leader, Mullah
Mohammad Omar. The Special Electoral Reform Commission commenced its work
and presented an initial package of recommendations to President Ashraf Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, while additional efforts were undertaken b y the
Government to further develop its economic reform agenda and finalize senior
appointments. Afghanistan continues, however, to face intersecting challenges
across the political, security and socioeconomic sectors that pose threats to the
population and the country’s social cohesion. The sustained conflict, which grew in
both intensity and geographic scope, continued to result in significant casualties and
displacement among Afghan civilians, as the Afghan National Security Forces
sought to counter the efforts of insurgent groups to undermine the Government.
* A/70/150.

15-14794 (E)

100915

*1514794*

A/70/359
S/2015/684

A.

Political developments
4.
In a positive development in support of peace, representatives of the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban held their first official, direct talks, in
Murree, Pakistan on 7 July, facilitated by the Government of Pakistan. China and
the United States of America attended the meeting as observers. The delegations
from the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban discussed issues pertaining to
peace and reconciliation and pledged to meet again as part of a continuing process.
The meeting in Murree followed a series of informal meetings between various
Afghan officials and Taliban representatives in other countries throughout May and
June. The Murree talks were widely welcomed, although reaction among some
Afghan political stakeholders was more guarded, with concerns expressed over the
intentions of the Taliban delegates and their capacity to represent the entire
movement. A subsequent statement issued by the Taliban on 15 June, in the name of
Mullah Omar, stressed that “political endeavours and peaceful pathways” were
legitimate under Islam and was perceived at the time as a softening of the
movement’s position on a peace process.
5.
However, on 29 July, the Government of Afghanistan publicly proclaimed that
the Taliban leader, Mullah Omar, had died in April 2013, in Pakistan. The next day,
a Taliban representative confirmed Omar ’s death “as a result of an illness”, but
without providing further details, and announced Mullah Akhtar Mohammad
Mansoor, Omar’s deputy since 2010, as his successor. Sirajuddin Haqqani, the son
of the founder of the Haqqani Network, Jalaluddin Haqqani, was announced as
Mansoor’s deputy along with the Taliban’s former Chief Justice, Haibatullah
Akhunzada. As a result of these events, a second meeting between Government and
Taliban emissaries, scheduled for 31 July in Pakistan, was postponed and has yet to
be rescheduled. In his first public message as the new Taliban leader, Mullah
Mansoor released a statement on 1 August calling for Taliban unity and continued
jihad, while characterizing reports of a peace process as enemy propaganda.
6.
Following the announcement of Mullah Omar ’s death, rifts within the Taliban
leadership emerged, with opposition to the appointment of Mullah Mansoor evident
from a number of prominent Taliban figures, notably including relatives of Mullah
Omar and Sayed Tayyeb Agha, the head of the Taliban Political Commission in
Qatar, who subsequently resigned his position in apparent protest. This opposition
notwithstanding, a significant number of Taliban members pledged their allegiance
to Mullah Mansoor as leader of the Taliban and on 13 August, the leader of
Al-Qaida, Ayman al-Zawahiri, did so as well.
7.
Since my previous report, the Government has appointed two more senior
officials. On 8 July, the lower house of the National Assembly confirmed a new
Governor of the Central Bank and one of two nominees for the Supreme Court. The
confirmed nominee, Sayed Yusuf Halim, was sworn in as Chief Justice on 27 July.
The second Supreme Court candidate and first woman nominee for a seat on the
Supreme Court was rejected. On 4 July, the lower house of the National Assembly
also rejected the Government’s nominee for Minister of Defence, Mohammad
Masoom Stanekzai. The latter was appointed as acting Minister on 23 May and has
continued to operate in that capacity. Other key positions that remain to be filled
and require confirmation by the lower house include the Attorney General and two
Supreme Court judges. The National Assembly rose for summer recess on 22 July
and will reconvene on 6 September. An additional 11 provincial governors were

2/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

appointed during the reporting period, for a total of 23 out of 34 provincial governor
appointments in 2015, including two women.
8.
On 19 June, the Office of the President announced that the lower house of the
National Assembly would continue its work until the next parliamentary elections.
The term of the lower house was otherwise set to expire on 22 Ju ne, in accordance
with the Constitution. In meetings with President Ghani, the Independent Election
Commission suggested two possible dates for holding lower house and district
council elections, in May or September 2016, but no announcement has yet been
made. With no clear election date set, and following the scaling down of
international donor funding for the Afghan electoral management bodies as detailed
in my previous report, the Independent Election Commission reduced staff from 911
to 504 and secured funding through the Ministry of Finance to maintain core
capacities. Possible changes in staffing and funding for the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission are being considered by the Government.
9.
Some progress has been made on the issue of electoral reform as agreed
between President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah in the 21 September
agreement to form a National Unity Government. After the President and the Chief
Executive reached agreement on its composition, chairmanship and operational
modalities, a Special Electoral Reform Commission was re-established by
presidential decree on 16 July. The Commission is composed of 14 members and
has a three-month, renewable mandate to make recommendations to the Government
on electoral reform. My Deputy Special Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto,
represents the United Nations as a non-voting member of the Commission, sitting in
an advisory capacity.
10. On 30 August, the Special Electoral Reform Commission presented its initial
package of recommendations to Chief Executive Abdullah, focusing on reforms for
the next elections. After intensive, five-week deliberations, the Commission
recommended changes to Afghanistan’s electoral system and electoral management
bodies, in addition to the invalidation of all existing voter registration cards and the
creation of a country-wide voters list. During the course of its work, the
Commission has undertaken a broad consultation process both in Kabul and key
provincial capitals, meeting with a wide range of stakeholders, including political
parties, prominent political figures, provincial authorities, civil society, religious
leaders and international organizations working on electoral issues in Afghanistan.
The United Nations has provided expert advice to the Commission, based on
international best practices, and has facilitated some of the Commission ’s external
consultations, including its provincial visits.
11. In accordance with President Ghani’s instruction to the Cabinet on 23 April,
all ministries and executive branch bodies presented 100-day strategies during the
reporting period, with the exception of the Ministry of Defence. Collectively, the
strategies reflect the Government’s reform agenda, with many presented publicly in
order to demonstrate the Government’s commitment to transparency and
accountability. On 28 June, the President’s Special Representative on reforms and
good governance, Ahmad Zia Massoud, presented his report on proposed
administrative reforms and offered recommendations to promote capacity -building
in the areas of anti-corruption, political participation and the civil service.
12. Nevertheless, nearly a year after its establishment, the National Unity
Government faces considerable domestic political pressure, exacerbated by the

15-14794

3/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

difficult security and economic situation. Critics of the current administration have
included former President Hamid Karzai, several of his associates and a number of
mujahideen leaders, all of whom have expressed their disagreement with President
Ghani’s outreach to Pakistan, specifically a memorandum of understanding
reportedly concluded in May between the Afghan National Directorate of Security
and the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence. On 14 July, President Ghani met with
the former President to explore grounds for future cooperation.
13. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) launched
four initiatives focused on promoting inclusive Afghan -owned and -led dialogue in
Baghlan, Bamyan, Daykundi and Kunduz Provinces. The initiatives were focused on
engagement with local ulema and resulted in recommendations to support the
latter’s role in local mediation efforts and conflict resolution mechanisms to address
drivers of conflict. Ulema involved in each of the initiatives called upon the
Government to strengthen linkages between local and national level reconciliation
efforts. On 15 July, participants in the Afghan People ’s Dialogue on Peace, a civil
society initiative supported by UNAMA, welcomed the dialogue between
Government officials and representatives of the Taliban and called for a cessation in
hostilities and practical steps to reduce the impact of the conflict on civilians. They
also asked the parties to consider the needs of the people, including women and
young people, in any negotiations.

B.

Security
14. Incident levels remained relatively consistent throughout the period, although
the overall numbers show a 4.6 per cent decrease compared with the same period in
2014. However, the sustained conflict grew in both intensity and geographic scope.
There was furthermore a noticeable spike in high-profile incidents in Kabul
following the confirmation of the death of Mullah Omar and reports of internecine
fighting among anti-Government elements in several areas.
15. The United Nations continued to monitor security-related events relevant to
the work, mobility and safety of civilian actors and having the potential to affect the
delivery of mandated activities and programmes. Between 1 May and 31 July, the
United Nations recorded 6,096 security-related incidents across the country. This
represented a 4.6 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2014, which
included the second round of the presidential election, while being consistent with
the records for the same period in 2013. Geographically, the spread of the conflict
has focused largely in the north-eastern regions around Kunduz, Badakhshan and
Badghis Provinces, in the north-west towards Faryab Province, in the south-east
region of Nangarhar Province and in the south, including Hilmand Province. The
majority of incidents were reported in the southern and eastern parts of the country,
with the provinces of Kandahar, Nangarhar, Ghazni, Hilmand and Kunar accounting
for 44.5 per cent of all security incidents during the reporting period. During the
Ramadan period and subsequent Eid al-Fitr festivities, the number of security
incidents was the second highest on record for the holy month since 2003, reflecting
the absence of any significant reduction in violence, as had occurred in previous
years, despite calls by Afghan religious and political leaders and the United Nations
to anti-Government elements for a cessation of violence.

4/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

16. The reporting period was notable for the concerted effort expended by anti Government elements to capture and hold district centres in a number of provinces.
These efforts resulted in the capture of seven district centres, a significantly larger
number than in previous years, and of which five were subsequently recaptured by
the Afghan National Security Forces. However, several of the centres captured by
anti-Government elements were under their control for extended periods of time,
allowing them to claim significant propaganda and materiel gains. The Afghan
security forces mounted a series of counter-offensives and clearance operations
throughout contested areas during the reporting period. This included a large -scale
operation in Nangarhar in May that appears to have contributed to a lower level of
incidents around Jalalabad City, as well as additional operations t argeting key
districts in the province during August. Further operations also took place in
Hilmand, Ghor and Faryab during the period. While Afghan security forces retained
control in the overwhelming majority of district centres across the country, anti Government elements and other illegally armed groups continued to intimidate the
population in many rural areas.
17. Although these attacks indicate the intent of the anti -Government elements to
make territorial gains, particularly in more isolated rural a reas, the capability of the
Afghan security forces has largely prevented the consolidation of any significant
gains and no provincial capitals have fallen to the insurgents. However, the Afghan
security forces continue to face challenges, including reinfor cing or resupplying
units in remote areas. Concerns about the ability of the Afghan security forces to
counter anti-Government elements led to calls for the establishment of
pro-Government militia groups, or so-called local defence forces, particularly by
former mujahideen leaders. UNAMA has registered a significant increase in such
reports since May; in the reports it is indicated that pro -Government militia groups
are being established or reinforced in the northern, western and southern regions.
18. Overall, incident trends remained unchanged, with armed clashes accounting
for the majority of security incidents (53 per cent), followed by improvised
explosive devices (26 per cent). Attempts by anti-Government elements to exert
influence through fear and intimidation resulted in a continued high level of targeted
killings. In the reporting period of 1 May to 31 July, 291 assassinations and
attempted assassinations were recorded, an 11.4 per cent increase compared with the
same period in 2014. Anti-Government elements also continued to undertake
high-profile attacks in the country’s capital and in provincial capitals. Although they
ostensibly targeted the Government and international forces, the brunt of the attacks
continued to be borne by civilians. Significant attacks in the first part of the
reporting period included one on the National Assembly on 22 June and attacks on
international military convoys in Kabul on 30 June, 7 July and 22 August, as well as
suicide attacks on Afghan military and Government targets in the provincial capitals
of Kandahar (25 May), Jalalabad (31 May), Lashkar Gah (30 June) and Khost
(12 July). Following the announcement of the death of Mullah Omar, the city of
Kabul experienced a string of attacks between 7 and 10 August, including suicide
attacks in the vicinity of an Afghan National Army base, the police academy, an
international military base and Kabul International Airport, which resulted in over
55 individuals killed and over 330 injured.
19. The period witnessed a significant increase in reports of intra-insurgent
violence between the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates
with the Taliban. The most significant clashes were reported in Nangarhar Province,

15-14794

5/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

where 48 incidents were reported during the perio d from May to July, resulting in
significant casualties on both sides and displacement among the local population.
The clashes were alleged to have centred around disputes about ideological
authority as well as financial control of lucrative cross -border smuggling routes. Air
strikes conducted by international forces were reported to have killed several senior
local ISIL figures in the province. Similar clashes were also noted in Farah Province
during May, albeit on a significantly lower scale. The majority of alleged ISILaffiliated fighters appear to be drawn from disaffected former members of the
Afghan Taliban, Tehrik-eTaliban Pakistan or groups previously associated with
Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. The bitter confrontation
between ISIL and its affiliate groups with the Taliban was evidenced in propaganda
and violent retaliation directed at each other by the two parties during the reporting
period.
20. During the reporting period, a total of 26 recorded security incidents were
either directly or indirectly aimed against the United Nations. Most of the incidents
were directed towards United Nations staff members and included criminal acts and
intimidation. Additionally, two road missions were targeted in Balkh Province
(2 May) and Paktya Province (13 July). Regretfully, in the latter instance, one
officer from the Afghan Diplomatic Protection Service escorting the United Nations
road mission was killed and three others were wounded when the ir vehicle was hit
by a remote-controlled improvised explosive device. No casualties or damage to
United Nations personnel or assets were reported.

C.

Regional cooperation
21. The Government of Afghanistan continued its engagement with regional
partners throughout the reporting period. Chief Executive Abdullah attended the
High-level International Conference on the Implementation of the International
Decade for Action, “Water for Life”, 2005-2015, held in Dushanbe on 9 and 10 July,
stressing that Afghanistan was ready for constructive collabor ation on regional
water issues. On the margins of the conference, he discussed security issues and
economic connectivity in bilateral meetings, including with President Emomali
Rahmon and Prime Minister Qohir Rasulzoda of Tajikistan and with the Secretary General. On 14 July, President Ghani welcomed the signing of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
E3/EU+3 as an opportunity to strengthen peace, stability and economic cooperation
in the region. Afghanistan hosted two preparatory meetings for the sixth high -level
ministerial meeting of the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference for
Afghanistan, to be held in Kabul on 4 September.
22. The reporting period saw evidence of efforts to strengthen ties between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as continued challenges to the bilateral
relationship. In early June, a letter alleged to be from President Ghani to Pakistani
authorities was leaked to the press, in which a number of demands with regard to
Pakistan preventing Taliban operations and supporting a peace process were made.
Additional tension was created by renewed security incidents along the border,
many involving cross-border indirect fire, which prompted both countries to lodge
official protests. The leaders of Afghanistan and Pakistan still continued to pursue
constructive engagement, with particular regard to the peace process. Pakistan ’s
emergence as a broker in formal talks between the Government of Afghanistan and

6/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

the Taliban facilitated improved relations during the month of July following the
successful convening of talks in Murree. However, the above -mentioned deadly
attacks in Kabul, which coincided with the emergence of a new Taliban leadership
in early August, led President Ghani to express public criticism of Pakistan and to
call for urgent action by Pakistan against the Taliban, in particular to prevent the use
of its territory to prepare Taliban operations. Amidst growing negative sentiment
towards Pakistan in Afghanistan, on 13 August, President Gh ani dispatched a highlevel delegation to Islamabad to discuss improved security cooperation with
Pakistani counterparts. Pakistan condemned the attacks and offered condolences,
emphasizing its commitment to joint efforts to tackle terrorism. It also sough t the
collaboration of the Government of Afghanistan to avoid public denunciations of
Pakistan.
23. Central Asian States and the Russian Federation continued to express concern
at the spread of violent extremism from Afghanistan. At a high -level conference on
the theme “Security and Stability in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Region”, held in Moscow on 4 June, participants expressed support for
Afghanistan’s efforts to establish a peaceful, stable and prosperous State. At the
Heads of State Council meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in
Ufa, Russian Federation, on 9 and 10 July, President Ghani called for enhanced
regional cooperation to address collective security challenges, stressing that
terrorists were using Afghan territory to destabilize the region. President Xi Jinping
of China echoed President Ghani’s plea, as Afghanistan’s neighbours announced
that they would strengthen their borders with the country.
24. Regional efforts to enhance North-South energy connectivity, which have an
impact on Afghanistan, gained momentum after separate visits to Central Asia by
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan in late May, and Prime Minister Narendra
Modi of India in early July. The two leaders and their interlocutors committed to
expediting regional energy projects. Prime Minister Modi and President Gurbanguly
Berdimuhamedov of Turkmenistan pledged to accelerate the Turkmenistan Afghanistan-Pakistan-India natural gas pipeline. Pakistan’s Prime Minister,
President Emomali Rahmon of Tajikistan and President Almazbek Atambayav of
Kyrgyzstan also expressed a commitment to fast-track the Central Asia-South Asia
CASA-1000 hydroelectricity project. On 7 August, the steering committee selected
Turkmenistan’s state gas company, Turkmengaz, as the leader of the consortium to
implement and operate the pipeline project.

III. Human rights
25. On 5 August 2015, UNAMA issued the midyear report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2015.
UNAMA documented 4,921 civilian casualties (1,592 deaths and 3,329 injured), a
1 per cent increase in total civilian casualties compared with the same period in
2014. The vast majority of civilian casualties (90 per cent) resulted from ground
engagements, improvised explosive devices, complex and suicide attacks and
targeted killings. Anti-Government elements remained responsible for the largest
proportion of total civilian casualties, at 70 per cent, with pro -Government forces
responsible for 16 per cent (Afghan security forces and pro-Government groups
15 per cent and international military forces 1 per cent), and 10 per cent could not
be attributed to a specific party, mostly occurring from crossfire incidents in ground

15-14794

7/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

engagements. Four per cent of civilian casualties were attributed to explosive
remnants of war. Ground engagements followed by improvised explosive devices
remained the leading causes of civilian casualties, despite 19 and 21 per cent
reductions in civilian casualties respectively from each tactic compared with the
same period in 2014. The 1 per cent increase in total civilian casualties was driven
by a 78 per cent increase in civilian casualties from complex and suicide attacks and
a 57 per cent increase in civilian casualties from targeted killing s. It was noted in
the report that, compared with the same period in 2014, there had been a 60 per cent
increase in civilian casualties caused by pro-Government forces, totalling 796
civilian casualties (234 civilian deaths and 562 injured); the establishm ent and
implementation of a national-level policy on civilian casualty mitigation and
prevention was recommended. It was also recommended in the report that both
anti-Government elements and pro-Government forces cease the use of schools,
hospitals and clinics for military purposes. On 11 August, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission issued its annual report on the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan for the solar year 1393 (20 March 2014 to 19 March 2015), which
included trends and statistics on civilian casualties that were largely consistent with
the UNAMA 2014 annual report on civilian casualties in armed conflict.
26. Between 1 May and 31 July 2015, UNAMA documented 2,985 civilian
casualties (934 killed and 2,051 injured), reflecting a decrease of 13 per cent from
the same period in 2014. The decrease during this period may stem from the fact
that during the same period in 2014, UNAMA documented a sharp increase in
civilian casualties linked to attacks on the electoral process, in particula r during the
second round of presidential elections held on 14 June 2014. During the current
reporting period, 69 per cent of civilian casualties were attributed to
anti-Government elements, 18 per cent to pro-Government forces (16 per cent to
Afghan National Security Forces, 1 per cent to pro-Government militia and 1 per
cent to international military forces) and 10 per cent to una ttributed crossfire
between pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements. Three per cent of
civilian casualties, resulting mostly from explosive remnants of war, could not be
attributed. Ground engagements continued to be the leading cause of civilian
casualties, accounting for 985 civilian casualties (262 deaths and 723 injured),
followed by improvised explosive devices.
27. UNAMA noted its concern about the continued suicide and complex attacks by
the Taliban and other anti-Government elements in civilian-populated areas
throughout the reporting period. On 25 May, the Taliban detonated a suicide
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device outside the Zabul Provincial Council
building, wounding 79 civilians, including 30 women and 2 children. On 30 June,
the Taliban conducted a complex attack targeting the Afghan National Police in
Lashkar Gah city, Hilmand Province. The attackers killed 5 civilians and injured
another 62. Three attacks on 7 August caused 355 civilian casualties (42 deaths and
313 injured), representing the highest number of civilians killed and injured in one
day since UNAMA began systemically recording civilian casualties in 2009. In one
of the attacks, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in the
Shah Shahid area of Kabul city, killing 15 civilians and injuring 283 others. The
Taliban claimed responsibility for each of the aforementione d attacks, but issued a
statement explicitly denying responsibility for the attack on the Shah Shahid area.
28. Between 1 May and 31 July 2015, the United Nations-led country task force
on monitoring and reporting documented and verified 379 incidents resu lting in 785

8/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

child casualties, including 220 children killed and 565 children injured. Ground
engagements killed or injured at least 391 children; this was the leading cause of
death, accounting for 49.8 per cent of all child casualties. Incidents involvin g
improvised explosive devices used by anti-Government elements caused 180 child
casualties (22.9 per cent). Overall, anti-Government elements were responsible for
365 (or 46.5 per cent) of all child casualties and pro -Government forces caused 203
casualties (26 per cent). In assessing the year to date, the number of documented
child casualties has increased in 2015, with the number of casualties verified
between 1 April and 30 June the highest recorded since the monitoring and reporting
mechanism was established in Afghanistan in 2009. Further, there was a significant
increase in attacks against schools and related personnel between 1 April and
30 June compared with the previous three months, increasing from 15 to 52
incidents, of which 40 were verified with 33 attributed to anti-Government
elements. Reports of the recruitment of children by armed forces were received
during this period, with five verified incidents, three of which were attributed to the
Taliban and two to the Afghan security forces.
29. On 30 June, President Ghani launched Afghanistan’s National Action Plan on
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women and Peace and Security for
2015-2022. The national action plan enshrines the Government’s pledges for
strategic interventions towards the increasing role of women in the areas of
participation, protection, prevention, and relief and recovery, the four pillars of
resolution 1325 (2000). The launch of the plan marked the culmination of a
year-long consultative and technical process, supported by the United Nations, to
create a framework that ensures the participation of women in the ongoing peace
process at the national and subnational levels. On 16 June, the United Nations
launched its HeforShe global campaign with a high -level event in Kabul under the
slogan “A Brave Man Stands for Women”. Male keynote speakers highlighted the
need for men to support gender equality and the empowerment of women and noted
that, despite the progress made since 2001, gender equality continues to be a major
challenge. The Ministry of Women’s Affairs launched its 100-day plan on 1 June,
which included technical support from the United Nations. Key aspects of the plan
include the launch of the National Strategy for the Elimination of Violence Against
Women and the Women’s Economic Security and Rights Strategy, as well as the
revision of the indicators for the National Action Plan for the Women of
Afghanistan (2008-2018).
30. Following the verdict and sentencing of the persons accused of complicity in
the murder of a 27-year-old woman by a crowd in Kabul on 19 March, the
prosecutor and all those convicted lodged appeals in the Kabul Appellate Court. On
30 June, the Appellate Court rendered its decision, upholding all verdicts, except the
convictions of one civilian and two police officers. The Court also upheld all prison
sentences, but substituted the death sentence imposed on four defendants with
lengthy prison terms. Further appeals have been lodged by all parties with the
Supreme Court.
31. In line with the National Action Plan on the Elimination of Torture, on 4 May,
the Government of Afghanistan established an implementation working committee
comprising senior members of relevant Government institutions, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission and a representative of civil society. On
25 June, the National Directorate of Security issued an order reiterating the

15-14794

9/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

prohibition of torture, in particular the use of torture during interrogation to obtain a
confession.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
32. The senior officials meeting, agreed at the London Conference and centred
upon the Government’s reform agenda, was held on 5 September in Kabul and
hosted by the Government of Afghanistan. Earlier, at the 21 May meeting of the
International Contact Group, participants agreed that the senior officials meeting
should reaffirm the principles of the development partnership, including mutual
accountability, and present a renewed mutual accountability frame work
incorporating the Government’s reform agenda. Work on the renewed framework
continued in parallel with other Government-led processes, including the
preparation of a report on the progress of ongoing reforms, the consolidation of
national priority programmes, public presentations of the 100-day plans of
Executive Branch ministries and bodies and a technical review of the Government ’s
approach to public financial management reform.
33. The Government continued implementing the economic reform measures t hat
were agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) through the staff monitored programme on 2 June. The measures include structural benchmarks and
measures designed to improve banking sector performance and domestic revenues.
The Ministry of Finance is leading the measures to improve domestic revenue
performance and reported collecting approximately $829 million in domestic
revenue during the first six months of the fiscal year, representing an increase of
9.9 per cent over the previous year. President Ghani also reaffirmed the Central
Bank’s independence during the investiture ceremony of the Central Bank Governor
on 13 July. Progress on the staff-monitored programme is expected to be assessed
during the first review, which the Government and IMF ha ve planned to conduct in
the second half of the fiscal year.
34. During the reporting period, the Ministries of Finance and Economy and the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance, together with line ministries that
operate sub-nationally, took further steps to implement the Government’s reform
agenda pledge to decentralize 40 per cent of the development budget. The
institutions prepared draft policy recommendations to implement a more
participatory and decentralized development planning and budgeting approach,
which will be presented to the Cabinet for its deliberations. The Independent
Directorate of Local Governance presented its 100-day plan on 27 June, which
prioritized the delegation of authority and resources to the subnational level.
35. The Government continued efforts to promote the rule of law and address
corruption. Following his appointment by President Ghani on 27 July, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court commenced work on a series of reforms. Initial
discussions led by the Chief Justice centred on prioritizing reforms to enhance the
transparency of court decisions and actions; strengthen anti -corruption measures;
improve access to justice; increase training for judicial officers; and strengthen the
independence of the judiciary. During the reporting period, the Attorney General’s
Office continued efforts to prosecute the persons involved in the collapse of the
Kabul Bank. The Attorney General’s Office announced the arrest of two members of

10/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

the Kabul Bank Clearance delegation on 25 June, measures to freeze assets and
impose travel bans on an additional 155 individuals on 6 July and the arrest on
27 July of two Kabul Bank debtors at the airport who were attempting to leave the
country. In June and August, the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee issued three “vulnerability to corruption” assessments
covering the payment system for martyrs and persons disabled by conflict,
investigation processes linked to the Elimination of Violence Against Women Law
and the registration of official documents in the judicial system. From 1 to 5 June, a
joint meeting was convened between anti-corruption experts of Afghanistan and two
reviewing countries to conduct a mandatory review of Afghanistan ’s implementation
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
36. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Interior established a General
Directorate for International Cooperation, completing the transfer of the Secretariat
of the International Police Coordination Board to the Ministry of Interior. This is an
important step in the Government’s efforts to ensure ownership of the institutional
development of the police and the coordination of funds from international partners.
Further, since the Ministry of Interior adopted police women councils as a national
strategic approach on 9 December 2014, progress towards their establishment has
continued, with 23 established during the reporting period. As at 20 August, there
were 75 police women councils, 45 of which are in Mini stry of Interior directorates
and Kabul police districts, and 30 in the provinces.
37. On 30 June, the Ministry of Interior approved an 18-month extension of the
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan with the United Nations Development
Programme. Responding to policy guidance from President Ghani, the project will
support capacity-building in the Ministry of Interior. The Trust Fund will channel
approximately $843 million to the Ministry of Finance for the salaries of over
150,000 police and $38 million to provide capacity development and related support
to broader security and justice reform.

V. Humanitarian assistance
38. The ongoing conflict between Government forces and insurgent and
international terrorist-associated networks led to significant population
displacements and increasingly affected civilians during the reporting period. The
continued expansion of the conflict from the south and south -east to northern
Afghanistan has created challenges for the provision of assistance by humanitarian
actors, particularly given that many of those displaced by the conflict are located in
areas rendered inaccessible to humanitarian agencies owing to ongoing hostilities.
39. Conflict-induced displacement continues to rise significantly in almost all
regions, triggered by insurgent and international terrorist-associated networks and
counteroffensives from the Afghan National Security Forces. As at 30 June 2015,
the Task Force on Internally Displaced Persons reported 103,000 individuals as
displaced by conflict during 2015. This represents a 77 per cent increase compared
with the same period in 2014. The highest number of displaced (37,523 individuals)
was recorded in Kunduz Province. Displacement was also triggered by clashes in
eastern Afghanistan between the Taliban and other groups declaring their allegiance
to ISIL. From 1 May to 30 June, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
assisted approximately 259,160 conflict-displaced persons with an estimated 3,634

15-14794

11/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

metric tons of food assistance. The United Nations has commenced preparations to
support persons displaced by the conflict during the winter period.
40. From 15 May to 31 July, 25 out of 34 provinces were affected by extreme
weather, including flooding owing to snow melt, river bank erosion and heavy rains.
A total of 19 people were reported killed and 13 injured, with 1,200 houses
destroyed and 1,400 houses damaged. A total of 18,160 individuals were affected by
these natural disaster incidents, including as many as 6,100 individuals displaced
from their homes, and were assisted by the Afghanistan National Disaster
Management Authority and humanitarian agencies. During the months of May and
June 2015, the United Nations supported 16,135 people affected by natural disasters
across the country with 425 metric tons of food.
41. Polio eradication efforts continued to face access challenges in southern and
eastern Afghanistan, as well as in the south-eastern and western regions. From May
to early August, the United Nations and relevant stakeholders met to secure the
resumption of the vaccination campaign in Kandahar Province, where over 523,000
children under five years of age had been deprived of polio vaccinations. The
vaccination campaign resumed in Kandahar Province on 23 August. Since the
previous report, seven new cases of polio have been confirmed in Afghanistan,
increasing the total for 2015 to eight cases. Five of the new cases were confirmed in
the western provinces of Farah and Herat and are genetically linked with the polio
virus strain endemic to Kandahar Province. Between 1 May and mid-August, two
rounds of National Immunization Days and three rounds of subnational
immunization days were held. The National Immunization Day campaigns are
aimed at vaccinating approximately 9 million children.
42. Tripartite Commission meetings were held in Kabul on 21 August with
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and on 17 August with Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and UNHCR. At those meetings, the planning process for the voluntary, safe,
dignified and gradual repatriation of Afghan refugees and the continued
management of the refugee populations in Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
was continued. A group called the Friends of the Solutions Strategy for Afghan
Refugees was formed in Kabul on 16 June, comprising donors, development
stakeholders, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
representatives of the Governments of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The country portfolio of the Solutions Strategy for Afghan
Refugees, consisting of a range of reintegration and development projects from
multiple agencies, was recently revised. The country portfolio includes projects,
activities and financial requirements for the implementation of the strategy. The
High Commission on Migration, chaired by President Ghani, held its first meeting
on 22 June. It was agreed that the Subcommittee of the Council of Ministers would
be responsible for implementing policy decisions through relevant line ministries.
UNAMA, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) will
provide support to the Commission’s secretariat.
43. The number of undocumented Afghans spontaneously returned or deported
from the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan increased during the first six months
of 2015. As recorded at border crossing points, 91,458 individuals from Pakistan
returned to Afghanistan during the first six months of 2015, compared with 21,866
individuals during the same period in 2014. A total of 243,107 individuals

12/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

spontaneously returned or were deported from the Islamic Republic of Iran during
the first half of 2015, compared with 220,564 during the same period in 2014. The
returns from Pakistan represent a 418 per cent increase from the same period in
2014. Most of the Afghans returning from Pakistan have spent between 15 and
25 years outside of Afghanistan. The rate of return through UNHCR voluntary
repatriation programmes increased significantly, with 4 3,695 individuals
repatriating (mostly from Pakistan) between 1 January and 30 June 2015, compared
with 9,364 individuals for the same period in 2014. Returnee monitoring feedback
continues to raise concerns about allegations that Pakistan is pressuring re fugees to
return.
44. The United Nations and its partners continue to respond to the needs of
217,000 refugees from Pakistan who crossed into south -eastern Afghanistan
following military operations in North Waziristan. No large -scale return of refugees
is expected in 2015, as evidenced by the building of transitional shelters by refugees
and from consultations with families who indicated that they expect to return in two
to three years. Significant gaps remain in the response owing to limited funding, in
particular for food items, and as a result, refugees are currently receiving about
30 per cent of the standard food rations.
45. From 1 January to 31 July, the volume of security incidents involving
humanitarian-related personnel, assets and facilities and violations against healthcare facilities decreased compared with the same period in 2014, with 140 recorded
incidents. These included the killing of nine aid workers in Balkh Province on
2 June and the killing of five national and two international non -governmental
organization workers in Kabul on 13 May. In addition, 28 aid workers were
wounded and 90 abducted during the first seven months of 2015. On 2 July, a
hospital in Kunduz supported by a non-governmental organization was temporarily
closed after security forces raided the hospital and allegedly threatened medical
staff while searching for a suspected insurgent who was reportedly being treated in
the hospital.
46. As at 30 June, overall humanitarian funding reached $197 million according to
the Financial Tracking Service, of which $124.3 million is designated for activities
within the Humanitarian Response Plan and $72.7 million for other funding (for
example, for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement). The 2015
Humanitarian Response Plan midyear review includes a revised funding
requirement of $417 million, increased from $405 million, based on increased needs
for refugees and returnees. In addition, the humanitarian cluster system is
reprioritizing resources within its existing strate gies to address the marked increase
in the conflict-displaced persons caseload and most critical life-saving needs. In
early July, the Emergency Response Coordinator allocated $8 million to Afghanistan
under the Central Emergency Response Fund underfunded emergencies window.
This funding is being prioritized to support assistance towards the immediate needs
of newly displaced populations owing to conflict and underfunded needs from
displacements in 2014.

VI. Counter-narcotics
47. The Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, in collaboration with the United Nations,
launched the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System on 23 June. The Ministry of

15-14794

13/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

Counter-Narcotics views the system as a key component of its leadership and
coordination role in countering narcotics, given that it consolidates verified
information from all line ministries and international partners involved in counter narcotics-related initiatives. As such, the system will provide access to the most
up-to-date data on all available narcotics-related indicators in Afghanistan,
including eradication, cultivation, drug prices, treatment capacity, imprisonment,
alternative livelihoods and seizure, to inform trend analysis, policy development and
evaluation.
48. At the close of the annual opium cultivation period in 2015, a total of 3,760
hectares of opium poppy in 12 provinces had been verified as eradicated under the
Governor-led control programme. This represents a 40 per cent increase from the
2,692 hectares verified as eradicated in 2014 under the initiative. Since May, two
persons have been injured during eradication operations. Overall security incidents
decreased compared with the eradication period in 2014, owing to better
coordination efforts between the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the Ministries
of Defence and Interior. Such efforts have allowed eradication to be carried out in
the vicinity of military operations, which has resulted in less resistance being
directed against eradication operations.
49. From 10 May to 12 August, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted
735 counter-narcotics operations, resulting in the seizure of approximately 16,161
kg of narcotics, a reduction in seizures from the same period in 2014. This
comprised 1,911 kg of heroin, 8,142 kg of opium, 6,104 kg of hashish and 4 kg of
methamphetamine. In addition, 372 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 74 litres of
liquid precursor chemicals were seized. The operations also resulted in the arrest of
777 suspects and the seizure of 149 vehicles and 59 weapons; this was not without
incident, however, as two security force personnel were killed in the operations.
Significant seizures continued to be recorded at Afghanistan ’s international airports,
with law enforcement authorities reporting a total of 25 seizures involving 25 kg of
narcotics in the overall total for the period.

VII. Mission support
50. UNAMA continued to review and align operational resources to enable
mandated activities across the country. The preparations for the roll -out of the next
phase of the Umoja enterprise resource planning project continued throughout the
reporting period. Training and capacity-building activities for staff were undertaken
as part of the preparations in close consultation with the Kuwait Joint Support
Office.

VIII. Observations
51. During the past three months, the Government continued to make efforts to
address the increasing political, economic and security challenges. I welcome the
determination of the National Unity Government to improve accountability and
eliminate corruption, which will be central to establishing fiscal sustainability and a
long-term path towards equitable economic growth. Measures to implement the
reform agenda articulated at the London Conference on Afghanistan have begun,
with the Government reporting progress in efforts to reform revenue collections and

14/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

procurements, enhance anti-corruption measures, rationalize Government salaries
and improve the investment climate. The Government is preparing reform and
development plans aimed at supporting its objectives of self-reliance and growth,
including a renewed mutual accountability framework that synthesizes key features
of those plans focused on priorities leading to the next development ministerial
conference. As the Government moves forward with its agenda, it will be important
for the leadership to work with the private sector and civil society to ensure that the
rights and needs of all its citizens, particularly the most vulnerable, are protected
and addressed during this reform process. I welcome the recent senior officials
meeting, which provided a platform for the Government and its international
supporters to renew commitments to mutually agreed benchmarks and promote
more effective use of aid.
52. The commencement of work by the Special Electoral Reform Commission was
another critical step towards meeting the commitments made by President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah in September 2014 upon the formation of the
Government and in further improving Afghanistan’s electoral processes and public
confidence. The Commission members are working intensively to address a number
of electoral challenges in a spirit of collaboration.
53. A number of prominent Afghans, however, have publicly voiced their concern
about the path being pursued by the Government. Political divisions within the
Government and with other political powerbrokers continue to challenge the
Government’s capacity to make timely decisions and implement effective reforms.
Nonetheless, I am encouraged to learn of efforts to move towards more constructive
engagement in the interests of the nation. I urge all political leaders to rise above
individual differences and confront these shared challenges in a spirit of national
unity.
54. This constructive approach is essential given that the intensity of the conflict
within the country shows no signs of abating and, if anything, the security
environment has become more fragile and dynamic. Conflicts between
anti-Government groups, including ISIL and the Taliban, and continued reports of
leadership tensions within the Taliban movement present increased challenges in
predicting conflict trends. At the same time, the conflict continues to expand in the
northern provinces of the country and a series of attacks have taken place in Kabul.
In this environment, the Afghan security forces have served with courage and
resilience in the face of sustained pressure. Notwithstanding the challenges facing
the Afghan security forces, I am concerned about increasing calls for and signs of
the re-establishment and reinforcement of pro-Government militias to combat
insecurity. While it is understandable that local communities are motivated to
support the security forces, armed groups not directly accountable to the State
represent a long-term challenge to security in the country. I urge the Government to
maintain the focus of its efforts on building the capacity of its national security
forces, which will serve and be accountable to all Afghans and enjoy their full
support.
55. I am deeply concerned about the continuing impact of the conflict upon
ordinary Afghans, following a period of sustained conflict throughout the holy
month of Ramadan. The impact of insurgent attacks upon civilians, particularly in
urban areas, continues to contradict public undertakings by anti-Government
elements concerning the protection of civilians. Consistent with my statement on

15-14794

15/17

A/70/359
S/2015/684

14 July following a series of attacks in Khost, Baghlan and Kabul, there can be no
justification for such abhorrent attacks in public places, where victim s are
predominantly civilians. The shocking attacks on 7 August in Kabul caused the
highest casualties in that city in recent memory and understandably prompted
considerable public anger.
56. The conflict also continues to undermine the efforts of humanita rian actors to
deliver aid. It is imperative that all those affected by conflict have access to
humanitarian assistance and that aid workers can work unimpeded, without fear of
violent attack. I again remind all parties to the conflict that military operat ions must
be conducted with respect for international human rights and humanitarian law and
urge full compliance in this regard.
57. The simultaneous increase in both conflict-related internal displacement and
refugee returns presents an increasing humanitarian and socioeconomic challenge.
The efforts by the Government and its national and international partners to manage
the processes of repatriation and reintegration and to meet the immediate
humanitarian needs of the displaced are welcome. I encourage do nors to ensure that
funding gaps are filled and that assistance is available to those in need.
58. The announcement of the death of Mullah Omar has clear implications for
reconciliation, as questions about Taliban cohesion following the announcement
have also fuelled doubts about its commitment to a peace process. The
postponement of the second round of talks was undoubtedly a setback, but peace
processes rarely move in a linear way. I reiterate the need for the Taliban to choose
the path to peace by nominating an authorized and representative delegation to
resume direct talks with the Government. A peaceful political settlement achieved
through dialogue is necessary for the future of Afghanistan.
59. A successful peace process needs to be inclusive. Discussions should take
place at all strata of society and this public debate should guide and support
negotiations between political leaders. Initiatives that stimulate discussion and
promote inclusion, such as the Afghan People’s Dialogue and the National Action
Plan on Women and Peace and Security, are crucial. I welcome President Ghani ’s
pledge, made at the launch of the Plan, to ensure women’s participation in the peace
process and to fully implement the Plan’s provisions.
60. The Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan continued to engage on critical
issues and while there were challenges to this relationship during the reporting
period, there are indications that both nations are making efforts to rebuild trust.
The Murree talks on 7 July were a positive step in both neighbourly relations and an
Afghan peace process, with Pakistan playing a constructive supporting role as host.
This event illustrated the progress that can be made through positive, regional
engagement. However, subsequent developments have str ained the bilateral
relationship and risk undermining the effective regional partnership being fostered
between the nations. Faced with growing domestic discontent in Afghanistan
following the attacks of 7 August in Kabul, the visit by senior Afghan offici als to
Islamabad on 13 August underscored the need for a shared commitment to continue
to work together as equal partners in addressing security challenges. I urge the
Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan to redouble their efforts to find common
ground on issues of security coordination and further explore how best to support an
Afghan-led and -managed peace process.

16/17

15-14794

A/70/359
S/2015/684

61. In reference to the request by the Security Council that I conduct an
examination of the role, structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan, I am pleased to report the timely completion of the work of a tripartite
commission comprised of representatives of the Government, the international
donor community, and UNAMA and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. This process was a useful opportunity for all stakeholders to take stock
and highlight important aspects of how the United Nations works in Afghanistan,
resulting in an improved alignment of work and structures. It is my expectation that
the report and recommendations of the Commission will inform the Council ’s
discussions in early 2016.
62. Lastly, I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for their continued efforts, under challenging
conditions, to support a more peaceful, prosperous and stable Afghanistan.

15-14794

17/17
