VI,

32/62.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Conunittee

Draft convention against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 24 and article 7 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Política! Rights, 25 both of which
provide that no one may be subjected to torture or
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Believing that further international efforts are needed
to ensure adequate protection for all against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
W elcoming in that regard the work that has been
done, or is being done, on the basis of General Assembly resolution 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Considering that a further significant step would be
the adoption of an international convention against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
in the light of the principles embodied in the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit a progress report on its work to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved in accordance with the present resolution.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/63.

Questionnaire on the Declaration on the
Protection of Ali Persons from Being
Suhjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
contained in the annex to its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975,
Recalling its resolutions 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/85 of 13 December 1976,
Having regard to article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Política! Rights, 26 which provides
24 Reso!ution 217 A (III).
25 Resolution 2200 A (XXJ), annex.
26 /bid.

137

that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Taking note of resolution 7 (XXVII) of 20 August
197 4 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 27 regarding its
annual review of developments in the field of human
rights of persons subjected to any form of detention
or imprisonment,
Reiterating that the Declaration should serve as a
guideline for all States and other entities exercising
effective power,
Grave/y concerned over continued reports from which
it appears that in sorne countries State authorities are
systematically resorting to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to draw up and
circulate among Member States a questionnaire soliciting information concerning steps they have taken, including legislative and administrative measures, to put
into practice the principles of the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment while giving special attention to the
fol!owing subjects:
(a) Publicity given to the Declaration, not only in
governmental bodies and services but also among the
public at large;
( b) Effective measures for the prevention of torture;
(e)
Training of law enforcement personnel and
other public officials rcsponsible for persons deprived
of thcir liberty;
( d) Any pertinent legisla ti ve or administrative action taken since the adoption of the Declaration;
(e)
Effective legal remedies for victims of torture
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests thc Sccretary-General to submit the
information provided in response to the questionnaire
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session and
furthermore to submit such information to the Commission on Human Rights and to the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities at its thirty-second session.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/64.

Unilateral declarations by Memher States
against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the principles proclaimed in the
Charter of the Unitcd Nations concerning the dignity
and worth of the human person place upon Member
States the obligation to promote universal respect for
and observance of, human rights and fundamental free~
doms for alI,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 28 and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 29 which stipulate that
27 See E/CN.4/1160, chap. XIX.
2HResolution 217 A (III).
29 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

138

-------------

no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatmcnt or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
unanimously adopted by its resolution 3452 (XXX) of
9 Deccmbcr 1975, as wcll as its resolution 31/85 of
13 December 1976,
Recognizing the necessity far further international
action in the form of a convention far thc elimination
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishmcnt,
Recognizing also the importance of action by Member
States to develop and utilize their national machinery
to climinate torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment,
l. Calls upon all Membcr States to reinforce their
support of the Declaration on the Protcction of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
by making unilateral declarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, along the lines of the text which is annexed to
the present resolution, and depositing them with the
Secretary-Gcneral;
2. Urges all Member States to give maximum publicity to their unilateral dcclarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to inform the
General Assembly, in annual reports. of such unilateral
declarations against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or dcgrading treatment or punishment as may be deposited by Member Statcs.
98th plenary meetini
8 December 1977
ANNEX
Model unilateral declaration against torture aud other
cruel, inhuman or degradin~~ treat1nent or punishment

The Government of ........ hereby declares its intention:
(a) To comply with the Declaration on the Protection of
Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (General
Assembly resolution 3452 (XXX), annex);

( b) To implement, through legislation and other effectivc
measures, the provisions of the said Declaration.

32/65.

Torture of political prisoners and detainees in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 30 in particular its articlc 5,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 Deccmber 1975,
30Resolution 217 A (III).

Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts on Southern Africa, 31 established pursuant to resolution 2 (XXIII) of thc Commission on
Human Rights, conccrning thc dcaths of dctainees and
policc brutality in South Africa sincc the Sowcto mas~acre of 16 Junc 1976,
Grave/y concerned about the reports regarding thc
torture of political prisoncrs and thc deaths of a number of dctainccs and about the growing wavc of acts
of reprcssion against individuals, organizatinns and information media in South Africa,
Deeply shocked by thc cowardly and dastardly murder in detcntion of Stephen Biko,
1. Condemns the South African régime far its continuing violation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and thc Dcclaration on thc Protection of Ali
Persons from Bcing Sl!lbjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Reiterates its deep aversion to the practice
whcrcby the South African régime persistently subjects
ali opponcnts of apartheid to summary banning, detention, imprisonment and somctimes murder;
3. Stronily condemns the practice of subjecting
political detainccs and other victims of apartheid in
South Africa to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
dcgrading trcatment or punishment;
4. Strongly condemns, in particular, the arbitrary
arrest, detention and torture which led to the murder
of Stcphen Biko by agents of the racist minority régime
of South Africa;
5. Demands that thc minority apartheid régime of
South Africa:
(a)
Releas e all política! prisoncrs without precondition;
( b) Lift ali banning and housc arrcst orders imposed on opponents of apartheid;
(e) Put an immediate cnd to the indiscriminate use
of ~iolencc against peaceful demonstrators against apartheid and to thc persistcnt rccourse to torture of política!
detainces;
6. ExpressC's its conviction that the martyrdom of
Stephcn Biko and ali othcr nationalists murdercd in
~outh A~rican J?risons and_ thc ideals for which they
fought w11l con~muc to ennch thc faith of the peoplcs
of southcrn Afnca and other parts of the world in thcir
struggle against apartheid and for racial cquality and
the dignity of thc human person.
98th plenary meeting
8 Deccmber 1977
32/66.

Status of the lnternational Covenant on
Et•onomic, Social and Cultural Rights the
International Covenant on Civil ancl' Politin1l Rii!hts and the Optional Protocol
to the lnternational Covenant on Civil
ami Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Convinced that thc International Covenants on
Human Rights~ 2 constitutc the first all-embracing and
:n A/32/226, annex.
3 2 Resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.
