UNirTEDNATIONS

TWENTY-SIXTH

1
NEW

th

YEAR

MEETING : 16 SEPTEMBER 1971

YORK

CONTENTS
‘““f
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . , . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 197 1 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10313);
(6,) Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146, S/9149 and Add.1,
S/9537, and S/10124 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV.1580

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in ‘yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTIETH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA

16 September

(Japan).

MEETING
1971, at 4 p.m.

take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn to
speak. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council decides to invite the representative of Mali to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

fiesent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, S. Daore (Mali)
took the place reserved for him in the Council chamber,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 580)

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will continue
its discussion of the item on its agenda, The first name on
the list of speakers for this meeting is the representative of
Israel, on whom I now call.

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2, The situation in the Middle ,East :
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the Presiderit of the Security
Council (S/10313);
(bj Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537, and S/10124 and
Add.1 and 2).

4. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, allow me to
express to you my delegation’s highest respect and best
wishesin your high office.
5. In the dark ages, when Europe was still covered with
primeval forests and marshes, when superstition was rampant and the law was in the hands of robber-barons, the
Jewish people, conquered by foreign invaders and uprooted
from its homeland, found itself dispersed in various lands
where Jews became bearers of an ancient but advanced
civilization, forerunners of medicine, science and finance.
In those days when disasters of war, flood, famine or plague
befell the local population it was not unusual for rulers to
try and divert the grief and wrath of the populace by
directing them against the Jews in its midst.

Adoption of the agenda
The agendu was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/103 13);
(bl Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537, and S/10124 and Add.1
and 2)

6. It seems that the Hashemite Kingdom is not averse to
resorting to such retrograde methods. Apparently its rulers
believe that their internal difficulties-the bloodshed which
has engulfed the land, the conflict with other Arab States,
the armed clashes with the Syrian Army, the closing of
borders and the severance of diplomatic relations-can all
be offset by a show of hostility towards Israel. This is an
old, primitive method; it has never succeeded in concealing
the real problems and calamities. It has always brought only
disrepute upon those who resorted to it. The Jordanian
Government can hardly expect that a frivolous complaint
against peace and progress in Jerusalem would camouflage
the malaise Jordan finds itself in at present.

1, The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken this morning [1579th meeting], I shall, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Jordan,
Egypt and Israel to take places at the Security Council table
in order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. Toukan (Jordan), Mr. M. H, ELZayyat (Egypt) nnd Mr. Y. Tekoah
(Ismel) took places at the Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:

7. From atop the Judean hills, Jerusalem has watched and
lived 3,000 years of history; it has known peace and war,
destruction and rebuilding; it has seen a multitude of
conquerors pass through its gates and settle within its walls.
Throughout all times, however, it has been the centre of life
of only one nation-the Jews. It has been the capital of
only one State-the Jewish State. There would have been

I have just received a letter dated 16

September [S/10321/ from the representative of Mali in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the current
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, and with
the consent of the Council, I would suggest that, in view of
the limited seating at the Council table, he be invited to
1

,

remained silent when the Jordanians eliminated the Jewi&
population of the Old City and razed to the ground all its
Jewish houses of worship and institutions of learning.

no Jewish people without Jerusalem; no Jewish culture or
religion without Jerusalem. There would have been no
rebirth of Israel without Jerusalem. Equally, there would
have been no Jerusalem were it not for the Jewish people.
Eventually the City acquired a spiritual sanctity for
Christianity and Islam, With its Holy Places it became the
seat of numerous churches and mosques and other religious
institutions, However, only in the history of the Jewish
people has it held at all times an unrivalled national and
religious primacy, making Jewish life inseparable from
Jerusalem.

12. The Security Council did not lift a finger when the
ancient Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives was defiled
and destroyed and its tombstones carted away for the
construction of sidewalks and latrines in Jordanian army
camps. Where was the Security Council when, during 19
years, Jordan, in breach of its explicit international
undertakings, prohibited access to the Holy Places of
Judaism and barred Israeli Moslems from sites holy to
Islam? Where was it when the Jordanian troops of
occupation subjected Jerusalem to a reign of terror,
repeatedly opening fire and killing innocent residents and
visitors in its western sector? Where was the Security
Council when in June 1967 Jordan used the occupied part
of Jerusalem to launch an assault on Israel? There wereno
Security Council meetings to prevent or stop Jordan’s
crimes against Jerusalem’s peace, sacredness and integrity,
There was no Security Council action to protect Jeru.
salem’s citizens from armed threat and attack.

8. Throughout history Jerusalem has preserved its unity
and integrity. ‘Except for the transitory occupation of its
eastern sector by Jordan, it has always been one : in its fate,
in its glory and in its sacredness. In an existence encompassing millenia there were 19 years-only 19 years-of
forced, tragic division, They are gone, a grim, painful
episode in the life of the Eternal City, Once ended, that
dark episode of warped langour can no longer overshadow
the City’s natural state and its normal life. Jerusalem is its
true self again. It is for this Jerusalem that Israel stands; it is
of this Jerusalem that I speak.

13. Now that the city is no longer divided by barbed wire
and minefields, now that it is secure and peaceful, the
Security Council is mobilized in an attempt to advise
Jerusalem to stop healing its wounds, to bar progress,to

9. Universally revered for its Holy Places, Jerusalem is at
the same time a living city. It is the home of close to
300,000 inhabitants, threequarters of whom are Jews.
These citizens are following the proceedings in the Security
Council with understandable wonderment. Indeed, it is a
cause for amazement that the State which brought so much
suffering upon the City should find it possible to try and
harass Jerusalem again, Jordan-which invaded Jerusalem in
1948, in violation of the Charter and United Nations
resolutions, seized its eastern sector, destroyed the entire
.Jewish Quarter of. the Old City and uprooted all its
inhabitants-is now trying to invade the City’s right to
normal existence, to reconstruction and development.
Jerusalem’s citizens categorically reject this intrusion.

stifle growth.

14. For generations Jerusalem’s Jewish majority and its
Arab minority lived side by side-for generations. Sincethe
removal in 1967 of the barriers which had separated the
two communities during the period of Jordanian occupation, Jews and Arabs are again living and working together,
Arab and Jewish 1abOUKeKSare employed in the same
enterprises. Thousands of Arab workers have become
members of the Israeli Labour Federation-the Histadrut,
They are no longer exploited as they were under Jordanian
rule. Joint Arab-Jewish commercial and industrial ventures
are being launched all the time, There are joint cultural and
sports clubs, joint artistic performances. Jewish and Arab
citizens alike participated in the municipal elections of
1969. The number of Arab voters was three times larger
than in the elections organized by the Jordanian authorities.

10. No one can question their right to natural growth, to
the clearance of slums and the construction of new
housing-especially not an aggressor State guilty of grave
crimes against the City. Jerusalem’s citizens are not pawns
to be trifled with in a game of international belligerency in
which the welfare of their City and the rights
of its
population are cynically brushed aside. They will not be
sacrificed on the altar of JOKCbn’s internal political squabbles. The men, women. and children of Jerusalem have the
same rights as the citizens of any other city in the world.
They refuse to have their lives tampered with and dissected
by those who mercilessly trampled them into dust.

15. There is freedom of the press to a degree unknown in
the Arab States. Two Arabic dailies are published in East
Jerusalem, In Arabic schools, the pupils have the choiceof
preparing themselves for Jordanian or Israeli matriculation
examinations.
16. The Qadi, the Moslem Religious Justice, of Ramallah,
a town on the west bank in the vicinity of Jerusalem,
reacted on 27 May 1971 to the Jordanian attempts to
distort the situation in Jerusalem. He declared:

11. They do not regard the Security Council OK other
organs of the United Nations as forums appropriate for the
examination of questions concerning the City’s life. The
United Nations, its General Assembly and the Security
Council have displayed singular disinterest in JeKUSEhTI’S
welfare at the most trying and crucial moments. When the
Arab States invaded Israel in 1948 and besieged Jerusalem,
the United Nations abandoned them to their own resources
and left them to fight for.their lives alone. When Jordanian
and Egyptian guns rained fire and death on the City,
endangering the very existence of its Holy Places, the
Security Council did not envince much concern. And it

“Doesn’t the Jordanian ‘Government realize that Peru.
salem is practically a united city, that commerce is
flourishing and Arab businessmen make a lot of money,
that thousands of Arab workers work in Israel, apply to
Israeli courts and join the Histadrut? ”
17. An impressive reflection of the situation in Jerusalem
is to be found in the number of tourists who visit the city
2

annually, In 1967, 291,000 visitors to Israel toured
Jerusalem; in 1968, 432,000; in 1969, 410,000; and last
year, 437,000. Moreover, there are tens of thousands of
Arab tourists from neighbouring Arab countries who come
to Jerusalem. This summer the number of Arab visitors to
Jerusalem from Arab States was more than 100,000.

22, As for building activities, the most important work is
that of the reconstruction of the Jewish Quarter destroyed
by the Jordanians. The Quarter had always been inhabited
by Jews. At the beginning of this century approximately
15,000 Jews lived in it. None remained after the Jordanians
occupied it in 1948.

18. Is this a situation that threatens international peace, as
alleged by Jordan? Could there be an allegation more
baseless?

23. Abdallah el-Tal, the commander of the Jordanian
forces that captured eastern Jerusalem, described its fate in
his memoirs, published in Cairo in 1954. He stated: “The
Jewish Quarter was destroyed. . . , For the first time in
more than a thousand years not a single Jew remained
in it .”

19, As in every large city, especially one with a heterogeneous population, Jerusalem has its occasional public
security problems. These however are rare and the measures
adopted to cope with them most infrequent and limited, as
compared with police measures in other parts of the world,
or with Jordan’s recent actions against its own citizens, and
with the extreme acts of repression which the Jordanian
authorities were in the habit of carrying out before 1967 to
maintain order in the all-Arab population of eastern
Jerusalem. Thus, for instance, since 1967 nine Jordanian
agents who have tried to encourage and organize violence
have been ordered to leave the city and join their masters in
Amman. The last time such a step proved necessary was
two years ago. Two of those nine persons have in the
meantime been allowed to return to the city. Nine houses
used as terrorist bases have been demolished in accordance
with laws in force since the British Mandatory Administration. The last demolition took place in May 1969 and none
have occurred since.

24. The Catholic Archdeacon of Oxford, C. Witton-Davies,
wrote in The Tablet of 12 June 1971:
“It was the Arab Legion that advanced on the Old
City. . . . What followed? The senseless and shocking
destruction of Jewish houses that could have been used
temporarily for Arab refugees, and the obscene desecration of Jewish synagogues, some of them of great
historical value and sanctity, simply because they were
Jewish”.
25. Now, were the Israeli authorities to leave this revered
area in a state of ruin and degradation? In the name of
what principle, on the basis of what law was the barbaric
ravageof the Jewish Quarter to be preserved?
26. The ruins of the Quarter and the slums that had grown
upon it, including the Moghrabi houses, have been cleared.
The Arab tenants affected were offered new housing and
compensation. All of them without exception have as a
result of that relocation improved their living conditions. In
letters to the Municipality they have expressed their
appreciation of the manner in which that was done.

20. The Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem still remember the
treatment meted out to them by the Jordanian occupation
forces. They remember for example how the Jordanian
authorities handled the frequent strikes and demonstrations. They have not forgcttee hu,; in April 1963 the
Jordanian army and police dispersed a demonstration by
killing 11 and wounding 150 residents, including 17
girl-students. They remember how in another demonstration, on 24 November 1966, at least 20 were killed and
many more wounded by the Jordanian forces. They know
that the Jordanian authorities regarded themselves as
occupation authorities and acted, throughout the entire
period, brutally and mercilessly. They are of course aware
of the fate of their brethren in Jordan today.

27. The area contained more than 60 synagogues and
numerous religious institutions. Some of them were not
only ancient but magnificent in their architecture. Their
restoration is an act of manifest merit and propriety.
28. Second only to the reconstruction of the Jewish
Quarter in historic, cultural and humanitarian significance
comes the reconstruction of the Hebrew University campus
and the Hadassah Hospital on Mount Scopus. When Jordan
invaded Jerusalem in 1948 and occupied a part of it, it
failed to dislodge Israel from Mount Scopus. Under the
General Armistice Agreement of 1949 Israel retained
possession of the Mount, which dominates the eastern
district of the city. Jordan undertook to ensure free access
to the humanitarian and cultural institutions on Mount
Scopus and the resumption of their normal activities. The
Jordanian Government refused, however, to implement
that undertaking. The university and the hospital remained
skeletons of structures guarded by Israeli units. Today
those institutions are functioning again, The buildings have
been restored. Some new ones have been added. The
hospital will have 700 beds and will serve the entire Jewish
and Arab population of the eastern and north-eastern part
of the city.

21. Jerusalem is a living, throbbing metropolis. It cannot
be cordoned off from the world. Its natural growth, its
municipal needs, its economic dynamism cannot be artificially garrotted. Its normal development cannot proceed in
same fields and be unnaturally arrested in others. City
planning and city construction are a normal and indispensable element in such development. They are proceeding in
several directions. Essential services such as sanitation,
public health, electricity, water, roads, and so on have been
assured to all parts of the city. Slum reconstruction has
begun, with tenants receiving in each case new housing or
compensation adequate to acquire new housing. The
concern for the social and aesthetic attributes of the city is
not confined to slum clearance. The minefields which used
to divide Jerusalem have become attractive parks. Under
Jordanian occupation eastern Jerusalem did not have a
single park, not a single playground for children. Today it
has six parks and four playgrounds.

29. Now, in accordance with Jordan’s international obligations that should have been the situation even in the period
3

preceding 1967. Are we to be told that, now that Jordan’s
violations of its international obligations can no longer
interfere with the normal operation and development of the
university and hospital on Mount Scopus, Israel should
nevertheless keep that area in a state of devastation and
neglect? Jordan has proved over nineteen years its contempt for learning, for science, for medicine at the service
of humanity. Is anyone at all to give serious regard to views
sanctioning that contempt-views opposing the esta’blishment of a new hospital wing, the construction of housing
for doctors and nurses, professors and students, the
creation of the International Truman Peace Center? HOW
far should disregard for human values be allowed to run
wild?

following the termination of Jordan’s invasion the development of Jerusalem must once more proceed on its normal
course, interrupted by war and the subsequent bisection of
the city.
35. In view of the universal interests in the city the Mayor
group of outstanding individuals in the fields of theology, architecture, art
and letters, philosophy, archaeology, social sciences,and
law to form an advisory board to aid the Municipality of
Jerusalem and the Government of Israel in planning future
development and especially housing construction. It was
named the Jerusalem Committee.
of Jerusalem has invited an international

36. The original 34 members of the Jerusalem Committee
first met in Jerusalem in July 1969 and by December of
that year the founding group had swelled to about 70
members. The discussions were lively, and the first statement published by the Committee stated, among other

30. The third area of eastern Jerusalem in which building
activities are taking place is Neve Yaakov. This Jewishinhabited district was over-run by the Jordanian forces in
1948 and turned into an army encampment. Jews are now
returning to it, building new houses, constructing new
roads.

things :

“We found the city already deeply engaged in rehsbilitation and reconstruction work as well as in arc&ological exploration, with people of all ages from all over
the world, contributing their knowledge and their energy
to the task. . . . Our visit to Jerusalem convinced us that
much of the work to be done is long overdue. To delay
any longer the rehabilitation of the Wall, the clearanceof
slums and the protection of sites would do irreparable
harm. The many essential values involved require inlmediate study and prompt action.

31. Then there is the construction of housing for Arab
residents who lived in slums or in the ruins of the Jewish
Quarter. Some of them have found housing in existing
buildings. Others are settling in newly constructed houses.
Under Jordanian rule there had been no public housing in
eastern Jerusalem. Today several projects are under construction. One is under way in Wadi Joz ) where a number of
Arab families have already settled. Another is about to
begin in the Beit Hanina district. The contractor and the
architect are members of distinguished Arab families.

“The preparatory work of the authority is both valid
and farsighted. . . . We believe that’ we must not succumb
to the temptation of using the ‘extraordinary wealth of
tangible reminiscence of the past to make the City a
museum or a stage set. Jerusalem must be kept a living
city. . . , We suggest that the Municipality of Jerusalembe
empowered to create an office of coordination to
reconcile the divergencies and implement whateverplans
it adopts. Past mistakes, such as the construction of a
hotel on the top of Mount Olives, the construction of a
hospital on the ridge of Mount Olives and the construction of a church which blocks the beautiful view of tile
Kidron Valley from the bridge (all three took place
during the Jordanian administration of East Jerusalem)
are sad examples of building in the wrong location and
should help us to prevent similar mistakes in the future.
Now that Jerusalem is, at last, freely accessibleto all, wo
call upon all cultural and spiritual groups throughout tllc
world to come here as we did for meetings and exchanges
of views and join in the challenging and great adventure
which lies ahead .”

32. Other projects are destined to accommodate the
growth of Jerusalem’s population, Jewish as well as Arab.
For that purpose 4,402 acreshave been acquired in the last
four years by the Government and the municipality. That
was done in accordance with the Land (Acquisition for
Public Purposes) Ordinance No, 24 of 1943, which has
remained in force since the British mandatory period. A
parallel law was in force under the Jordanian rule-the Land
(Acquisition for Public Purposes) Law No. 2 of 1353.
33. Of the owners of the land thus acquired, 1,180 were
Arabs and 2,140 Jews. The Jewish owners were actually
affected more than the Arab owners, Though special care
was taken to acquire land that was completely vacant,
nevertheless there were on it 270 structures owned by Jews,
as compared with thirty-five Arab-owned structures. The
latter were in a deteriorated condition. They were inhabited
by forty Arab families numbering about 24Cl persons. The
Jewish structures were occupied partially by 485 Jewish
families consisting of more than 3,000 persons and partially
by stores, garages and workshops which provided living
quarters for an additional 300 families. The owners of the
land, Arabs and Jews, are being paid full compensation. The
tenants are being relocated,

37. Among the founding members of the Jerusalem
Committee were: Pasteur Marc Boegner, Past President,
World Council of Churches; Reverend W. G. M. Brandful,
President, Christian Council of Ghana; Professor Jacques
Courvoisier, theologian and former rector, University of
Geneva, Switzerland; Professor Oscar Cullmann, former
rector, Base1University, Switzerland; His Eminence Diangenda, chef Spirituel de L %glise, Kinshasa, Congo; the
Reverend T. M. Hesburgh, President, University of Notre
Dame, United States; Mr. Jorge Amado, author, Brazil;

34. It is to be observed that housing construction is
pursued largely on the basis of plans elaborated by the
British administration during the Mandate period and
suspended after the Jordanian jtlvasion of 1948. However,
contrary to the Jordanian allegations, there is no master
plan. Construction is carried on in the conviction that
4

Mr. Oskar Kokosclika, artist and author, Switzerland;
Mr. Jacques Lipchitz, sculptor, United States; Henry
Moore, OM., sculptor, United Kingdom; Mr. Isamu
Noguchi, sculptor and landscape architect, United States;
Mr. Thomas Having, Director, Metropolitan Museum of
Fine Arts, in New York; Mr. John PopeHennessy , Director,
Victoria and Albert Museum, United Kingdom; Dr. Willem
Sar.‘berg, former Director, Municipal Museums of Amsterdam, Netherlands; Lord Goodman, Chairman of the Arts
Council of Great Britain; Mr. Ernest0 Sabato, author and
philosopher, Argentina; Mr. Ignazio Silone, author, Italy;
Mr. S.N, Tagore, author and political thinker, India;
Mr. Luis Barges, author, Argentina; Mr. Geoffrey Bawa,
architect, Ceylon; Professor Torgny Segerstedt, Rector
Magnificus, University of Uppsala, Sweden; Mr. Manuel
Aguilar, publisher, Spain; Maestro Pablo Casals, Puerto
Rico; the Honourable Carlos Garcia, former President of
the Fhllippines; Sir Robert Menzies, former Prime Minister
of Australia; H.E. Vittorino Veronese, former DirectorGeneral, UNESCO, Chairman Italian Committee for Human
Rights.

population which is absorbing additional residents in a
city whose rate of natural increase is among the highest in
the world, and particularly high among the Arab residents. The city is open to the constructive initiative of
Jews, Christians and Moslems the world over in the
furtherance of its development, especially of its cultural
and spiritual assets, and in increasing the number of
institutions and enterprises testifying to the city’s historical uniqueness and special mission of promoting faith,
progress and peace.
“Should Christian and Moslem circles, to whom Jerusalem is dear, manifest initiative of their own, it wilI be
welcome and they will benefit from Government support,
just as they have been benefiting up to now .”
42. The Government of Israel addressesitself with special
respect and consideration to the universal religious interests
in Jerusalem.
43. This could have hardly been said of the Jordanian
authorities which, in addition to their infamous destruction
of Jewish sacred places, have left behind a record of
anti-Christian actions. In fact so callous had their disregard
been for religious and historic values that even venerated
Moslem sites have not escaped desecration by them.

38. The town-planning subcommittee includes: Buckminster Fuller, Sir Philip Hendy , Louis I. Kahn, Isamu
Noguchi, Sir Nikolaus Pevsner, Luigi Piccinato, Moshe
Safdie and Bruno Zevi, and many other luminaries of
architecture and town planning.

44. On 27 June 1967, the Knesset passed a law for the
protection of the Holy Places. On the same day, the Prime
Minister made the following declaration to the religious
leaders in Jerusalem :

39. A declaration adopted on 10 June 1971 at a Conference of Catholic, Protestant and Evangelical leaders of the
United States described the construction projects in Jerusalem as follows :

“Ail the Holy Places in Jerusalem are now open to all
who wish to pray in them and to the faithful of all
religions without discrimination. It is our intention to
place the internal management and arrangements for the
Holy Places in the hands of the religious leaders of the
communities to which these places belong.”

“Our inquiry into the question of public housing in the
Old City and environs has convinced us that the construction of these buildings is a legitimate effort on the part of
the Israeli Government to effectuate a renewal of certain
slum areas of the City, to rehouse in new apartments
Arabs from these quarters, to provide living space for a
Jewish population increased by immigration, and to
re-introduce a Jewish presence into the Old City from
which it had been forcibly barred after the war of 1948.
The development plans are in no sense designed to oust
the Arabs, nor to ‘suffocate’ the Christian and Moslem
population. While we are concerned about the sacred
character of the City, we believe that this housing is
sufficiently removed from the Holy Places to avoid the
charge of diminishing the sanctity of the City.”

45. In pursuance of this policy the Waqf is responsible for
the management of AI Aqsa, the Dome of the Rock, and all
the Moslem institutions, cemeteries and mosques. The Chief
Rabbinate has jurisdiction over the Western Wall and other
Jewish Holy Places, synagogues and Jewish cemeteries. The
various Christian communities maintain jurisdiction over
their respective Holy Places and religious institutions,
according to the accepted tradition.

41 I) The Foreign Minister of Israel, Mr. Abba Eban, declared in the Knesset on 30 June 1971:

46. Israel has concluded and carried out compensation
agreements for war damage with all church institutions.
This refers to damage sustained from 1948 to 1967 as a
result of the wars initiated by the Government of Jordan
and other Arab Govermnents. Such compensation has been
paid to 17 Christian institutions, to the amount of 6 million
Israeli pounds. The Government also encourages pilgrimage
by the faithful of all denominations to the Holy Places.
This welcome movement takes place in an atmosphere of
peace, freedom and safety. Christian and Moslem pilgrimage
grows from year to year. Many religious leaders have borne
positive witness to this policy.

“ . . . the city’s development will be planned with an eye
to all the inhabitants and taking into consideration the
urgent requirements of a lively, variegated and increasing

47. In addition, the Israeli authorities and the municipslity of Jerusalem have aided churches and Christian institutions in the furthering of spiritual activities, art and culture,

40. In addition to housing projects carried out by the
authorities, Arab private building as well is proceeding on a
considerable scale. Thus it is estimated that since 1967
more than 300 housing units have been constructed by
private Arab builders without assistance from the authorlties. There could be no better evidence of the fact that
housing construction is taking place in accordance with the
natural needs of growth and development in the City.

5

mosque, restoring it to its previous condition, The
Bureau carried out and supervised all these repairs.

and for the promotion of strong and efficient construction.
Institutions benefiting from administrative, material or
technical assistance include: the Armenian Patriarchate,
St.Peter in Gallicante of the Assumptionist Fathers, the
Sisters of Zion, the Franciscan Order, the Greek Catholic
PaMarchate, the White Sisters, the Knights of Malta, the
Evangelic Lutheran Church of Reformation at Beit Jolla,
Notre Dam de Sian and St, John’s Monastery in Ein Karem,
a new Roman Catholic Church and community centre in
Beit Hanina, and the American Institute of Holy Land
Studies.

Aqsd

“Entrance to the venerable Holy Place is controlled by
guards appointed by the Bureau. These guards stand at all
gates leading to the courtyard of the Holy Place except at
Al-Maghariba Gate. The Bureau pays salaries to all the
guards appointed by it from the Islamic Waqf treasury,
The Jslamic Waqf Bureau levies entrance fees from
tourists visiting the venerable Haram compound at all the
gates leading to the courtyard of the Holy Place. It is
forbidden for non-Moslems to enter the venerable Haram
eBharif on Fridays, and the regulations regarding this are
applied. With the help of Arab and Jewish police, the
guards appointed by the Waqf Bureau enforce the
regulations and orders prohibiting non-Moslems from
entering the holy compound. Posters which set out rules
concerning behaviour in Holy Places are displayed at
conspicuous places.

48. A Roman Catholic Ecumenical Research Institute, the
first of its kind in the entire world, is about to be
completed on a hill near Jerusalem, following an idea put
forward by Pope Paul VI. Father Hesburgh, President of the
University of Notre Dame in indiana and Chairman of the
World Union of Catholic Universities, is in charge of the
project. Professor Charles Moeller of the University of
Louvain, Belgium, will be the first dean of the Institute. As
envisaged by the Pope, the Institute will bring together the
great theologians of all Christian churches and persuasions
in researching the history of schisms in Christianity.

“The Egyptian architect, Abdel Munim Abdel Wahab,
supervised the repair works of the noble Rock and its
Dome. Repairs have been carried out in the galleries of
the domes, the minarets and all areas of the Holy Places
damaged as a result of the war. The damage at the blessed
Al Aqsa mosque itself principally affected the main gate
and some of the windows, including the artistic colored
glass. The Waqf Bureau believes that it is necessary that
the same architectural office undertake this repair work.
The Waqf Bureau did not hesitate to work on repairing
the central gallery of Al Aqsa mosque straightway after
the war, thus avoiding the dangers that might have
threatened the building itself as a result of the penetra.
tion of rain water. As a result, every Moslem can enter the
Haram Sharif and freely perform his religious rites.
Moslem circles in Jerusalem believe that it is the duty of
every Moslem to obey the call of the blessed Al Aqsa
mosque, so that it is filled with worshippers at the five
daily prayer times, at the Friday noon service and on
other blessed Islamic religious occasions.

49. A Greek Orthodox Church just outside the Old City
walls, which had stood unfinished for years under Jordanian rule, has now been completed by the community.
Half a million Israeli pounds have also been set aside for
repair work on the Rockefeller Museum.
50. Since the reunification of the city, repairs and
renovation work have been carried out on the Armenian
Church on Mount Zion, on the Monastery of the Cross, and
on the Armenian Church of the Holy Sepulchre. The
foundation stone has been laid for a new Armenian
Theological Seminary in the Old City. Christian churches
benefit from reductions in matters of taxation.
51, The right of every religious community to maintain its
own schools and, unlike the situation under Jordan’s rule,
to set its own curricula, is also guaranteed and preserved.

“There are a large number of mosques and Moslem
places of worship in Jerusalem. The number of mosques,
in addition to the Dome of the Rock and Al Aqsa, is 34;
27 of them are within the wall in the Old City, and seven
are outside the wall, in the modern part of the city; a
small .number of these Mosques are no longer in use.
There are also 11 small mosques, prayer rooms, in
Jerusalem, into which the pious, the strangerson Moslela
pilgrimage and the orthodox belonging to different sects
may retire.

52. The Moslem Holy Places, houses of worship and
religious instit.utions enjoy similar conditions. The situation
since 1967 was described as follows by Mr. Ghazi Alam
El-Ain in an article published in the Arabic daily of east
Jerusalem Al-Anba on 8 August 1969:
“The Islamic Waqf Bureau continued to supervise all
Islamic places of worship in the Holy City, and especially
the Haram e-Sharif compound which includes the Dome
of the Rock and Al Aqsa, remaining in charge of the
preservation of its holiness and cleanliness.

“Moslems have many cemeteries in Jerusalem, of which
some were used in the past, and, with time, have become
obsolete; others are still in use. There are 20 such Islamic
cemeteries,

“The Waqf Bureau carried out repairs and renovations
necessary to maintain the buildings of the holy Haram
compound. It also undertook the repair of all Islamic
Holy Places which were damaged as a result of the June
war. Ah this was financed by the Islamic Waqf funds and
with no outside help. Among the places which the Bureau
repaired was the minaret, Bab al-Asbat, the Tribes’ Gate,
which was damaged during the fighting. It also repaired
the Dome of the Rock, which wasthen slightly damaged.
The Bureau also repaired the main gate of the blessed

“In Jerusalem there are not a few Islamic public
fountains, built by Moslem kings and sultans hundreds of
years ago. Owing to their great age, they have suffered
some damage. However, the Waqf Bureau renovated
them, at its own expense, after the June war. The Waqf
Bureau took heavy costs upon itself in rebuilding and
repairing these public fountains, because of meticulous
6

and lengthy technical work which was required as is the
casewith any archaelogical monument.
-

front of the Wailing Wall. Already Charles Wilson of the
Royal Engineers discovered over a hundred years ago the
original construction which today bears his name“‘Wilson’s Arch”. Scholars have been anxious for years to
continue the exploration of this monument and, as late as
1966, Professor William F. Stinespring of Duke University
Divinity School conducted archaeological excavations in
this very area. No danger whatever exists either to this
monument or to the buildings above it.

“The Waqf Bureau carried out repairs at other buildings
owned by the Waqf, which were damaged as a result of
the June war, especially the buildings on S&h ed-Din
Street.
“NO
radical change has occurred in the administration
of the Holy Places during the period of Israeli rule as
compared with the situation under Jordanian rule.

59. UNESCO’s Commissioner General for Cultural Property, Dr. Karl Brunner, in a letter addressed to Mr. R.
Maheu, Director-General of UNESCO on 6 October 1970
stated, inter alia:

“As to the Islamic Museum adjacent to the blessed Al
Aqsa mosque, it is still as it has been. Foreign tourists and
other visitors frequent this museum and view its collec.
tion of Islamic antiquities. The museum receives visitors
thmugllout the week, except Fridays, against an entrance
fee.“’

“The excavation of Professor Mazar has not threatened
the safety of the temple area and he is now working in a
direction further away from the mosque complex.”

53. It is to be noted that the damage caused in 1969 to
the Al Aqsa mosque by fire is being repaired by the Moslem
authorities. A new mosque wasbuilt earlier this year on the
Mount of Olives, Another was dedicated recently in the
Silwar~ district of the city.

60. Dr. H. J. Reinink, UNESCO’s Special Representative
entrusted with reporting on the compliance with The Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict,1 declared in a letter addressedto
the Director-General of UNESCO on 13 April 1971:

54. Particular regard for Jerusalem’s spiritual attributes is
reflected also in the archaeological excavations which aim
at revealing the ancient history of the city. These excavations center today in the area to the south and west of the
monumental wall built by King Herod the Great in the
latter part ‘of the first century B.C. They are conducted in
an area in which there are no cultural or historic monuments.

“It is important that you should know the exact
character of the work done by the Ministry of Religions
in subterranean Jerusalem. There is no question of
excavating in the ordinary sense of the word. No new
tunnels are being made that could threaten the safety of
the buildings above, but constructions that were built
hundreds and thousands of years ago are being cleared of
ancient debris and cleaned. Every precaution is taken to
protect the subterranean areas and the streets and
buildings above.

55. Captain Warren, of the Palestine Exploration Fund,
commenced these excavations some 100 years ago. They
were continued under Jordanian rule by the British
archaeologist, Miss IL Kenyon, and by the French scholar
and archaeologist, Pore Roland de Vaux.

“Everyone who hears of the extensive works that are
being done under an important part of the Old Jerusalem
must think that great risks are taken; that many buildings,
streets, market places, and especially the monuments, are
threatened. This is, therefore, the place to remind
everybody concerned that already s hundred years ago
archaeologists especially the renowned Charles Wilson in
circumstances very much more difficult than exist today,
uncovered part of the original construction, particularly
the celebrated Wilson Arch. As late as 1963 and 1965 and
1966, Professor William F. Stinespring of Duke University
Divinity School conducted archaeological excavations in
the area.

56. Not only has there been no damage to Moslem cultural
property but these excavations have unearthed, inter alia,
Interesting Moslem Unmayyad remains. Arab workers are
employed in the excavations; Arab students join the
volunteer workers who assist the archaeologists, and Arab
visitors to the excavations include members of the Moslem
Council in Jerusalem.
57. The excavations present no danger whatsoever to
Moslem religious buildings, Subsequent to the six days war
some dilapidated houses near the excavations’ site were
pulled down, for safety reasons, but they included not one
historical or cultural building. No demolition of any
Moslem cultural building or monument has been, or is
being, contemplated. The excavations are conducted in a
most scientific and careful manner and will undoubtedly
contribute much to our knowledge concerning Jewish,
Christian and Moslem culture of many centuries.

“The present clearance is being done in close collaboration with the Israel Institute of Technology and the
University of Haifa, by an expert engineer, Josef Schonberger of Darmstadt . Furthermore, the Ministry of
Religions is not being allowed to engagein any form of
archaeological exploration and excavation. The engineerarchitect of the British School of Archaeology, Mr. Archibald Walls, declared in the presenceof the Director of the
School, Mrs. Christal Benett and of the famous archaeologist P&e Roland de Vaux of the Dominican Ecole
Biblique de Jerusalem, that in his opinion, this part of the
work done in the center of Jerusalem does not bring with
it my risks of damage for the buildings above.”

58. Similar care is also undertaken in the clearing Of refuse
and debris which have accumulated through the centuries
under the arches built by King Herod to support the bridge
connecting the Temple Mount to the Western Wall. The
clearing of the refuse stops at the level of the pavement in

1 &ited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249 (19561,NO. 3511.

7

Does anyone expect the Jewish State to become party to
anti-Jewish prejudices and pronouncements?

61. Information disseminated by certain elements, according to which there has been in the last four years a
diminution of the Christian and Moslem populations of
Jerusalem is not in accordance with, and is even opposed
to, facts. On the other hand, there is also no truth whatever
in the Jordanian allegations contained in the Jordanian
complaint that Israel contemplates the extension of the
city’s municipal boundaries to include neighbouring Arab
towns and villages and their populations. The private bill to
which the representative of Jordan referred earlier today
was submitted by a single individual member of the Knesset
and has long ago been withdrawn.

68. The Israeli authorities can be expected to ensure-and
will ensure-that the universal religious interests in Jerusalem are meticulously respected and that the city’s life and
development are carried on in an orderly manner, They
cannot be expected to lend themselves to Arab belligerency
and to impose anti-Jewish restrictions on the city that has
throughout history been the heart of the Jewish people’s
existence.
69. On what does Jordan base its claims and charges?
From what does it derive its pretensions? Jordan’s association with Jerusalem was of one kind only-through its
invasion of 1948, in violation of the Charter and of United
Nations resolutions, and through the subsequent illegal
occupation of the city’s eastern sector. That occupation
does not accord Jordan any rights, especially now that it
has been terminated. It had never been recognized by any
of the States Members of the United Nations. It cannot
serve as a basis for invoking international conventions and
instruments. Obviously, it cannot be used as a Iever to
oppose Jerusalem’s integrity and development,

62. The phenomenon of Christian emigration from the
Middle East has existed for over one hundred years. This
process, with regard to Jerusalem, intensified during the 19
years of Jordanian occupation. Since 1967, however, it has
ceased. It intensified during the Jordanian occupation. It
has ceased since the reunification of Jerusalem. What is
actually occurring is the normal process of exit and entry in
conjunction with the disappearance of the tendency to
emigrate from Jerusalem.
63. The best illustration of the situation of the Christian
and Moslem communities in Jerusalem is to be found in the
statistics relating to the growth of the population. There
was a sharp decrease in the number of Christians in
Jerusalem under Jordanian rule, which followed the Jordan
occupation in 1948. The figures are as follows. In 1948 the
number of Jews in Jerusalem was 100,000; the number of
Christians, 25,000; the number of Moslems, 45,000. In
1967 the number of Jews was 195,000; the number of
Christians dropped from 25,000 in 1948 to 10,800 in 1967;
the number of Moslems increased to 54,963. In 1970 the
number of Jews was 215,000; the number of Christians,
11,500; the number of Moslems, 61,600.

70. While firmly rejecting any claims based on aggression
against Jerusalem ‘and the city’s former illegal division,
Israel will continue to be guided by the legitimate rights
and interests of Jerusalem’s citizens irrespective of nationality and faith and will scrupulously ensure the sanctity of
the Holy Places, freedom of access to them and tk
jurisdiction of the various religious communities over them.
And in pursuance of this objective Israel maintains a
constructive and detailed dialogue with representatives of
universal religious interests.

64. It appears then that the heavy emigration of Christians
during the Jordanian occupation-about 14,000 left during
this period-ceased as of 1967. It also appears that the
Moslem population has actually increased since 1967.

71. The inability of the United Nations to deal impartially
with the Middle East situation by means of public debate
and resolutions is a matter of record. This is due prinerily
to the structure and voting procedures of United Natiorls
organs. The world is aware of the fact that Israel’s CL~S(:
cannot receive a fair hearing in our Organization or be
judged here on its merits.

65. The gratuitous and malicious nature of Jordan’s
assault on Jerusalem’s right to lead a normal life, to grow
and to develop is illustrated by the charge that the city’s
character is being changed, that Jerusalem is being
“Judaized”. The significance of the charge is clear. Jerusalem may be the centre of the Jewish people’s existence,
civilization, unity. Jews may have constituted the majority
of the city’s population for generations, but Jews, according to Jordan, should not be allowed to supply the town’s
municipal services, Jews must not beautify the city, Jews
must not build, and Jews must not multiply.

72. Israel, however, cannot forego its rights simply because the Security Council, the General Assembly or other
organs are inherently weighted against it. The merits of its
position cannot be affected by the fact that it is a small
nation, solitary in its Jewish civilisation and Hebrew
heritage, a nation that does not belong to power blocs
which dominate the outcome of voting, and that, consequently, it is outvoted time and again, Being a minarity is
not new to Jewish experience. The Jewish people’s strength
seems to lie in its successto preserve, through the ages, its
values, ideals and traditions despite the hostility of others.

66. There is a sinister echo in this attitude. We still
remember Hitler’s maniacal campaign against the so-called
“Judaization” of German life. We have not forgotten how
this campaign developed into the genocide of 6 million of
our brethren.

73. We have therefore come before the Security Couneit
not in search of equity, for equity is denied here to lsr~~l:
we have come sharing in the general knowledge that
discussions of the Middle East situation in the United
Nations have become almost like rituals of acrimony and
animosity, and that, whatever the rights and wrongsof the
respective positions in the present debate, we face foregone
conclusions and even a resolution formulated in advance.

67. Does the Jordanian Government, or for that matter
any other Government, believe that it is possible to revive
the spirit of the anti-Jewish laws and to establish a
‘humerus cZausus” against Jews,in Jerusalem of all places?
8

We have come before the Security Council not to give
sanction to this ritual, but to reiterate the truth, for truth
has a life and a force of its own. “For Zion’s sake I will not
keep silence; for Jerusalem’s sake I will speak out”, saysthe
Bible. So it shall be.

by any resolution, past or potential, of this Council. That
has just been affirmed. They have neither rescinded their
past measures nor refrained from further more serious
measures. On the contrary, the Israeli authorities have
proceeded to apply these measures to an ever-widening area
of the other occupied Arab territories in the west bank of
the Jordan. Whole Palestinian villages have now been
engulfed within the borders of the so-called greater Jerusalem.

74. The PRESIDENT: I have just received letters dated 16
September I971 from the representatives of Lebanon,
Morocco and Saudi Arabia [S/l 0322, S/l 0323, S/10324],
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
current discussion, without the right to vote.

82. All we have from Israel are the arrogant statements of
its officials. The annexation of Jerusalem, they shout, is
irrevocable and not negotiable. So, we must concrude, is the
annexation of the large areas brought since 1967 within
these new “municipal boundaries of Greater Jerusalem”.
On 1 June of this year, 1971, the Israeli Foreign Minister,
Mr. Eban, declared to his Knesset:

75. In accordance with the usual practice, and with the
consent of the Council, I would suggest that, in view of the
limited seating at the Council ,table, they should be invited
to take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber, on the understanding that they will be
invited to sit at the Council table when it is their turn to
speak.

“No power on earth could change the ‘new’ status of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel in the municipal
boundaries which it enjoys today .”

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. M. M. Zentar (Morocco) and Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber.

83. A few days ago, on 31 August, the Israeli representative to the United Nations was quoted by Agence Frame
Presse as saying: “Israel will not participate in the show
prepared by the United States and aimed at the discussion
of the Jerusalem question in the Security Council.” He
went on to say: “The member States of the Council have
been warned of this.” We also assured the correspondent of
the Israeli newspaper Haaretz that “the discussion by the
Council of the Jerusalem question might only delay, to
some extent, the measures for the development of the
Israeli capital.” Seeing the representative of Israel at this
table participating in this “show”, we may hope-even if it
is only a thin ray of hope-that perhaps his other arrogant
declarations will prove to be as baselessas his threat not to
participate in this “show”.

76. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, on whom I
now call.
77. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Today is the anniversary of
one of the holiest Moslem days. It is the anniversary of El
Xsral, the journey of the prophet Mohammed, mystically
linking Mecca with Jerusalem and symbolizing in our minds
the universality and unity of God’s revelations to man. We
ahouid have been praying today, a holy day. But what
better prayer than to try to defeat evil, and we pray that,
with this Council’s help, right will be asserted and peace
based on justice will prevail.
78. Mr. President, my delegation is indeed grateful to YOU
and to the members of this Council for giving us the
opportunity to participate in this resumed debate on the
situation in the city of Jerusalem,

84. Well, the Council has been warned, Clearly and loudly
it has been told that all it may achieve from this present
“show” might be a “delay, to some extent” in the
execution of the premeditated operation by which the
Israelis seek to build their new Jewish Jerusalem on the
debris of the one that we have all revered and held sacred
for 1,971 years-an operation described by the Israeli
Minister of Housing himself as an operation with a Hebrew
goal, a Zionist exhibition. No one, certainly not a Moslem
speaking on the day of Israa, would deny that the Jews
have a place not only in Jerusalem but in the history of the
monotheistic religions. We revere the whole history of
Jerusalem, the 3,000 years of it. However, what is proposed
now is something that can be illustrated by an interview
given by the Minister of Defence of Israel, Mr. Dayan, to an
Israeli newspaper. In the Iiaolanz Hazeh of 10 August 1971
he is quoted as saying:

79. The Council last convened more than two years ago, in
July 1969, to consider the illegal measures imposed by the
Israeli forces occupying Jerusalem. You have appealed to
us, Mr. President, to confine our discussion today to the
question which is the subject of this resumed debate. I shall
try to do so. I shall not stray or try to confuse things by
speaking about anything but the issue before the Council.
80. The Council on that occasion-in July 1969-censured
in the strongest terms all such illegal measures taken by

Israel and called upon Israel to rescind them forthwith and
to refrain from any further similar actions. The COUIUA
demanded that the Israelis inform it of their intentions with
regard to the implementation of that unanimous resolution.
The Council further determined that, in the event of a
negative response or of no response from Israel, it would
reconvene-as it has today-in order to consider what
further action should be taken in the matter.

“I prefer to see the wall of the temple as it was in the
days of the second temple. All the rest of the sides could
be photographed and eliminated, because they are concealing and preventing us from seeing the perfect picture .”
85. The paper does not leave us in doubt. It asks ‘What is
the perfect picture? ” and then says “The perfect picture,

81. The Israelis’ response has been brazen in its clarity.
They have simply no intention of being in the least affected
9

Assembly resolution of 1947 partitioning Palestine
/181 (IZ)/ -the only resolution which the Zionists deem to
be of any use to them-was apparently considered by them
to be such a licence. Having obtained it, they do not wish
to be bothered any more by the United Nations. Since
then, the United Nations, its Charter, its Councils and its
resolutions have all been without value in the eyes of the
Israelis-nothing but empty, impotent words. Of themselves
they carry no compulsion or coercion and are therefore
without any effect on the Israelis; they command no
respect by the power-worshippers of present-day Israel.
Those are the simple facts of the Israelis’ present political
philosophy and actions.

to Dayan, is Jerusalem qf the Temple of David, without any
unnecessary additions. All the archaeological proofs of the
holiness of Jerusalem in the eyes of Christians and Moslems
would be a fog.”
86. Our stand is, therefore, that we have held Jerusalem
sacred for all its 3,000 years. The stand just set forth by the
Israeli representative is that Jerusalem ceased to be sacred
when Christ was born; the only part of its history and its
culture which is sacred is the Jewish one. The Israd which
we celebrate today, tells us that there is continuity, that the
sacrednessof Jerusalem has continued throughout its 3,000
years.
87. There is no question of what Israel’s response to the
Council’s resolution has been and promises-or rather
threatens-to be. We have the reports of the SecretaryGeneral, enumerated in our agenda, which all give US the
same reply: Israel has declared that it will simply ignore any
resolutions by this Council on this subject.

92. The Council is bound today to consider one question :
what “further action” must it take in the face of Israel
avowed contempt for and utter disregard of its resolutions,
in particular in this case its resolution 267 (1967)?
Basically, what is the Council to do about this obvious
incompatibility of Israel’s reactionary philosophy with the
ideology on which our Charter is based?

88. Hence, there is ample evidence before us of the degree
of Israel’s respect for this Council and for the Charter
which guides its work: Israel has none. Hence, there is
ample evidence before us of the extent to which Israel has
complied and in the future intends to comply with this
Council’s resolutions: utter and complete disregard.

93. The Israeli operation in Jerusalem only follows the
pattern set by all their actions in our area: to acquire a
semblance of a right from one document or another-in this
case the Security Council cedse-fire resolution; to acquire
support, implicit or tacit, from one great Power or another;
then to create “facts” in the face of any and all objections
and to confront the world defiantly with a fait accompli,
cynically confident that the world will not react effectively m
This was the Zionist strategy which we witnessed during the
forties, fifties and sixties in our region. Once again, today,
this is their strategy in the Arab lands which they invaded
in June 1967: on the struggling west bank of the Jordan
River, in the Syrian Al Golan, in Sinai and in the Gaza-and
although this larger basic question is not before the Council
today and I have promised not to depart from the subject
of Jerusalem, the Council surely realizes that the Israeli
operations in Jerusalem are only part of a larger, more
threatening whole. The ruthless ambitions of the Zionists
are not by any means limited to Jerusalem, But our
delegation reserves its right to speak on that subject on
another occasion, before too long and before it is too lats.

89. The United Nations is built on the basis of the
Charter, which stems from the determination of the peoples
of the world that. war shall not pay. The Israelis, on the
other hand, clearly build their policies on the validity of the
notion that might makes right; that the conqueror shall
reap the fruits of his conquest. The Zionists live by the
totalitarian ideas which dominated their world in Europe,
before they elbowed their way into Palestine. The fact is
that they cannot bring themselves to believe seriously in
our Charter or in the reality and the effectiveness of the
determination of the peoples of the world to live by justice
and in peace.
90. The principle -vital to the United Nations-of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory as a result of
war is, therefore, obviously incomprehensible to the present
Prime Minister of Israel. Very recently she told Marsh
Clark, a correspondent of Time magazine-and I quote from
the 30 August 197 1 issue of that journal:

94. It has been suggested that Israel, by its actions in
Jerusalem, is depriving itself of peace. I think our colleague
the representative of Jordan alluded to a quotation to that
effect. I suggest that perhaps the reverse is true: Israel does
not want peace; Israel, under its present leadership and with
its present expansionist, racist policies, cannot afford peace.
One of its leaders told a London audience, two years ago,
that the State is now only 16 per cent complete-meaning I f
guess, that it will not be complete until all those who
believe in God and worship according to the Judaic religion,
all the JEWSof the world, are brought into it and under its
rule. The Israeli authorities are intentionally undermining
all the roads to peace, afraid that peace would put an end
to further expansion and to further acquisition of territories by virtue of the so-called right of conquest, to which
Foreign Minister Eban alluded in his statement to the
General Assembly in 1967. If, therefore, illegal changes in
the status of Jerusalem put peace another step further
away, so much the better for the present rulers of Israel.

‘$There is something else which is absolutely immoral,
because it has never happened in human history-the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by force. How
many around the table of the Security Council can really
stand up and swearthey have never done it? ”
That bold confession mocking the principles of the Charter
was, as I have said, contained in the 30 August 1971 issue
of Time magazine.
91. In the imperialist Europe of the nineteenth century
the Zionists saw violence and wars paying dividends in
colonies and expanded frontiers, Her& the Zionist pioneer,
therefore established his “Imperial Bank” and sought some
imperial licence or other to form a Zionist colony with the
intention of expanding it as far as possible. General
10

95. The question again before the Council is what course
this Council is to take now. What is the Council collectively, and what are its members separately, to do? mat,
besides deploring or censuring or condemning?

100. Thirdly, the Security Council should seek to deny
Israel the means of its continued defiance of the Council,
We should deny Israel the means by which it defies this
Council and the Assembly.

96. Our delegation would like to present, in five points,
what in its conception effective action by the Security
Council should now be.

101. Only yesterday there was a story in 7%~A&V YOT~
Times from Tel Aviv about the Israeli war industry, to the
effect that it is at present bent on producing all sorts of
weapons, with some capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
It is obvious from the same story that this war preparation
can be carried out only with the huge active financial and
technical assistance of other States Members of this
Organization. When Mr. Eban boasts that “no Power on
earth” can get the Israelis to change their internationally
deplored and censured position on Jerusalem, he is obViOUSlY confident because of the United States Phantom
jets and other military weaponswhich his Government has
obtained and expects to obtain in the future.

97. First, the Council should certainly reiterate the complete inadmissibility and illegality of all past, current and
future actions aimed at altering the status of the City of
Jerusalem, whether by expropriation of land, forced displacement of population, destruction of buildings, or
indeed by any other so-called laws or other measures aimed
at changing the character of the City of Jerusalem, holy to
half of mankind-holy
throughout its entire history, to this
day.
98. Secondly, the Council should call upon all Member
States to declare the illegality of the Israeli annexation of
Jerusalem and to refrain from any act of support or
recognition of all illegal measures undertaken by the Israeli
forces of occupation.

102, The Council should, therefore, call upon all Member
States faithful to the Charter to stop all aid, military and
financial, to stop the supplying of all arms and other
military equipment, to stop all support which enables the
Zionist State to continue its arrogant defiance of the
United Nations and to pursue its expansionist racist
policies. The permanent members of this Council will
remember their strong, even stern, advice to my country in
the middle of May 1967 not to be the tirst to attack. Both
the Soviet Union and France, under Presidents de Gaulle
and Pompidou, have been logical and fair since the Israeli
assault in June 1967. They have abstained from giving Israel
any weaponswith which it could consolidate its occupation
and resist efforts to end that occupation and to reach a just,
acceptable settlement. The Israeli conquest was facilitated
because the Arabs were restrained by their respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and for the permanent
members of this Council and by the advice of those
permanent members. The example of France and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics should indeed be emulated by
all Members of the United Nations.

99. In an analogous situation, the International Court of
Justice, on 2 1 June of this year, gave its Opinion on the
question of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa ,* In paragraph 118 of that Opinion the Court stated
that “South Africa . , . is under obligation to withdraw its
administration from the Territory of Namibia”. It further
stated:
“By maintaining
the present illegal situation, and
occupying the Territory without title, South Africa incurs
international responsibilities arising from a continuing
violation of an international obligation. It also remains
accountable for any violations of its international obligations, or of the rights of the people of Namibia”.
In paragraphs 119 and 120 the Court stated that:

103. Four-My, the Council has obviously now exhausted
the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. More than four
years have passed with Israel adamantly and flagrantly
disregarding all General Assembly and Security ’ Council
resolutions and efforts, whether about Jerusalem or about
the situation as a whole. The last stern warning of this
Council to Israel, contained in its resolution 267 (1969) of
July 1969 was met only with declarations and actions of
defiance and contempt.

“The Member

States of the United Nations are . +.
to recognize the illegality and invalidity
of South Africa’s continued presence in Namibia. They
are also under obligation to refrain from lending any
support or any form of assistance to South Africa with
reference to its occupation of Namibia . . .
under obligation

L‘. . . it is for the Security Council”-the Court said-“to
determine any further measures consequent upon the
decisions already taken by it on the question of
Namibia”.

104. I listened carefully for any phrase or referencein the
statement of the representative of Israel indicating that
Israel may consider implementing that resolution or giving
the Secretary-General the information that he has SO far
failed to get from them. Of course, there was no such
reference.

That Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa is certainly
applicable to the situation arising from the illegal occupation of Jerusalem and, indeed, of ail other parts of the Arab
territories invaded and occupied by Israel.

105. It is then time for this Council to consider Chapter VII of the Charter in dealing with this situation, and to
imposeon Israel the sanctions enumerated in that Chapter.

2 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Aflea in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisoty Opinion, 1.c.J

106. Fiftldy , and lastly, in View of this utter contempt of
the United Nations-and I need only refer to the last part of

Reports1971,p. 16.

11

“Corpses are piled up unburied in the Old City, historic

the speech just made-anct in view of the fact that Israel has
opted for a might-is-right morality in lieu of that of the
Charter, it must be concluded that Israel does not care to
remain a Member in good standing of this Organization,
faithful to its signature to the Charter and ready to carry
out its obligations.

synagogueslie in ruins, centres of education and culture

have been laid waste.“3
“History never forgets anything which happens to
Jerusalem, and it will have an unenviable place in its
gallery for this modern destroyer of Jerusalem’s buildings
and shrines, and for all who are associated with him . , , in
that sacrilegious adventure .“s

107. The representative of Israel has just said that Israel is
used to being a minority. It does not want to be part of the
majority. It does not like our procedures. It does not like
our composition. The Security Council should therefore act
to accept this virtual Israeli resignation and recommend to
the General Assembly the appropriate measures provided
by the Charter.

114. What was Egypt’s reaction to that plea to stop the
savage destruction and carnage in Jerusalem? It was
Mahmoud Fawzi, the present Prime Minister of Egypt, then
representative of Egypt to the Security Council, who
replied, “The Egyptian Government cannot abide by a
recommendation of the Security Council to cease fire”,
History never forgets. Neither will, Israel forget what Egypt
wrought on Jerusalem.

108. This Council and the world community must now
take such positive actions in dealing with Israel. The world
cannot stand by and wash its hands of this matter. Such a
stand would surely amount to aiding and abetting Israel in
its new, twentieth century, crucifixion of Jerusalem.

115. Twenty-three years later the partners in the destruction of Jerusalem in 1948 are partners again in battling the
peace, the progress and the happiness of Jerusalem. The
sanctimonious words we heard today From the Egyptian
representative can impress only the very ignorant or the
very gullible. The representative of the United Arab
Republic charged Israel with disrespect for the Charter. He
attempted to claim that his Government is peace-loving.
Indeed, Egypt’s respect for the Charter and Egypt’s
attachment to peace is as evident as.Egypt’s concern for the
well-being of fellow Arabs, or for that matter of its own
citizens, and as real as its interest in the welfare of
Jerusalem.

109. The people of the whole world, their hopes embodied in the Charter, await the result of this Council’s
deliberations. I know the people of Egypt and of the whole
Arab and Moslem world are eager to learn whether the
Charter is still alive, or whether the law of the jungle will
again blacken the face of the earth. They are entitled to
know whether they are to live by the Charter or by the
sword.
110. Are the people everywhere, and especially in our part
of the world, to look forward, as they hope, to an era of
justice, order and peace, or are they to resign themselves to
a world where might, developed or borrowed, can enforce
its will on a futilely protesting world? Those are the
questions. The answersare now for this Council.

116. In addition to the wars in Yemen and in the Sudan
and the participation in civil wars in various countries of
Africa, it is Israel that has, throughout the years been the
primary target of Cairo’s lust for bloodshed. When Israel
was invaded in 1948, it was Egypt’s Azam Pasha who on
behalf of the Arab League informed the United Nations,
“This will be a massacre reminiscent of the Mongolian
massacres”. It was Egypt that, soon after the signing of the
Armistice Agreement terminating belligerency, barred, in
the name of belligerency, freedom of navigation. It was
Egypt that in flagrant violation of the Charter and the
Armistice Agreement launched a war of terror and murder
against Israel resulting in the Sinai campaign of 19.56. It was
Cairo that throughout the ensuing years openly proclaimed
its intention to destroy the State of Israel, a Member State
of the United Nations, and actively prepared itself to
execute that design, It was Cairo that in May 1967
announced that the time was ripe for the final assault on
Israel, unceremoniously chased the United Nations Emergency Force out of Sinai and Gaza, moved huge armies for
attack on Israel and, in an overt act of war, blocked
international waterways.

111. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
of Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
112. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Since the representative of
Egypt has referred to a number of matters extraneous to
the item under consideration, I regret I have no alternative
but to allude to them also.
113. I listened very carefully to his statement, and in
particular to Ms expressions of concern for Jerusalem and
for the welfare of its Arab inhabitants. Indeed, Egypt’s
concern for the welfare of feliow Arabs and fellowmen in
general has earned it international renown in Yemen, in the
Sudan, in Gaza. Egypt’s feelings towards Jerusalem have
been expressed in a manner that leaves no room at all for
any doubt. In 1948 the Egyptian armies advanced on
Jerusalem, together with the Arab Legion of Jordan, laid
siege to it and joined in the indiscriminate shelling of the
city, disregarding its Holy Places and sites and its Arab and
Jewish civilian inhabitants. That was an expression of
Egyptian love for Jerusalem. Hundreds were killed. Houses
of worship and institutions of learning and private homes
were destroyed. Mr. Abba Eban, then Israel’s representative
to the United Nations, implored the Security Council to
save Jerusalem. At the 305th meeting of the Council, on 26
May 1948, he said

117. It was Egypt which after the six-day war instigated
the Khartoum Declaration rejecting peace, recognition and
agreement with Israel. The United Arab Republic wasthe
one to reject in March 1968 Ambassador Jarring’s proposal
to meet in a conference with Israel. It was the United Arab
3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Third Yeor,305th

meeting, pp. 51 and50.
12

9;

Republic which in March 1969 repudiated the Security
Council cease-fire and opened a war of attrition against
Israel that lasted till last August. It was Egypt which
violated the cease-fire and standstill agreement of August
1970 by moving missiles into the standstill zone. And it was
Egypt which prevented progress in peace-making efforts by
insisting that Israel withdraw to the vulnerability and chaos
of the lines established in the Armistice Agreement
although. . . .
118. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked to speak on a point of order.

that would have stipulated withdrawal to the old lines. As
far as Israel is concerned the doors to understanding and
agreement remain open. It is for Egypt to go through them
in good faith, in a geuine desire for peace, in a real
willingness to seek accommodation and understanding.
Agreement remains possible and we hope that it will be
achieved. However, agreement can be attained only through
quiet diplomatic efforts, if Egypt decides that instead of
pursuing these efforts with patience and constancy, it
would turn to scoring points in public acrimony and
one-sided resolutions unacceptable to Israel, Egypt may
very well find that it has by its own actions blocked the
doors to settlement.

I 19. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): This morning,
Mr. President, after the Council had adopted the agenda for
our work, you made an appeal. Unfortunately, I do not
have the exact text of the appeal. But I remember well that
it was to the effect that we should confine our deliberations
and discussions to the item on the agenda we had adopted,
namely, Jerusalem. It seems to me that in the unending
diatribes of the Israeli representative he has wandered far
afield from the problem which we are discussing, to which
we have been asked to confine our deliberations. I
respectfully request the President, if he finds it convenient
to do SO, to remind the Israeli representative to confine
himself to the subject under discussion.

125. Once before, Egypt made such a mistake. There were
many possibilities and opportunities during the period
between 1949 and 1967 to terminate the war and to
conclude a peace agreement with Israel. Egypt at that time
refused and instead concentrated all its efforts on the
pursuance of belligerency and on the tug-of-war in United
Nations organs. The result was a series of one-sided
resolutions reflecting the known numerical preponderance
of Arab States, but bringing no progress whatever in the
direction of a solution of the conflict. The consequences of
that policy are a matter of history.

120. The PRESIDENT: As President I wish to appeal once
again to members of the Council to limit their remarks to
the matters raised in the letter of the Permanent Representative of Jordan and in the reports of the Secretary-General
which were mentioned by the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

126. Today Egypt must ask itself in all candour, does it
prefer the continuation of the conflict, adorned perhaps by
United Nations resolutions which draw Israel and Egypt
farther apart, or will it sincerely seek to end the conflict
and to reach agreement with Israel? If it is the latter course
that it chooses, then it is not at this table that the
representatives of Israel and Egypt should be exchanging
their views.

121. I call on the representative of Israel.
127. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Mali. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

122. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I remember
very clearly your statement earlier this morning, with which
I associate myself fully. As I explained at the opening of
this statement in right of reply, I have no alternative but to
allude to those matters included in the statement by the
Egyptian representative to which I am replying.

128. Mr. TRAORE (Mali) (i%erpreCation from Bench): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council for having authorized me to express very
briefly the point of view of my Government on the matter
on the agenda of the Council.

123, May I also add an observation that representatives
around this Council table, even if they do represent
countries which have very little knowledge of what freedom
of speech is, should allow representatives of sovereign
Governments, Member States, to proceed and complete
their statements without interruption in accordance with
some of the more fundamental principles of the Charter,
Iike that of the equality of Member States.

129. The cease-fire which occurred in the Middle East
after very difficult negotiations, i?s extension by the
parties-a difficult thing for them to do-had Ied us to hope
that no initiative would be taken to create de facto
situations which might undermine the necessary trust
without which any peaceful negotiation would be uncertain
if not impossible.

124. I was about to say-in reaction to the accusation
voiced here by the representative of the United Arab
Republic that Israel holds only disrespect for the Charter
while Egypt is respectful of the Charter and attached to
peace-that it was Egypt which prevented progress in the
peace-making efforts by insisting that Israel should withdraw to the vulnerability and chaos of the lines established
in the Armistice Agreement, although the latter provided
specifically that those lines are not to be construed as final
borders and although Security Council resolution
242 (1967) does not call for withdraw1 to such lines.
Indeed, the Security Council rejected in 1967 all proposals
13

130. The Government of the Republic of Mali fervently
hoped for the speedy return of a just peace in that part of
the world, with which our country has deep links of
technical and cultural co-operation. This well-known position was affirmed throughout discussions on this problem
in the Council and in the General Assembly or its main
Committees. The Head of State clearly defined this position
on 1 May 1970 after his trip to the United Arab Republic.
This position is predicated essentially upon the search for
peace. We know that negotiations for peace are lengthy and
delicate, but we also know that it is because they are

i

136. The Middle East is sufficiently troubled for seeds of
religious troubles to be sown there. The status of Jerusalem,
consecrated by international agreements, cannot be
changed unilaterally. Otherwise, moral and spiritual values
would be made dependent upon a temporary imbalance of
forces resulting from armed confrontation. No account
would be taken either of Charter provisions recommending
negotiation for the settlement of international disputes.

delicate that they are undermined ‘from the outset by any
unilateral action. As peace itself is indivisible, any isolated
act weakening it contains in itself the seeds of its own
destruction,
131. It was therefore not necessary to add to the serious
differences born from the conflict of 1967, at a’time when
delicate negotiations are being carried out, other troubles
which are of paramount interest to the ‘conscience of
millions of faithful for whom Jerusalem symbolizes the
eternity of their faith, Catholic, Jewish or Moslem. This
faith is, of course, built upon tolerance, and the love of
one’s brother and is contrary to any act of domination
based essentially on the fate of war. A victorious people is
obviously the one which knows how to conquer hearts, the
one which avoids to trouble consciences and add them to
the vicissitudes born of war.‘Scrupulous respect for faith is
a sacred duty for any State, and the greatness of a nation
resides in the care with which it keeps in good repair the
Holy Places of these faiths.

137. ‘The explanations given by Israel to justify the
measures and steps taken to change the universally recognized sacred nature of Jerusalem are that they are of an
administrative nature and apply to populations or sites
whose legal status is allegedly strictly within its sovereignty.
138. Together with the Secretary-General, we ask ourselves what the status of sites specifically under our
Organization should be, and the silence of Israel is ever
more heavy and disconcerting.
139. The Council purposely wanted to limit the present
debate to the question of the status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem. In the view of the Mali Government, this must
then be the logical sequence of previous debates and at the
end of these meetings the Council must logically adopt
measures which could in no case be weaker by nature and
the obligations flowing therefrom than those that I mentioned a few minutes ago.

132. The latest events in Jerusalem are a matter of
concern to us for many reasons. The members of the
Council will probably recall the deep emotion felt by the
Moslems of the whole world at learning of the tragic fire at
the Al Aqsa Mosque. This was not an isolated incident.
Prior to that, the General Assembly had expressed its
concern at the measures and steps taken by Israel and likely
to alter the Holy Places in Jerusalem. We are in duty bound
to recognize that no account has been taken of that
emotion,

140. Jerusalem is only one of the aspectsof the conflict in
the Middle East. Any measure, any provision contrary to
relevant provisions of the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly would, in our view,
create a climate of mistrust that would later make
impossible any negotiation in conformity with the spirit
and the provisions of the Charter,

133. The Security Council, seized of this matter anew, had
to recognize, in resolution 252 (1968), that Israel had taken
other new measures contravening relevant resolutions, and
that the Council:
“Considers that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, including appropriation
of land and properties thereon, which tend to change the
legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot change
that status.”

141. The Government of Mali is convinced that the
Council is well aware of this elementary fact. The provlsions it has already adopted, which have remained a dead
letter, proved that the road followed until now does not
seem to be the best to settle the crisis in the Middle East.
My Government is opposed to any acquisition of territory
by war. It considers that force cannot settle the future
status of Jerusalem. That is the price of peace, and this
price is so high that once again we ask the Council, at the
end of this debate, to take measures to ensure that
Jerusalem will remain a haven of peace and love in the
Middle East.

134. This warning by the Council certainly remained a
dead letter since on 3 July and 15 September 1969, the
Council had to meet again and adopted resolutions
267 (1969) and 271 (1969), the provisions of which are
more or less the same as those of resolution 252 (1968),
with one important difference, that paragraph 6 of resolution 271 (1969) states: “that in the event of a negative
response or no response, the Security Council shall convene
without delay to consider what further action should be
taken in this matter .”

142. Once again, my Government is a sincere advocate of
peace, but we also co-sponsored the final statement of the
Islamic Summit Conference,4 in which our Heads of State
and Government reaffirmed their devotion to peace, but in
honour and justice.

135. If those resolutions had been heeded, or if measures
had been taken not to disturb the conscience of millions of
faithful, the representatives of 26 States would not have
met at an Islamic conference, from 22 to 25 September
1969, in Rabat to warn the world against infringements
upon the “spiritual, moral, social and economic values of
Islam” in Jerusalem. This warning was taken lightly, since
in the report of the Secretary-General to the next session of
the General Assembly mention is made of excavations
around the Moslem Holy Places threatening their very
existence.

143. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Saudi Arabia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
4 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1969, document S/9460.

I4

144. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President and members of the Council, for allowing me to
participate in the debate on the item before the Council
&is evening. I shall concentrate strictly on the question of
Jerusalem. I have not lost hope, after 25 years in this
Organization, that the Council this year will see its way to
doing something constructive rather than abdicating its
powers, as it did in 1967 when it referred the whole
question to the General Assembly, knowing very well that
questions of security and war are the prerogative of the
Security Council, whereas the General Assembly has only
recommendatory powers.

point that usually rights of reply are relegated to the end of
the meeting. Anything is possible when Israel asks for a
favour. I had been waiting in the wings, waiting outside the
Council chamber to speak, and then the Secretariat
informed me, “Oh, incidentally Israel registered its name in
the morning”. No one can tell me that they registered their
name in the morning to speak twice. I saw the slip
requesting the right of reply, which is quite permissible.
However, they preceded me and my brother from Mali.
What kind of procedure is this in the Council? Mr. President, you are new among us. Do not think I am throwing
any criticism at the President. But I have a right to draw
your kind attention to what goes on in this Organization
and to how sometimes favours are bestowed when order
and procedure should be observed.

145. I have to say this, because we have been going round
in circles on this question, whether it has been the larger
question of Palestine or the specific item before us, which is
Jerusalem. We have been going round in circles for too
long-since 1947. If the Council is going to be a platform
for propaganda, if some members-in particular the five
members having the right of veto-continue, as they have
done since 1967, to resort to the consensus at the expense
of small Powers, I say let this Council negate itself and refer
everything to the larger body of 127 nations, which would
make recommendations. The Council is supposed to take
action, but unfortunately on this question of Jerusalem in
particular no action has been taken since the adoption of
resolution 267 (1969) which is very clear. Two years have
passed since the Council requested Israel to report on the
question of Jerusalem.

150. The subject before us is Jerusalem. I remember how,
time and again in the past, in the late 194Os, in the 1950s
and in the early 196Os, how those who preceded
Mr. Tekoah used to say, “God gave us Jerusalem”. And I
would repeatedly throw the question at them, “Since when
has God been in the real estate business to apportion land?
Show me the title deed and the seal.” Then I would remind
them of what Ring David said in one of the psalms, “The
earth is the Lord’s and the fullness thereof”. He did not
say, “The earth, a corner of it”-with that amendment-“is
for the Jews,or the Gentiles . . .” or what have you.
1.51. Since then the Israelis have desisted from saying:
“God gave us Jerusalem”. But by implication they are still
saying the same thing, They say Jerusalem was divided and
it was wrested from them, especially after the last major
Diaspora during the days of the Romans, and the indigenous population-which time and again I have mentionedhad been Jews who embraced Christianity or Islam. They
say Jerusalem was wrested from them for 2,000 years and
that in 1948 the prophecy of God came true. But the title
deed giving them Jerusalem is cached somewhere; we have
not seenit.

146. What have the members, and especially the five
permanent members, of the Council done? They have done
nothing. That is why our colleague from Jordan was
compelled, in view of the developments that have been
taking place without let-up, to come to this Council with
the hope that it will act. But if it does not act, I would ask
it not to meet any more. What should it meet for, to be the
laughing stock of the world community-not
of one
community or the other, but of the world community at
large?

152. But I would remind my colleague from Israel that
Jericho-which is a stone’s throw from Jerusalem in the
Dead Sea valley-was the first Canaanite city to be attacked
by the Israelites: not the present Israelites but the Israelites
who were our brothers and cousins; not those Khazars who
are descended mostly from tribes that settled, in the first
century A.D., in the southern part of what today is Russia
and who, in the seventh and eighth centuries, were
converted to Judaism because there was a sort of gentleman’s agreement between the Christians of Byzantium and
the Moslems who had gone north. But now let us keep our
hands off these tribes. Incidentally, those tribes in the first
century migrated from the northern tier of Asia. They are
not of Indo-European origin; they are of Turko-Finnish
origin-in language, in culture. Even archaeologically, we
know where they came from.

147.
As a veteran of this Organization, I think I have
had enough experience so that I can talk in these terms,
without anger but with emphasis.
148. It is a paradox that the United Nations, which
created Israel, and which did so erroneously, laying aside
the principle of self-determination enshrined in the Charter,
should be criticized by none other than that State which
was artificially created at Lake Success,beginning with the
partition of Palestine. And I witnessed the pressures. They
are on the record. I do not have to enumerate them.
Everybody can look up the record and see how that State,
through pressures and manipulations, was created. And now
in spite of the inaction of the Council, Israel, through its
representative, throws invective. It is like the one who
curseshis mother for having given birth to him.

153. There is nothing wrong in being of Turko-Finnish or
Tndo-European origin. Incidentally, the whole of Europe at
that time, ethnologically speaking, became a projection of
tribes that migrated from Asia.

149. I think the Council has been very lenient, sometimes
in small matters but in matters which have great significance in showing how much influence this tiny State of
Israel has in the international community. Our colleague
Mr, Tekoah inscribed his name to speak in right of reply. I
am not blaming you, Mr. President, but nobody raised the

154. The Moslems said to the Byzantines, and the Byzantines said to the Moslems: “Let us not have those pagan
15

as a motivation. They use the religion of Judaism. Their
prophets are our prophets. But did our Jews, our brothers,
create this political movement called Zionism? No. If poor
Theodore Herzl had known what would happen he would
not have let his dream be translated into a nightmare. He
thought that because the Jews were persecuted in Europe
they should have an enclave somewhere. They thought
about Uganda. Then they said, “Jerusalem is ours.” What
about when it wasnot theirs, when it ~89 Uru Salim, before
Jericho was attacked? In relatively modern times, when I
was 17, I demonstrated in the streets of Beirut and
Damascus, when Jerusalem was made the seat of the
Government of Palestine under the mandate given to
Britain in July 1922, almost 50 years ago. This is why we
demonstrated in the streets of Beirut and Damascus, those
of us who were in the region. The British deceived the
Arabs. Why did they do it? Because of the beauty of the
eyes of the Jews? Some Jewish eyes are very beautiful, but
so are Arab eyes. Why did they do it? They wanted a place
astride the route to the empire somewhere and they
thought they would make Palestine and Jerusalem a part of
the Commonwealth of Nations. They sounded out the
Rothschilds. The Rothschilds were an international family,
in Frankfurt, Paris and London. I would not say they were
mundane, but they were secular. But of course there is
what we call in Arabic asabiya. They were Jews, of course,
and they played on their sentiments. I knew some of those
Rothschilds in the thirties and spoke to them. They did not
seem to be so religious, but they would go to the
synagogue. They were like many people who go to the
church or to the mosque or to the temple. They were
notables of their religion. So do not think that we canbe
fooled here by being told that Jerusalem was divided. These
Khazars of the Balkans, descended from those tribes
converted to Judaism, formulated a sort of new ideology
which is naked colonialism. That is what it is-naked
colonialism, using, I must say again, religion as a motivation
for political and economic ends.

tribes convert to Christianity or Islam”, because then the
balance of power would be upset. So there were some Jews
who had migrated to what is called the Balkans-Sephardic
Jews, our own Jews-and they could go and convert them
as long as they worshipped the same God. Birt they did not
want them to become either Christian or Moslem. And the
whole problem is not from our Sephardic Jews. In good
faith, they thought they had gained them to a monotheistic
religion-to the worship of God.
155. And where did Zionism begin? Was political Zionism
begun in Palestine by the Sephardic Jews-by our Jews, by
the Arab Jews? No. It was begun by the descendants of
those converted Jews who are no more Semite, except in
religion, than I am a Buddhist or Ambassador Malik is, say,
a Red Indian. That is a political movement, but the subject
now is Jerusalem, and you have appealed to us, Mr. President, to concentrate on Jerusalem. Very well.
1.56. What is the origin of the word “Jerusalem”?
Remember that I mentioned that Jericho was the first city
in the Dead Sea valley-a Canaanite City; the Canaanites
were Semites too--to be attacked by the ancient Israelis.
That is in accordance with the account given in Joshua, one
of the Books of the Bible-I am not citing some archaeologist-and the Bible is holy to the Jews. Christians also
consider the Bible holy; we all consider the Bible holy.
1.57. There is no mention yet of Jerusalem. And Jericho,
as I said, is very near to Jerusalem. What is the origin of
Jerusalem? Certain letters engraved on tablets in Tel Al
Mama in Egypt show that the name “Jerusalem” existed
under the form of Uru Salim-meaning city of Salim; Salim
is an Arabic word. It is a proper noun; many people are
called Salim-in Jordan, in Arabia and in North Africa. It is
an Arabic name. Our ancient brothers had the word
‘?3halom”, “Salim” has many connotations in the Arabic
language: S&m Al Niyah, good-hearted Salam. Anyone
who is good-hearted likes peace. And then I would take you
back in history to Ur of the Chaldees, where the patriach of
all those tribes, Abraham, came from. But where was Ur of
the Chaldees situated? It was situated in what today is
north-western Iraq. And who were the sons of Abraham?
One of them was Jacob, who migrated southward. Go and
read the thirty-second chapter of Genesis and you will
know how they migrated from what is today Iraq and came
down to the land of Canaan, and they have not yet reached
Uru Salim. Ur of the Chaldees wasthe birthplace of Jacob.
Jacob had twelve sons and Judah was the fourth son. The
word “Judea” is derived from the name of the fourth son
of Jacob. And Yehudi-meaning Jew-came, and sometimes
they called themselves Hebrew. Abara, Ebraniyeen-Abara
means to cross. They crossed from one place.

160. The ancestors of the Jews came from Ur of the
Chaldees, and that wasthe land of Canaan. The others were
Semites, but they were tribes warring one against the other.
Let us assume a few things, Let us assume that Jerusalem is
the spiritual home of the Jews. Let us do more than that.
Let us concede that Jerusalem is the symbol of the Jewish
religion. Is Bethlehem not the birth-place of Jesus? Is
Jerusalem not the city where Jesus started his mission? Is
Jerusalem not the cradle of Christianity? In Islam, Jerusalem is the first Qublah. There was no Mecca or Medina.
The Moslems looked on Jerusalem. They were Semites
-they were Khazars-and they worshipped. Therefore, if
we concede that Jerusalem means a great deal to the Jews,
equally it means a great deal to the Christians and to the
Moslems. There are 16 or 17 million Jews. They have not
increased very much. Perhaps there are 18 million. There
are a billion Christians who consider Jerusalem their
spiritual city. There are 600 million Moslems who consider
Jerusalem very holy to them. By what logic shodd 16
million make a world problem? It is not the 16 million but
a few leaders who are using this question in order to
promote political and economic ends. Today we havehad
the best proof. Mr. Tekoah was speaking in terms of
concrete and steel and buildings. I do not know whetherhe
mentioned air-conditioning. Let me assure him that the

15X. And you know how the land of Canaan was taken by
the sword. Joshua wasa great general in those days.
159. The city of Jerusalem existed before the sons of
Jacob came-and the sons of Jacob are our brothers, or
those descended from them are our brothers. But these are
the Khazars. This is a European movement, using Judaism
as a motivation for political and economic ends. Most of
the leaders are secular. In fairness I must say that, like all
leaders in the world, they are secular, but they use religion
16

greatest prophets did not have to have edifices. They
probably lived in tents, like many of us still do. People who
love mundane things usually do not accomplish anything
spiritually, because their instincts have to be satiated, with
food and sex and luxury. The mind does not produce
anything. Buddha, who wasthe son of a king-a prince-did
not produce anything worth-while while he was a prince
living in the palace of his father, who provided him with all
that could be desired by a human being. But his mission not
only gained credence but still has millions upon millions of
adherents because he renounced material things and became
a great teacher. He renounced the pleasures, the luxuries,
the comforts, because he felt with the bulk of humanity. So
did Jesus. So did the prophets who preceded Jesus. They
were simpIe men in their instincts and desires. And the
representative of Israel speaks to us today of what they
have done in Jerusalem. They are building edifices. It is not
New York City. The Jews built New York City. That is
enough. All the skyscrapers are being built with the money
of the Jews. Let them build more if they want, but then
there will be so much congestion we shall have to move the
United Nations from here. Mr. Tekoah mentioned that the
Arabs are making money. He forgets what Jesus said, that
you cannot worship two gods. God or mammon: you must
worship one and leave the other. The white man’s burden
of the erstwhile colonial Powers should apply. A man with
money and organization who can build should go to a place
where the people do not have luxury or modem buildings
and say, “Look, you are backward, and I am going to build
on your land .”
161. That was the colonial thesis, epitomized by the
phrase “the white man’s burden”. White man’s burden, my
foot! They exploited the people, but that was the age of
exploitation. And, in fairnessto the colonial Powers, within
a State people exploit one another. But that argument does
not hold water. “Man does not live by bread alone”; how
true.

Mr.
_ . Nelson Rockefeller, the Governor, or Mr. David Rockefeller, the banker, but their grandfather-when he could not
use up the money had had made from oil, in Pennsylvania,
not in Texas, was once told by a gentleman named
Mr. Reid: “You know, Mr. Rockefeller, you are the most
hated man in America.” Rockefeller said, “Why, what have
I done? ” He answered, “I don’t know, but when people
become rich they are hated or envied. Do you want to be
liked? ” He was the first public relations man in the annals
of the United States. Mr. Rockefeller said to Mr. Reid,
‘“Young man, you come to seeme tomorrow in my office”.
Mr. Reid sold him the idea of the nucleus of the Foundation,
165. Why am I talking about all this-the Rockefeller
Foundation, medical schools and so on? Because the
Rockefellers then became involved in the restoration of
Williamsburg. I think they spent some $80 million in hard
currency, not inflated currency, on that; they restored
Williamsburg. They did not say the houses were old and
they should be torn down. I have been there; it is a very
charming town. What is Williamsburg compared with
Jerusalem? All the Americans are infants in civilization;
they were British only 200 years ago. Should Jerusalem,
which is the cradle of Christianity and Islam and the
symbol of Judaism-we concede that-be subjected to
modernization, destroying houses, obliterating cobbled
streets, so that it may have the cachet of modernism? Must
apartment houses be built to settle hundreds of thousands
in the future so that the dream of the Zionists may be
realized: to have Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital, as
the place of the ingathering for all the Jews? What is this
that you are modernizing the City? Who wants to
modernize the City? On the contrary, it should be restored
as much as humanly possible, just as Williamsburg was
restored.
166. Here, in this young country, they seek out certain
places and conserve the buildings. They do the same in
England; in France: the Chateaux de la Loire, the Crlllon
-that is where 1 stay; they did not take awaythe fa$ade
and build ten storeys there; the Place de la Concorde, one
of the most beautiful squaresin the world: they did not
destroy the Minis&e de la Marine. The buildings are
beautiful. They do things inside-a little here and little
there-but the cachet of modernism does not interest them.
You tell us you have been doing this to Jerusalem in order
to modernize it. And perhaps you will want to build some
industries around and pollute the air more than it is already
politically polluted. Whom do you think you are fooling
here with your argument? We do not buy that bill of goods
of modernism, That is a fallacious argument. Today nations
try to restore and conservehistorical sites as part of their
heritage, but you are doing the exact opposite. You have
power.

162. Money, money, money! What is money? Is it a
master or a servant?’ One day you will see all money
floating as I saw it floating in Europe. Where is the mighty
dollar? It recently became a midget. What about the Israeli
pound? It started like the English pound. I sawthe English
pound being whittled down by inflation-from
$3, to
$2.80, to $2.40;now it is $2.42.
163, The mighty will fall if they are unjust. What is
money? The Arabs are getting more money, money,
money! What is money? Money should be a means to
facilitate exchange instead of bartering, but it should not be
worshipped. Two thousand years ago Christ himself warned
us not to worship money. He was preaching also to us, the
Semites of the area, not to the Jews only. You cannot
worship two masters-God and mammon. You must worship eiber the one or the other.
164. The representative of Jsrael’brought up the argument
that they are building, clearing slums and modernizing the
City. At one time John Rockefeller the eldest-and 1 am
talking about millionaires at just the right moment because
my good friend Ambassador Phillips has just sat down
beside me. I know that he is busy with the Chinese
problem.
John D. Rockefeller, the grandfather-not
17

167. Let. us come to grips and grapple with the issue. You
took Palestine and Jerusalem by force-a fait accompli-and
rationalized that it wasgiven to you by God. I say, God
does not give land to any people. If I prayed to Him from
now until doomsday He would not give me an inch. I have
to work and buy land or encroachupon my neighbour and
take his land, That waswhat you did-except that YOU did
not really encroach upon your neighbours, because YOU

173, I cannot remain silent here; I witnessed these things,
This whole State was created artificially by Khazars, who
happened to be Jews,from eastern and central Europe.

came from distant parts, from the Balkans, from Central
Europe, from Eastern Europe. And you are always maligning the Soviet Union because it happens to have some
3 million Jews. You say: “Why don’t you let them come? ”
“Let my people go! ” Your people? There is not a Semitic
Jew there; the Jewsin the Soviet Union are Khazars. I want
the Soviet Union to know that they are not our Jews; they
are your Jews. I know what the game of power politics is
sometimes.

174. Why should you have such power? Well, as I said, at
one time the British thought it was a good thing to have a
foot-hold in the Middle East, “lest those Arabs get drunk
with nationalism”, so that there would always be a pretext
to save the route of the British Empire. And our friends the
Americans thought, “Oh well, now we have oil interests;
maybe one day they will nationalize; we should alwayshave
a foot-hold to have a pretext”.

168. If the Soviet Union should get irked with us one of
these days, thinking we are flirting with another great
Power, oh boy, they will send all the Jews in the Sovmt
Union to us-they will, if they see that some of us turn our
backs on them,

175 . Those are the power politics of nations. In fairnessto
the big nations, smaller nations do it too. And those poor
Palestinians are robbed of their country and of Jerusalem;
and Mr. Tekoah, who comes from Shanghai and who
happens to be a Jew, recites chapter and verse from the
BibIe out of the context of the whole situation. Ask me. I
come from the area. They say the Baroodies go back 1500
years. We know a little, I think. You Khazars from the
Balkans want to tell us what the truth of the situation Is on
spiritual grounds because there are 16 or 17 million Jews.
What about the 1 billion Christians? What about the 700
million Moslems? If it is on the basis of religion, the
Christians should hold Jerusalem: there are a billion of
them. The Pope of the Middle Ages, Urban II, tried. That
propagandist was Peter the Hermit. The declaration of
Urban II is quite clear. I am paraphrasing from memory. He
said: “Why are you cutting one another’s throats? ” As you
know, there was some national awakening in Europe at that
time-l 187 is the date. He said: “Why are you cutting one
another’s throats? Go to the Holy Land and wrest the Holy
Sepulchre”-mea,ning the tomb of Christ-“from the hands
of the infidel”-meaning the Moslems, who worshipped the
same God. But it was politics, you see; the Pope wasa
political figure. Thank God, now he is a spiritual figure. But
now the Zionists want to reverse everything; they want to
make a nationality out of a religion.

169. And then you say that Christian and Moslem pilgrims
are going to Jerusalem. What pilgrims? For your information-and I checked this, because I do not talk lightly; I
may make you laugh in order to relieve the tension, but this
is serious-no one from the Arab world is sgoing to
Jerusalem, only Christians or Moslems from outside the
Arab countries; we know. Only the poor Palestinians who
are in the occupied area, or who were in occupied
Palestine-the whole of Palestine has been occupied by
you-go to Jerusalem. Do you want to brag about it-that
you allow them to go to the churches and the mosques?
170. Do not misrepresent things, my colleague
Mr. Tekoah; you did something worse: the cemetery of
Mamillah, which is considered sacred ground by the
Moslems-you erased it. Some of the Moslems who had
beaten the Crusaders were buried there. Do you want to
build something over it? You will be haunted by their
spirits. Yours is a policy of fait accompli, and you are
confronting the United Nations,-and more particularly the
Security Council-with that fait accompli.
171, And you five permament members of the Security
Council-so-called great or sometimes super-Powers-what
have you done about it? In 1947 did you observe the
principle of self-determination? I was sitting at Lake
Success,and I told you what pressures were being brought
to bear to partition Palestine. A prelate-I do not want to
say of what sect he was-was sent to Latin America. Of
course, now you know his sect. He was given money so as
to bring votes for the partition of Palestine. He regretted it
before he died. He said: “I did not know; I did that in good
faith”.

176. You cannot do it. It did not work. The Europeans
before the advent of Protestantism were of the same
religion. They cut one another’s throats. We Moslems,
too-we who are of the same religion-cut one another’s
throats sometimes. You cannot take them as a people. You
want to force this idea that the Jews are one people. They
are not one people: they are different peoples. There are
those who speak English, those who speak the American
language, those who speak French, those who speak
Yiddish. And our Jews speak Arabic.

172. An Asian representative spoke against partition for
two hours at Lake Success-Evatt was presiding-and the
President of one of the mightiest Powers emerging in Africa
told me that he had got in touch with the President of an
Asian Power that had just emerged-I am not going to
mention names, in order not to embarrass people here. He
told me; he spoke for two hours against partition, and the
President of that Power got in touch with the President of
that Asian Power and told him: “If you want to receive
American aid you have to cast your vote for partition”. He
said: “I cannot”. So they brought the Ambassador of that
Power from Washington to vote for partition.

177. Every now and then I get a call from an Aleppo Jew
from Syria: ‘What are they doing to us, those Sikneslr? ”
“Siknesh ” is Arabic for “Ashkenazlm”-those who are not
Sephardic Jews-meaning, for your information, those who
had been converted in the seventh century. “What are they
doing? ” I say: “Why ask me? ” They say: “We want to
know. We speak Arabic; our religion is the same.” 1 say:
“Go tell them; why do you tell me? ” Only yesterday they
called me. They said: “For heaven’s sake, please, we have
heard that some of our own Arab Jewsmay be mistreated.”
I said: “Never will they be mistreated.” At one time a Jew
who spoke Arabic was even pampered; he was a spy18

Cohen-and now they brag about him. They brainwashed
him and he became a spy.

why? The Jew is a human being, like anybody else. There
are many Jews who are good Americans. It is because the
Zionists do not leave the American Jew, the British Jew or
any other Jew alone. They tell them, “Your first duty is to
Israel”. Some reply, “We are Americans”. “No, you are
Jews first and foremost. Americans should be a source of
Phantoms and money-billions. Your duty is to Israel.”
And whose Israel? The Israel of the ancient world? No.
The Israel of the Kbazars of eastern Europe.

178. I have said all tbis in order to tell the Jews who are
Zionists to bridle their ambition-to curb their ambi.
tion-lest they become scapegoats. And you would be the
first to suffer-because the bulk of the Jews are innocent.
But your leaders are secular, playing on people’s senti.
merits,
We have seen what happened in Germany, Who is to
day it will never happen again, against Jew and Moslem and
Christian so long as bigotry has not been banished from the
world?
not

181. I do not need to read the whole newsitem. If anyone
wants to read it, I will sendhim Xerox copies. Incidentally,
it was a very good Jew who organized the Xerox company,
and he wanted to go to Israel. I do not think he will.

179, I was on my way from Paris, and I saw something
which bolsters my statement that one day you may become
scapegoats and all of us-whether Jew or Gentile-would
suffer to see the innocent suffer. And what would you do,
YOU
leaders of the Zionists? You would do exactly what
YOU
did in Nazi Germany-turn your heels to the air and
leave your co-religionists there behind you. Schacht told
something to a good friend of mine, an Ottoman princemay
God rest his soul; he died two years ago, He related
this incident three or four times. And Schacht, remember,
was not pronounced to be a Nazi, He was at Nuremburg,
but he was absolved. He was Minister of Economy; before
the First World War the Jews were highly respected in
Germany, They wined and dined with the Raiser. And then
things changed. We shall not go into the historical ramifications of the post-war era. In the late twenties and thirties I
was in Europe, watching things. And Schacht told this
Mend of mine after the war: “I cannot explain it; I used to
send oral messages to the Jews, who were waging all kinds
of campaigns against German goods. Of course, I was
Minister of Economy, and I did not want our economy to
suffer. We were living on ersatz to a large extent. And what
did they do? The more I sent them word that Hitler was
not
to
be fooled with”-he did not dare to put that in
wrlting- “the more they intensified their propaganda
against us. Time and time again I sent them word that their
co-religionists would suffer. Did they care? No, they had a
psychosis.” Zionism is a.psychosis. You cannot explain it in
any other way. And we are developing a psychosis also, we
Arabs: the psychosis of our nationalism. We have to, in
order to fight a psychosis. We do not develop it willingly,
but many of us will never make peace with the usurper.

182. For heaven’s sake, do not distort the facts and think
people will be fooled for another twenty-five years.
Twenty-six years have passedsince this artificial State came
into being. In fairness and justice not to the Arabs but to
your co-religionists, who do not want to have anything to
do with political Zionism, leave them alone. And leave us
alone. If you want to live at peace with us as Jews of
various cultures, you are welcome, but not under the flag of
a usurping State.
183. In pre-war days we did not have the consciousness
that ‘YOU are a Jew and I am a Christian and he is a
Moslem’“. We never had that consciousnessin our part of
the world. YOU, the Kbazars of eastern Europe, created it,
And now you come and say Uru Salim is your city. You are
fooling no one but yourself. To give it credenceyou have
repeated this erroneous appraisal of the whole situation so
many times that you believe it yourselves.
184. Thank you, Mr. President and members of the
Council, for having been so patient with me. I think I shall
be more explicit in my next statement. It seemswe have no
recourse saveto orations. The members of the Council must
act-1 started by saying that, and I end my statement not
with a warning; I am speaking in a friendly manner; we
know the difficulties.
185. The speech our beloved Secretary-General made
today constitutes a textbook, a manual for future Secretaries-General and what they should do. But the onus is on
the members of the Council. They should act and forget the
policy resorted to at the time of the League of Nations,
which I observed ex officio in the late twenties and
thirties-the policy of the balance of power, the balance of
spheresof influence,

180. And now I come to ‘what I wanted to tell you
about-a piece that appeared in the Herald 7kibune of Paris,
on 7 September, If you do not beware you will become the
scapegoats. People are getting tired of both Jews and Arabs.
But we do not care. We are 110 million and we are in our
own area. But you are dispersed, and your money is out.
And you will make victims and scapegoats of Jews. This
item is from Pittsburg and appeared in The New York
Rimes of 6 September, according to the source. It reads:

186. Look at the painting in this chamber. Half the world
is still submerged by injustice-and not necessarilypolitical
injustice. Our beloved Secretary-General enumerated the
catastrophies, including famines, and we talk here asthough
we are squabbling, when the jworld is faced with such
stupendous problems needing the attention of every human
being regardlessof nationality.

“The Zionist Organization of America yesterday
allowed Rabbi Meir Kahane, head of the militant Jewish
Defence League, to address a plenary session of the
national convention. He called for Jewish emigration to
Israel, and declared that the Jew is not liked in America”.

187. It is the prime duty of members-especially the five
permanent members-to act, and to act with dispatch, lest

things get out of hand and there is war and conflict and
turmoil and suffering and bereavement +It is high time YOU,
the members of the Council, put life into this OrganiZatiOn.

Now, 1 am not saying that, If I did, you would say, ‘You
are mischievous”. No, he said it: the Jew is not liked. Now,
19

full debate on this matter in this Council. But it would have i
to be conducted in an orderly way. It would have to be ’
preceded by a final report from the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and of his Representative, Ambassador
Gunnar Jarring. Ambassador Jarring may then tell the story
of his long and arduous efforts with us and of the 75
minutes which Mr. Tekoah has granted him since his
Mission began here in New York.

188. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Egypt in exercise of his right of reply.
189. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, I am sorry
to speak at this late hour, but I shall be extremely brief.
190. We have heard the Israeli representative exercising his
right of reply, but not in the orderly manner of this
Council. We heard this right of reply exercised in two
sections with an interval between them. In the first one, as
a lover of music I knew the beginning and I knew the end.
This is an old statement, as I said last year, pre-cooked and
frozen, waiting to be thrown in the face of anyone who
dares say anything which is not to the liking of Mr. Tekoah.
I need not go into that. The second section was an amazing
reference to the efforts of this Council to settle the Middle
East problem.

192. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Morocco
and Lebanon, who have been invited to participate in the
discussion, wish to speak at the next meeting.
193. I have also been informed that the representative of
Jordan, in view of the lateness of the hour, wishes to defer
his statement in exercise of the right of reply to a later
meeting.
194. I shall therefore adjourn this meeting.

191. If Mr. Tekoah is speaking under instructions from his
Government, I declare in the name of the Government of
Egypt that we have no opposition to-nay, we welcome-a

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

20

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Gsntva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
ddpositaires
du monde
Nations
Unies, Section

HAH

tlOflY’IHTb

be obtained
or write

Nations
Unies
soot
entier.
Informez-vous
des venles,
New York

MBAAHHFl

from
bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

DES
en

NATIONS

vento

q upr&s

throughout
New York

UNIES

dons
les librairies
da vatre
librairic
ou

et Ies agencss
odressaz-vour
61

OSbE~HHEHHbIX

HAL\Hfl

ou GM&O.

OPrAHHBAUHH

~~:~~itltllll
OptWlll:l?~l~tttt
ObZ~,!(ttllClllll~IX
Ihl(ll$
3tOitillO KyUIlTh
tl tilttlilill6lS
JI~WJtlltaX
II
itt’CtlTI’TIIltS
II0 ttl‘l’s
pttfiOiltlX
Jlllp2L
IhtOptTC
VttpatlKtl
06 KI:I@IllllflX
Jt llfttUP3I IiIllliiillOJl
uara:lnllc
11.111 LllttttltTC
II0 n#ccy:
Oprnanoaqufl 06ZentItletllll~ls
IIRI~IIB,
cctilnlH
tto
ttpO~tt;liC
ll:J~IlltItd,
I3bM-fiOlJti
ILlIt ~ClIl3DtL

COMO

CONSEGUlR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicacioncr
de las Nacionss
Unldas
estbn
en todas
partes
del mundo. Consults
a su libreio
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho inUnIted Nations, New York

NACIONES

UNIDAS

an venta an librerias
y casas dislribuidarar
o dirfjare
al Naciones
Unidas,
Srcci6n

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

82075JuIy

1973-2,050
