United Nations

A/52/PV.79

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

79th plenary meeting
Monday, 22 December 1997, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 7.25 p.m.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council (A/52/3)
The President: Members will recall that chapters I to
IV, sections A, B, D and H of chapter V, and chapters VI
and VII of the report of the Economic and Social Council
were assigned for consideration directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of chapters I to IV, sections A, B, D and H of
chapter V, and chapters VI and VII of the report of the
Economic and Social Council?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of those
chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council
which were assigned for consideration directly in plenary
meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 12.

97-86818 (E)

Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 12, 113 to 115, 119 to 121, 135, 137, 153, 160 and
116.
I request the rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, Mr.
Djamel Moktefi of Algeria, to introduce the reports of the
Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (interpretation from Arabic): I have the
honour to introduce today to the General Assembly the
reports of the Fifth Committee on the agenda items
allocated to it. Thirty-seven items were allocated to the
Fifth Committee at the Assembly's fifty-second session.
From September to December the Committee held 46
plenary meetings, in addition to informal consultations. I
shall give a brief report of the results of its work.
With regard to agenda item 12, entitled “Report of
the Economic and Social Council”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/729. In
paragraph 4 of the report the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft decision by
which the General Assembly would take note of chapters
I, V (section B) and VII of the report of the Economic
and Social Council contained in document A/52/3/Rev.1.
The Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
With regard to agenda item 113, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/52/732. In paragraph 6 of that
report the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 114, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/746. In
paragraph 7 of that report the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of two draft decisions,
which were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 115, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 1996-1997”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/743. In
paragraph 6 of that report the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 119, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained
in document A/52/734. In paragraph 7 of that report the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 120, entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/52/745. In paragraph 6 of that
report the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 121, entitled “United
Nations common system”, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/52/735. In paragraph 7 of that
report the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 135, entitled “Financing of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/724. In
paragraph 6 of that report the Committee recommends to

2

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 137, entitled “Financing
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, the report of
the Fifth Committee is contained in document A/52/726.
In paragraph 6 of that report the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution, which was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 153, entitled “Human
resources management”, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/52/739. In paragraph 6 of that
report the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 160, entitled “Admission
of the International Seabed Authority to membership in
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund”, the report
of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/52/718. In paragraph 5 of that report the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption a draft
decision by which the General Assembly would decide to
admit the International Seabed Authority to membership
in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund. The draft
decision was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 116, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999”, the
report of the Fifth Committee will be issued as document
A/52/744. Under this item the Committee adopted five
draft resolutions, which for the time being are contained
in A/C.5/52/L.18, relating to issues concerning the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999,
and A/C.5/52/L.19, which has two parts and contains the
programme budget for the biennium. The Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
draft resolutions, as orally revised at its 46th meeting,
which was held today. The draft resolutions were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee which are before the Assembly.

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of all the chapters of the report of the
Economic and Social Council.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote. The positions of delegations regarding
the recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee.

Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/732)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/212).

Agenda item 12 (continued)

The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 113.

Report of the Economic and Social Council

Agenda item 114

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/729)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 4 of its report.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of those
chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council
which were allocated to the Fifth Committee?

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/746)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Action taken on certain items”, without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted.

It was so decided.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision II, entitled “Biennial programme of work of the
Fifth Committee for 1998-1999”, without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: We have concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 114.
Agenda item 115
Programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/743)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution consists of two parts. Part A is
entitled “Final budget appropriations for the biennium 19961997”. Part B is entitled “Final income estimates for the
biennium 1996-1997”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/213 A
and B).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 119
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/734)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.

4

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/214).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 119.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/745)
The President: I call on the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh) (Chairman of the
Fifth Committee): In my capacity as Chairman of the
Fifth Committee, I should like to bring to your attention,
Sir, and to the attention of the General Assembly a
technical correction in the document which we are now
considering: A/C.5/52/L.17.
In the second line of the second preambular
paragraph of that document, after the phrase “Member
States”, the word “broadly” should be added. This was
adopted in the Committee but has somehow been missed
in the processing of the document.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Liechtenstein for an explanation of vote before the voting.
Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): I wish to state for the
record our position on the draft resolution on the scale of
assessments which we are in the process of adopting.
First of all, we would like to say that we are
gratified to note that it has been possible to elaborate a
new scale of assessments which commands consensus
among the membership and to express our sincere hope
that this important step will contribute to putting the
Organization on a more sound financial basis, as indeed
is urgently needed.
Liechtenstein has expressed its position on the scale
of assessments on several occasions, in writing, formally
and informally. It was our wish to remain at the assessed
contribution of 0.01 per cent, which is identical with the
floor rate that has been abolished under the new scale of

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
assessments. While we recognize that the abolishment of
the floor rate was a necessary step, we hold the view that
the set percentage reflects our capacity to pay and is thus
in accordance with the crucial criterion relevant for the
elaboration of the scale of assessments.
It has never been our intention to act in any way
unilaterally, as we think no other country should do. I
should therefore like to inform the Assembly that we are
going to join the consensus on the new scale of assessments
with the following understanding.
We maintain our position that we should have been
assessed at 0.01 per cent. Since the scale for the period
1998-2000 assesses Liechstentein at 0.005 and 0.006 per
cent, respectively, we envisage paying the difference
between our assessed contribution and the 0.01 per cent
assessment by way of voluntary contributions to activities
which we will announce at a later stage.
If the scale of assessments is reopened in the
upcoming years in accordance with section D of the draft
resolution before us, we will take that opportunity to come
back to our concern, and we hope that it will then be
possible to find a solution accommodating our interests that
is based on broad consultation and consensus among the
membership.
All this is done in a spirit of compromise and with the
clear understanding that the matter raised by us will remain
on the table for further discussion. We would like to thank
all the delegations which have expressed their
understanding and that have assisted us in pursuing our
concerns. We hope that our way of proceeding is in
accordance with the overall interests of our Organization,
which is our common goal in the Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands on a point of order.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): As the Chairman of the
Fifth Committee has already pointed out one technical error
in document A/C.5/52/L.17, my delegation would like to
draw the attention of the Assembly to another technical
error. In the table with the Member States, with their
percentages for the years 1998-2000, the Netherlands is not
mentioned in that list, and my delegation would wish that
technical error to be corrected.
The President: This is a very important point of
order, and certainly this technical error will be corrected. It

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
is very important that this error be corrected because of
the contribution of the Netherlands to the regular budget.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report, as orally revised by the
representative of Bangladesh, the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, and by the representative of the Netherlands,
which for the time being is contained in document
A/C.5/52/L.17.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/215
A, B, C and D).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): We
wish to offer our highest compliments and thanks to
Chairman Chowdhury and to the scales coordinator, Mr.
Maycock, for their outstanding leadership of the Fifth
Committee through a long and arduous session. We would
not have reached the positions we all have agreed to
support today without their leadership, inspiration and
innovation.
The United States joins in consensus in support of
the scales resolution offered here today. Like other
Members, we find that there are concepts and elements
that are not exactly to our liking, but this process is not
designed to satisfy everyone's every wish and need. With
respect to the scale, we will not burden this plenary by
repeating our specific positions on the various elements of
the methodology. Our positions are well known. They
have been repeated in formal, informal, “informal
informal”, and still more informal settings these past
weeks, and will be repeated when we debate this issue
again.
We do wish to comment on paragraph D, which
relates to a review of the scale for the last two years of
this period. Again, we wish to thank coordinator Maycock
for his work, which led us to language we can agree on.
He and other key senior members of the Fifth Committee
were essential in bridging the divisions on this issue and
in so doing enabling movement towards a brighter
financial future for the United Nations. Rather than offer

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
a legalistic interpretation of our understanding of this
resolution, let me simply describe it as an open door to
permit a revisiting of the scale for the years 1999-2000. We
said during the consultations that we wished to see an open
door, not a swinging door nor a revolving door, and
certainly not just the painted outline of a door on a wall.
This resolution contains that open door, and we will be
working assiduously over the next weeks and months to
bring about a set of circumstances that make sure our
entrance through that door receives a welcome from the
Members of the United Nations.
The United States Government's commitment to
working with the other Members to restore the financial
health of the United Nations is unequivocal. Again, we
wish to thank you, Sir, for your leadership of this reform
Assembly, Chairman Chowdhury, coordinator Maycock and
all those delegations that worked together to produce this
resolution, which we join in supporting.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have once again the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia — and the associated country Cyprus, as
well as Norway, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the adoption by
consensus of a new scale of assessments of the United
Nations Organization for the years 1998-2000. However, we
must recognize that the decision we have just made does
not resolve our Organization's severe financial crisis. The
proposals of the European Union which aim at providing
the Organization with reliable and predictable resources are
more than ever necessary. We wish to point out,
furthermore, that it is thanks to the Member States that
continue to fulfil their financial responsibilities — and these
include the 15 members of the European Union — that the
United Nations Organization is still in a position today to
carry out its activities.
The negotiating process on this resolution proved to be
particularly difficult this year, and we welcome the
responsible and constructive role played by a number of
delegations during the debates in the Fifth Committee.

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
The resolution we have just adopted provides, in its
section D, for discussions on a possible review of the
scale of assessments under certain circumstances.
In this context, the European Union wishes to state
that it will agree to a reopening of the discussions on the
scale of assessments only after the United States of
America has adopted legislative provisions enabling it to
clear its arrears in full and to respect its financial
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. The
entry into force of any possible revised scale of
assessments cannot take place before monies owed have
actually been paid.
The European Union trusts that all Member States
will fulfil their obligations to the Organization on time, in
full, without conditions and in accordance with the scale
of assessments adopted by the General Assembly. No
unilateral reduction of the amount owed to the
Organization by the United States of America can be
accepted.
Furthermore, it is important for the Committee on
Contributions to play its role in the possible reopening of
the discussion on the scale of assessments, since each
point will have to be thoroughly examined. The European
Union explained its position regarding this matter when
the draft resolution was adopted in the Fifth Committee.
Finally, we wish to recall that the scale of
assessments for the regular budget is only one element of
the proposal made by the European Union to ensure a
sound and predictable financial basis for the United
Nations. In any case, we are determined to revisit in due
course other important elements of the European Union's
proposals, including measures aimed at accelerating the
payment of arrears, at stricter enforcement of the system
of payment of contributions through incentives and
disincentives and at reforming the scale for the
peacekeeping budget.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 120.
Agenda item 121
United Nations common system

However, while acknowledging the right of each
delegation to defend the interests of its own Government,
we regret that on a number of occasions the eager pursuit
of specific goals won out over the obligation to take into
account the common interest of the Organization.

6

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/735)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/52/735.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “United Nations common system: report of the
International Civil Service Commission”.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
Agenda item 137
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/216).
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/726)
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda item 135
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/52/726.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/724)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/52/724.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/218).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 153
Human resources management

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/217).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
135.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/739)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/52/739.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/219).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 153.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Agenda item 160
Admission of the International Seabed Authority to
membership in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund (A/52/718)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 5 of its report contained in
document A/52/718.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 160?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 19981999
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/744)
The President: I call on the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania, who wishes to make a
statement in explanation of position.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China under agenda item 116, on the adoption of the
programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999.
The draft resolution which we are about to adopt
concludes a cycle of intense negotiations carried out under
very special circumstances.
As the Assembly is aware, during the current
biennium the Organization has had to meet the target
savings on the one hand and, on the other, to deal with the
process of reform proposed by the Secretary-General.
In meeting the savings targets, the Organization was
confronted with the need to significantly reduce
expenditures, especially on posts, which impaired the
capacity of the Organization to fully implement all
mandated programmes and activities.

8

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
These negative impacts have been identified in the
reports of the Secretary-General, as well as in the reports
of the Committee for Programme and Coordination and
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
The Group of 77 and China trust that the budget for
the biennium 1998-1999, which we are about to approve,
will be able to rectify the shortfalls and difficulties
experienced by the Organization during the current
biennium in its delivery of programmes and activities, as
expected by Member States.
The reform proposals of the Secretary-General,
which were welcomed by the Group of 77 and China —
comprising 132 countries — brought an additional
dimension to the deliberations on the budget for 19981999. While the proposed programme budget for 19981999 was under consideration in the Fifth Committee, the
reform proposals were being examined by the whole
General Assembly. This complex process and its
budgetary ramifications brought additional challenges for
the Fifth Committee in the budget debate, which itself is
already a very demanding task that the Committee faces
every two years.
The overall level of resources contained in the draft
resolutions before us was determined after thorough
scrutiny of the requirements of the Organization for the
biennium 1998-1999. The Group of 77 and China agreed
to a level of resources of $2,532,331,200 on the
understanding that this would allow the United Nations to
implement in full all its mandated programmes and
activities. This has always been the major determinant of
the Group's position regarding the overall level of
resources.
The Group of 77 and China have agreed to the
budget presented on a net basis on the understanding that
changes have been introduced only in its presentation and
that they do not infringe on established budget rules and
procedures. The entities whose budgets are covered by
this new-format presentation will be assured by the
Secretary-General of allotment of all funds approved in
their gross budgets in order to allow them to implement
all of their mandated programmes and activities.
Moreover, the staffing tables of the entities involved —
namely the Joint Inspection Unit, the International Civil
Service Commission and the Vienna Conference and
Security Services — are now contained in annex I of
draft resolution I. We expect that, in accordance with the
present draft resolution, all aspects of net budgeting,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
including its impact on the functioning of the entities
concerned, will be kept under review and that the
Secretary-General will report on this subject at the fiftythird session of the General Assembly.
The Group of 77 and China joined consensus on the
Secretary-General's proposal for the abolition of a
significant number of posts, on the understanding that such
abolition will not adversely affect the capacity of the
Organization to fully implement mandated programmes and
activities. We wish to emphasize, as draft resolution I
states, that the abolition of posts must not entail any
involuntary separation of staff. The Group of 77 and China
would like to underscore the need to fill promptly the
newly approved posts, and trusts that the vacancy rate will
be maintained as determined by Member States.
The Group of 77 and China remain attached to the
current budgetary process, which should be fully respected.
In this connection, the Group stresses that any changes in
this process must be subject to the prior consideration and
approval of the General Assembly. I would like to
underscore that it is the exclusive prerogative of the
General Assembly to determine and decide on the
budgetary process.
Having gone through a very gruelling marathon, which
led to the consensus texts that will shortly be adopted, the
Group of 77 and China — which comprises 132
countries — hope that Member States will make sure that
financial resources are remitted to the Organization. Failing
that, the whole exercise will have been futile.
I wish you, Mr. President, and the representatives of
all Member States, happy holidays and a prosperous new
year.
The President: The General Assembly will now take
a decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report, and which for
the time being are contained in document A/C.5/52/L.18
and in paragraph 28 of document A/C.5/52/L.19 (Part II).
Draft resolution I, entitled “Questions related to the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999”,
is contained, for the time being, in document
A/C.5/52/L.18. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/220).

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
The President: We turn now to draft resolutions II
to V, which for the time being are contained in paragraph
28 of document A/C.5/52/L.19 (Part II).
Draft resolution II (A to C), entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999”, was adopted by the
Fifth Committee. May I take it that the Assembly too
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution II (A to C) was adopted (resolution
52/221 (A to C)).
The President: Draft resolution III, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 1998-1999”, was adopted by the Fifth
Committee. May I take it that the Assembly wishes also
to adopt this draft resolution?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 52/222).
The President: Draft resolution IV, entitled
“Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium
1998-1999”, was adopted by the Fifth Committee. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 52/223).
The President: Draft resolution V, entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 1998-1999”, was
adopted by the Fifth Committee. May I take it that the
Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 52/224).
The President: I call now on delegations wishing to
explain their positions on the draft resolutions just
adopted.
Mr. Maddens (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): The European Union would like first of all to
thank the coordinator for this item in the Fifth
Committee, Mr. Carlos Dante Riva of Argentina, and the
Chairman of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador
Chowdhury of Bangladesh, for their efforts to produce
consensus texts for draft resolutions on the programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999.
The European Union welcomes the decision to
undertake during the resumed fifty-second session a
review of the working methods of the Fifth Committee.
We believe that we should try in future to avoid meetings

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
of the kind we have endured over the past few days. We
believe that approval of the budget could be made faster
and more effective.
Here, a possibility for the future could be to study new
budgeting techniques, such as results-based budgeting. We
support the Secretary-General's pilot projects aimed at
devising and introducing new management methods. We are
ready to engage in constructive discussions based on the
reports that the Secretary-General will be submitting on this
subject.
With respect to the question of human rights, we are
surprised that some delegations have chosen to use that
particularly sensitive and important subject at this sensitive
time to attack a practice that has been in existence for a
decade. The European Union will never accept the use of
a possible administrative omission on the part of the
Secretariat as a pretext for eliminating budgetary allocations
for human rights.
The process of United Nations reform was an
additional factor with which the Fifth Committee had to
contend during the fifty-second session — in addition to the
simultaneous drawing up of a new scale of assessments and
a new programme budget. We believe that the resolution
adopted today faithfully reflects — within the limits
imposed by the need to achieve consensus — the SecretaryGeneral's proposals and the views voiced by Member
States.
In the humanitarian field, we welcome the fact that
more attention will be devoted to basic functions, in
accordance with resolution 46/182, with regard to drawing
up coordination policies and functions for coordination; the
promotion of humanitarian issues in consultation with
political bodies, including the Security Council; and the
coordination of emergency assistance. We should like to
express our firm support for the strengthening of the
process of consolidated appeals as a means for mobilizing
resources by including appeals for rehabilitation and
reconstruction and for operations to promote human rights
in the field. We agree with the Secretary-General when he
notes that humanitarian actions must always be aimed at
sustainable solutions.
Before concluding, I should like to say that the Fifth
Committee would never have achieved these results without
the assistance of the Secretariat, in particular the Budget
Director, Mr. Warren Sach.

10

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
Mr. Deineko (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The draft resolution of the Fifth
Committee on the budget, which has just been adopted by
consensus, was the result of enormous efforts by the
Chairman of the Fifth Committee and by the coordinator
for this agenda item. This resolution on the United
Nations programme budget provides a clear guideline for
the activities of the Organization in the forthcoming
biennium. The adoption of the resolution by consensus by
all Member States not only attests to the unconditional
support by United Nations Member States for the
parameters and size of the budget approved for 19981999, but enables the Secretary-General to implement all
of the United Nations mandates and programmes within
the budget in accordance with the funds allocated for each
sphere of activity.
A significant part of the work on the budget was
devoted to the reform proposals of the Secretary-General.
Here, our delegation would like to draw the attention of
members of the General Assembly to paragraph 2 of
resolution 52/12, which calls upon the Secretary-General
to take full account of the views and comments of
Member States in implementing the reform measures
contained in his report in document A/51/950. The letter
dated 14 November 1997 from the President of the
General Assembly addressed to the Secretary-General,
document A/52/664, contains a clear reference to the
statement made by the delegation of the Russian
Federation during the open-ended informal consultations
of the plenary on United Nations reform, which was
subsequently conveyed to the Secretary-General in written
form.
In that statement, which has since been reaffirmed
on numerous occasions, including during meetings of the
Fifth Committee, the Russian delegation clearly noted
that, while agreeing with the establishment in New York
of a Department of Disarmament Affairs, it considers it
advisable to appoint as its head someone at the level of
United Nations Assistant Secretary-General. We believe
that the establishment of a new disarmament structure
within the United Nations Secretariat should not be
carried out to the detriment of the effective functioning of
the Geneva disarmament mechanism. The position of the
Russian Federation was supported by many delegations
during the open-ended informal consultations of the
plenary on United Nations reform.
Furthermore, in this context we are greatly alarmed
by the trend, noted by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, towards

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
increasing the number of high-level posts during the reform
process of the Secretariat. It seems that the pyramidal
structure of the hierarchy of posts is once again being
upset.
Appointing the head of the new Department of
Disarmament Affairs at the level of Assistant SecretaryGeneral is also supported by the staffing table that has been
approved for that Department, which provides for only 41
people, including General Service staff members.
Furthermore, it is significant that in the second tier in the
chain of command in the new Department there is only one
staff member at the D-2 level. In that context, while we
associate ourselves with the consensus on the budget
resolution, we should like once again to express our
understanding that, in appointing the head of the
Department of Disarmament Affairs, the Secretary-General
will take into account the well-founded position that has
been expressed on numerous occasions by many
delegations.
Mr. Odaga-Jalomayo (Uganda): Let me begin by
associating my delegation with the statement so eloquently
made by the Chairman of the Group of 77 and China,
Ambassador Daudi Mwakawago. I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, Mr. Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh,
and his Bureau, for a job well done. I also wish to thank all
the coordinators of the informal consultations on the various
agenda items that were before the Fifth Committee for the
commendable efforts they made, which enabled the
Committee to reach its decisions. We also wish to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Carlos Riva of Argentina for his
able leadership in chairing all the informal consultations on
this agenda item. We admire his patience and coolness,
which he demonstrated during the course of all the
meetings that we shared.
Once again, the Fifth Committee, after working
tirelessly, has demonstrated its responsibility and usual
spirit by adopting by consensus the budget for the biennium
1998-1999. This was made possible through the great
understanding and flexibility demonstrated by all delegates.
While our delegation attaches great importance to the
principle of decision by consensus, particularly on an
important subject such as the budget, we wish to underscore
that genuine negotiations require Member States to state
their views and positions frankly and freely. Negotiations
also require the spirit of give and take on the basis of
sovereignty and equality. In this regard, our delegation is
rather disappointed that the negotiations on the budget we
have just adopted fell short on those principles. It was,

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
however, within the spirit of the decision by consensus
that our delegation made far-reaching concessions in order
not to block consensus.
The Assembly has just witnessed the adoption of a
budget that the Secretary-General can call “my budget”.
Three days ago the General Assembly also adopted the
Secretary-General's reform measures and proposals. With
the adoption of his own budget and his own reform
measures and proposals, we believe that the moment of
action has arrived. Our delegation will be looking forward
to action rather than to more talk of reform. We are
waiting for results and value for money.
We regret that the overall level of resources adopted
for the biennium 1998-1999 is very much lower than that
for the biennium 1996-1997. This can be interpreted in
many ways: the United Nations has become efficient; past
figures were plastic; the priority of the Organization has
changed; or the activities and the purpose for which the
Organization was created have been minimized or
eliminated. We do not want to pass judgement. However,
one can only note that world inflation is higher today than
it was in 1996.
The budgets of similar institutions of government
have never seen such a reduction as is the case with the
United Nations budget. On the contrary, their budgets
have been going up each year.
The Committee, in considering the SecretaryGeneral's proposals, showed great flexibility by agreeing
to most, if not all, of them. In fact, the expression “these
are the Secretary-General's proposals” was often echoed
by many delegations. The Committee went further to
ensure that it accommodated those Member States that
could not accept the overall level of appropriations of the
budget going beyond its desirable range.
Now that Member States have shown their goodwill,
it is also our hope that the Secretary-General, in
implementing the approved programmes and actions in
the biennium 1998-1999, will adhere strictly to the
mandates adopted by the General Assembly. It is our
considered view that, when we consider the performance
report of the budget, we shall be able to give the
Secretary-General a clean certificate for implementing all
mandated programmes and activities, in particular priority
programmes and activities, as approved in General
Assembly resolution 51/219 on the medium-term plan.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In this context, we wish to stress the need for the
Secretary-General to give a balanced treatment to all
approved priorities in terms of resource allocation and
implementation. In the same vein, priority programmes and
activities, as identified in the medium-term plan, should
have a first claim on resources that may be realized through
efficiency gains and savings. It is also our hope that the
Secretary-General will always seek the approval of the
General Assembly, as stated by the Chairman of the Group
of 77 and China, prior to implementing proposals which
have an adverse impact on mandated programmes and
activities.
Furthermore, it is our hope that all Member States,
without exception, will demonstrate their commitment to
the Organization by providing the Secretary-General with
the necessary resources to enable him to implement the
mandates given to him. In one of our informals, we were
told that there is a cheque lying across the street, waiting to
cross the road. We do hope that, with the budget that we
have just adopted, the cheque will cross the road.
In our discussion of the budget, we expressed our
concern on a number of issues, such as duplication of work;
misplacement of programmes and activities; the topheaviness of the Organization's inverted-pyramid structure;
using advance recosting to reduce the level of budget
appropriations; high vacancy rates; and growth in specific
programmes. Although we were not persuaded by the
arguments advanced by the Secretariat on most of these
issues, in the larger interest of the Organization and to give
the Secretary-General a chance, we decided to close our
technical eyes.
We also noted with keen interest the concept the
Secretary-General has introduced in the presentation of his
budget. In this connection, we wish to reaffirm the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/213, which
was extensively negotiated and accepted by consensus as
the only legal basis for the preparation of the United
Nations budget. In this vein, our delegation will be looking
forward with keen interest to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the use of some of the new budgetary concepts
that were recommended on a trial basis by the General
Assembly.

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
America — are waiting for the distribution of the food.
They are wondering whether the 1998-1999 budget will
leave them hungrier than did the budget of the 1996-1997
biennium. The clarion call is sounded; the international
community is waiting for a response.
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine shares the view just expressed with regard to the
establishment in New York of the post of the UnderSecretary-General for Disarmament Affairs. In this
connection, I would like to state my delegation's strong
hope that, while creating this post, the Secretary-General
will take into account the position of Ukraine, which has
been repeatedly stated in the Fifth Committee and during
the consideration of the actions proposed in the report of
the Secretary-General, “Renewing the United Nations: A
Programme for Reform”, and in particular that such posts
should be established at the level of Assistant SecretaryGeneral.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 116.
I should like to take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,
Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury of Bangladesh, and to
the Coordinator of the informal consultations on agenda
item 116 on the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1998-1999, Mr. Carlos Dante Riva of
Argentina, for their tireless efforts during the 25-hour
marathon session over this weekend that resulted in the
adoption by consensus of the proposed programme
budget.
I also wish to express my sincere gratitude to all
Member States for their spirit of cooperation in enabling
us to adopt by consensus the scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations. In
this connection, I would also like to pay a special tribute
to Ambassador McCook, the Coordinator on the scale of
assessments, for his great work.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee.
Programme of work

Let me conclude by restating that the Committee has
played its role and lived up to its responsibility. The food
is now on the table. The entire international community,
and particularly the developing countries — from Algeria
to Zimbabwe in Africa; from Afghanistan to Viet Nam in
Asia; from Antigua and Barbuda to Venezuela in Latin

12

The President: Apart from organizational matters on
items that may have to be considered by operation of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and bearing
in mind the action already taken by the Assembly at its
31st, 35th, 39th, 42nd, 47th, 49th, 50th, 54th, 57th, 67th,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997

68th, 70th, 71st, 73rd and 76th to 79th plenary meetings
concerning agenda items 10, 11, 16 (b), 17 (g), 17 (j), 20
(b), 24, 36, 37, 39, 43 to 45, 47, 60, 73, 83, 95 (a), 104,
106, 112 (d), 113 to 116, 119 to 121, 123, 133, 135, 137,
138, 142 (a), 153, 157 and 159, I should like to propose
that the following agenda items remain for consideration
during the fifty-second session of the General Assembly:

Item 45

The situation in Central America:
procedures for the establishment of a firm
and lasting peace and progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development

Item 47

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Item 10

Report of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization

Item 57

The situation in Burundi

Item 58
Item 11

Report of the Security Council

Restructuring and revitalization of the
United Nations in the economic, social
and related fields

Item 16 (b)

Election of
Committee
Coordination

Item 59

Question of equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters

Item 60

Strengthening of the United Nations
system

Item 61

Question of Cyprus

Item 73

Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted
by the General Assembly at its tenth
special session

Item 17 (g)

seven members of the
for Programme and

Appointment of members and alternate
members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee

Item 17 (j)

Appointment of a member of the Joint
Inspection Unit

Item 19

Admission of new Members to the United
Nations

Item 20 (b)

Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions

Item 83

Rationalization of the work and reform of
the agenda of the First Committee

Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly

Item 95 (a)

Financing of development, including net
transfer of resources between developing
and developed countries

Item 104

International drug control

Item 106

Implementation of the outcome of the
Fourth World Conference on Women

Item 21

Item 24

Building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal

Item 36

Question of Palestine

Item 37

The situation in the Middle East

Item 39

Oceans and the law of the sea

Item 112 (d)

Item 43

The situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and
security

Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action

Item 113

Financial reports and audited financial
statements, and reports of the Board of
Auditors

Item 114

Review of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of
the United Nations

Item 44

The situation of democracy and human
rights in Haiti

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997

Item 115

Programme budget for the biennium 19961997

Item 132

Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Haiti

Item 116

Proposed programme
biennium 1998-1999

the

Item 133

Financing of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia

Item 117

Improving the financial situation of the
United Nations

Item 134

Financing of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda

Item 118

Joint Inspection Unit

Item 135

Item 119

Pattern of conferences

Item 120

Scale of assessments for the apportionment
of the expenses of the United Nations

Financing of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991

Item 121

United Nations common system

Item 136

Financing of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan

Item 122

Financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the Middle East

Item 137

Financing of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

budget

for

Item 123

Financing of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission

Item 124

Financing of the activities arising from
Security Council resolution 687 (1991)

Item 125

Financing of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara

Item 126

Financing and liquidation of the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia

Item 138

Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Item 127

Financing of the United Nations Protection
Force, the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia, the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force and
the United Nations Peace Forces
headquarters

Item 139

Financing of the United Nations
Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium

Item 140

Financing of the United
Preventive Deployment Force

Financing of the United Nations Operation
in Somalia II

Item 141

Financing of the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti

Financing of the United Nations Operation
in Mozambique

Item 142

Administrative and budgetary aspects of
the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations

Item 143

Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services

Item 128

Item 129

Item 130

Financing of the United
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

Item 131

Financing of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia

14

Nations

Nations

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Item 153

Human resources management

Item 154

Financing of the Military Observer Group
of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala

Item 157

United Nations reform: measures and
proposals

Item 159

Financing of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly that those agenda items remain for consideration
during the fifty-second session of the General Assembly?
It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President: Before closing this part of the fiftysecond session of the General Assembly, let me offer a few
preliminary observations and assessments of what we have
together managed to accomplish since we started our
deliberations.
First, I wish to report that during the three months of
its work, the General Assembly considered 138 items. In
this regard, it is worth noting that all of them were
important, and that, in my view, we managed to develop
productive discussions. Despite the divergence of the views
presented by various delegations and the political sensitivity
of some of the issues, an atmosphere of cooperation and
mutual respect of national positions prevailed in the General
Assembly's deliberations. The General Assembly adopted
270 resolutions, about 76 per cent of them by consensus,
and 77 decisions on the major issues facing our
Organization today. The subjects covered were different,
and they reflected the breadth and scope of the
responsibilities facing the Organization during this time of
its renewal and of new global challenges.
At the same time, I hope that members would agree
with me that this part of the session has been, to an extent,
a special one. It has been marked by the General
Assembly's consideration of the institutional reform of the
United Nations system, the outlines of which had been
suggested by the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan. This issue
dominated the general debate during the work of the highlevel segment of the session. It was also the subject of
thorough discussions during deliberations in the plenary and
at informal meetings. Those broad discussions demonstrated

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
a notable convergence in the aspirations and intentions of
the Member States concerning the need to renovate the
Organization so that it is better prepared to face new
realities and challenges.
As a result of innovative thinking and the
demonstrated political will to reach a desired goal, the
General Assembly introduced a new format of
deliberations — the open-ended informal consultations of
the plenary. This allowed all delegations, large and small,
to actively participate in the discussions on this
particularly important item. Moreover, it enabled them to
contribute equally to the final results of this lengthy but
worthy exercise.
It took 16 meetings of the open-ended informal
consultations, a number of the so-called informal
informals, conducted by the Friends of the President, and
a countless number of meetings and consultations held at
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
before we could conclude our discussion on the report of
the Secretary-General on “Renewing the United Nations:
measures and proposals”. As members know, the General
Assembly adopted two resolutions in which it commended
the Secretary-General for his efforts and outlined further
steps necessary for the implementation of his proposals
aimed at strengthening the existing institutional and
operational machinery and introducing new mechanisms
required for the successful functioning of the United
Nations.
In this regard, I should like to thank all the Friends
and super-Friends of the President, as well as all
delegations, for their active and constructive participation
in our deliberations on the report of the SecretaryGeneral. It is important for me to report to the Assembly
that, in accordance with the request of the Member States,
the views expressed and comments made by delegations
in the course of these discussions were sent to the
Secretary-General with a request to take full account of
them in the process of the reform implementation.
Although many issues are still waiting to be resolved
in the process of the United Nations reform, including
action on setting up a revolving credit fund, a reexamination of the role of United Nations agencies and
the establishment of “sunset provisions”, today we have
a reason to assert that the process of reform has become
a reality. It was endorsed by concrete decisions of the
General Assembly, which no doubt have ushered the
United Nations into a new stage of its history.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
This has happened because of the true spirit of
consensus which emerged in the course of our deliberations
on this issue and which will be invaluable in our further
efforts to develop and complete this process of reform. By
engaging in it, we are striving to make the United Nations
more effective so that it can better contribute to the people
of our global village in their efforts to build a safer,
healthier, more just and prosperous world.
The issue of Security Council reform also attracted
considerable attention from the Member States. It was
raised in the course of the general debate by almost 160
heads of delegations, which is a clear indication of the
membership's strong interest in the issue.
The comprehensive exchange of views on this subject
during our discussions in the plenary was remarkably
explicit and straightforward, and although it demonstrated
that all Members share the same belief in the need for
changes in the composition of the Security Council and the
methods of its work, it also proved once again that there
was no clear consensus on how to arrange these changes.
The General Assembly agreed not to take a decision
on this matter at this stage. However, it will continue its
work on this issue starting in the second half of January
next year, in the format of the relevant Open-ended
Working Group.
Referring back to my inaugural statement, I should
like to reiterate the two principles which, in my opinion,
should govern our approach to any issue relating to the
reform of the United Nations, including that of the Security
Council: these are realism and responsibility. We have to be
very realistic and responsible about proposals concerning
the future of this main body of our Organization.
I hope that the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council will be successful in
finding out whether the so-called magic formula of
enlargement of the Security Council exists in reality, and I
hope that we will be able to approach the end of the fiftysecond session of the General Assembly with a clearer
vision of the future Security Council.
The process of United Nations reform, as all of us are
aware, has been taking place against the background of a
precarious financial situation in the Organization. The
seriousness of the financial situation in our Organization
warranted the holding, at the request of the SecretaryGeneral, of a meeting of the relevant Open-ended High-

16

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
Level Working Group. This matter will continue to be the
object of careful study in the Working Group on the
Financial Situation of the United Nations in the coming
months.
During the past months of this session of the
General Assembly, we have witnessed a number of
important achievements in the field of international
security and disarmament. The General Assembly held an
important exchange of views in the First Committee on
the issue of anti-personnel landmines, which also received
the greatest scrutiny from international public opinion. It
took place against the backdrop of the successful
conclusion of the Ottawa process, and the General
Assembly marked this historic event by adopting a
resolution on the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of AntiPersonnel Mines and on Their Destruction.
I cannot but mention another contribution made by
the General Assembly to the process of disarmament.
After this session, according to the resolution adopted by
the Assembly, the world will have one more nuclearweapon-free zone — now it will be Central Asia. The
proposal for the establishment of Central Asia as a
nuclear-weapon-free zone received support from all
Member States, and a resolution on this issue was
adopted without a vote.
Another source of satisfaction resulting from the
work of the session is the adoption by the General
Assembly of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. This became possible
as a result of a compromise reached among Member
States. It will certainly fill in the lacuna existing in
international law on terrorism and will be an important
step forward in combating this evil.
As a result of our common efforts, we have also
come closer than ever before to the establishment of an
international criminal court. Today there is no doubt about
the importance and the necessity of creating such a body
and, at this session, the draft statute for the court has
acquired its concrete contours.
The General Assembly also accomplished a great
deal in furthering cooperation in the areas of sustainable
development and international economic cooperation, as
well as on a number of other important issues. Today
development has become a priority matter for the
Organization, and it is rightly perceived to be inseparable
from such important issues as, for example, the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
maintenance of international peace and security. This
understanding helped delegations iron out their differences
regarding certain aspects of development, in particular with
regard to the concept of sustainable development, and it is
to the benefit of all of us and the Organization that a
consensus emerged.
Of particular note is the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly which establishes a process for the
convening before the end of the year 2001 of a high-level
international forum on financing for development. I would
like also to attach particular significance to the decision on
the renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international
economic cooperation for development through partnership.
The General Assembly also dwelt extensively on other
items, including the promotion of human rights, as well as
issues related to narcotic drugs. On the latter subject, the
General Assembly made specific proposals for the
preparatory work for the special session of the Assembly,
which is to take place from 8 to 10 June next year. In its
resolution on the Third Decade to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, the General Assembly decided to
convene a world conference on racism and racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance not later
than the year 2001.
We also dealt with the issue of reviewing and adopting
the new scale of assessments. The elaboration of the scale
was proposed and justified by many delegations on the
grounds that any budget, if we wish it to be sound, should
be based on proper taxation.
Given the financial constraints of the United Nations,
as well as its difficult and overloaded agenda, deliberations
on this issue proved to be quite complex. Most of them
were conducted in the Fifth Committee, and at the end of
this part of the General Assembly's session we have
managed to adopt a new scale of assessments.
I have highlighted this achievement of the fifty-second
session deliberately because it leads the Organization away
from the brink of bankruptcy and opens up the possibility
for the United Nations to enjoy financial stability in the
future.
During this session, we also agreed on the programme
budget for the next biennium, which also reflects the

79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
measures and proposals of the Secretary-General
concerning the programme of United Nations reform.
It should be especially noted that only once every
six years does the discussion of the scale of assessments
coincide with the discussion of the budget. This
circumstance added some difficulties to the work of the
General Assembly on these issues, but, judging by the
final results, we may say that this exercise was also a
success.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we managed
to reach a broad agreement on most of the issues, as well
as on the strategies for addressing them. We also
managed to succeed in resolving many controversial
issues without losing the spirit of cooperation and mutual
understanding.
Much has been improved in our work during these
past three months. We can in particular highlight the
enhanced transparency in the work of the main organs of
the Organization. The General Assembly, on its part, has
taken certain steps to rationalize and streamline its
agenda. Significant improvements have also been made in
the overall organization of the Assembly's work. As an
indicator of this trend, most of the Committees finished
their work well before the scheduled time.
Before suspending the fifty-second session of the
General Assembly, let me extend to all delegations my
sincere appreciation for their assistance, for their very
instrumental cooperation and for their active work during
these months.
I should also like to express my special thanks to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the people in
the Secretariat, whose close cooperation I have enjoyed
throughout the whole three-month period of our work.
My words of gratitude go also to all Vice-Presidents
of the Assembly and all Chairmen, Vice-Chairmen and
Rapporteurs of the Main Committees for their excellent
contribution to our common achievements.
Bearing in mind that we are about to enter the
holiday season, I wish all happy holidays and a happy
new year.
The meeting rose at 8.55 p.m.

17
