S/2011/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 January 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 5 January 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I would like to refer to three letters received from the Federal Democratic
Republic of Nepal, one from the office of the caretaker Government of Nepal dated
31 December 2010 (see annex I) and two from the Chairman of the Unified
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”, dated
30 December 2010 (see annex II) and 4 January 2011, respectively (see annex III).
The letter dated 31 December 2010 from the office of the caretaker
Government provides information on how, from its point of view, issues relating to
the monitoring of arms and armies and dispute-resolution mechanisms should be
handled after the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) on
15 January 2011, and requests the transfer of essential documents and equipment
used by UNMIN to either the Special Committee or a designated mechanism.
The letter dated 30 December 2010 from Chairman Prachanda requests, on
behalf of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), the extension of the
tenure of UNMIN or the setting up of a United Nations political office to follow up
the peace process. The second letter, dated 4 January 2011, was written in response
to the letter dated 31 December 2010 from the caretaker Government of Nepal and
raises strong objections to all the key elements contained therein.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annexes to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-20186 (E) 120111

*1120186*

S/2011/1

Annex I to the letter dated 5 January 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Letter dated 31 December 2010 from the office of the caretaker Government of
Nepal to the Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal
We would like to bracket a number of issues that are raised often as the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) is coming to an end on
15 January 2011. The concerned parties to the peace process of Nepal have clearly
envisioned constitutional provisions together with the Comprehensive Peace Accord
and subsequent agreements and understandings for the integration and rehabilitation
of the Maoist Army combatants. It is necessary to take note of all those
constitutional provisions and other arrangements to ensure smooth transition after
the departure of UNMIN from Nepal.
1.

Monitoring of Maoist cantonments and arms containers
As provided under article 146 and 147 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal,
the Special Committee (SC) represented by all the major political parties, including
the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), is authorized for the supervision,
integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist Army combatants. The SC secretariat
will take charge of supervision, including the monitoring functions currently carried
out by UNMIN. Detailed guidelines for this purpose are contained in the directives
for supervision, control, direction and code of conduct for the Maoist Army
combatants 2067, issued by SC on 17 September 2010 unanimously. Any issues that
are not adequately covered by the above directives will be dealt by SC as and when
required.

2.

Monitoring of the Nepal Army and arms
According to clause 10.5 of the Comprehensive Peace Accord, the concept of
two sides is no longer relevant. It is further evidenced by the formation of the
Maoist-led government in 2008-2009. Articles 144 and 145 of the Interim
Constitution of Nepal and the Nepal Army Act 2007 provide detailed guidance for
the management, control and monitoring of the Nepal Army. Rigorous
implementation of the above by designated agencies of the State would ensure the
required monitoring of the Nepal Army. Furthermore, the Government of Nepal has
already prepared a report for the democratization of the Nepal Army and the report
has been sent to the political parties represented in the Constituent Assembly and the
State Affairs Committee in the Parliament for their consideration.

3.

Status of the Agreement on Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies
(AMMAA) and dispute resolution mechanism
Several mechanisms, including commissions and committees, are envisaged
and agreed between the political parties for dispute resolution and creating a
congenial environment through confidence-building measures for the success of the
ongoing peace process. The Special Committee is one of the major mechanisms to
manage any unresolved issues and other disputes that might come up in future.
AMMAA was agreed much before the Interim Constitution and the Constituent
Assembly poll. Subsequent developments have overtaken much of the provisions of

2

11-20186

S/2011/1

AMMAA. The mandate of SC and the Nepal Army Act 2063, both of which are in
accordance with the Interim Constitution of the country, cover most of the points of
AMMAA. However, as mentioned earlier, any points that are not covered both in
the mandate and the directives passed by SC and may come up as disputes in future
would be resolved by consensus in SC, where the major parties, including UCPN
(Maoist), are members.
With SC fully in charge of monitoring of Maoist Army combatants and arms
and the Nepal Army managed under existing constitutional and legal provisions,
there is no longer a need for any dispute resolution mechanism in addition to the
already agreed aforementioned mechanisms.
4.

Transfer of essential documents and equipment used by UNMIN
As the Special Committee is taking charge of all matters relating to the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist Army combatants, the transfer of all
materials to the Special Committee or to the appropriate mechanism designated by
SC is expected. It is essential to ensure smooth transition of the monitoring
functions previously carried out by UNMIN, and to maintain institutional memory,
relevant documents, equipment and logistics to carry out the remaining tasks ahead.
The following documents, materials and equipment related to the monitoring work
should be handed over to either SC or the designated mechanism:
1.

The containers with arms and ammunitions.

2.

Updated details of the arms and armies.

3.

Documents retained by the Joint Monitoring Coordination Committee
(JMCC).

4.

Barcode-readable software for both the combatants’ ID cards and
weapons.

5.

Any other equipment and materials.

The ultimate objective of the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist Army
combatants and related tasks is to bring the ongoing peace process to a meaningful
conclusion and to establish sustained peace and democracy in the country. All
parties concerned, including the Government, are committed to the earliest possible
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist Army combatants to ensure peace and
success of the constitution-making process in the country. Therefore, the abovementioned monitoring mechanism should be for the shortest possible period. The
major focus of SC is, therefore, to expedite the integration and rehabilitation process
rather than creating an additional complex supervision and monitoring mechanism.
We hope that, with the understanding and cooperation of all sides, the Special
Committee will be able to carry out all tasks regarding the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist Army combatants and other relevant responsibilities in a
smoother way.
(Signed) Bimal Prasad Wagle
Secretary

11-20186

3

S/2011/1

Annex II to the letter dated 5 January 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Letter dated 30 December 2010 from the Chairman of the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) to the Secretary-General
As you are well aware, after the historic people’s movement of April 2006, the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) decided to enter into the peace process,
station our combatants and store our weapons in the United Nations monitored
cantonments. Our decision was based on our Party’s unflinching commitment to and
faith in the United Nations and our reiterated conviction that the expertise of the
United Nations and its active involvement is required in Nepal to take the current
peace process to its logical conclusion.
The sovereign people of Nepal through the elections to the Constituent
Assembly held in 2008 made us the largest party in the House. However, despite our
strength in parliament, a loose coalition mostly run by those that were defeated in
the elections assumed power and since then this Government has made every effort
to discredit the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and publicly defame the
United Nations, and has tried its best to push Nepal back to conflict. Nevertheless,
this Government has resigned and its resignation has also been duly accepted by our
Head of State. With a status of a caretaker, this administration cannot take farreaching decisions, a limitation which it has violated by asking UNMIN to leave on
15 January 2011.
Additionally, our Constitution under article 147 categorically mentions the
Comprehensive Peace Accords and the Agreement on Monitoring of Arms and Army
Management reached on 21 November 2006 and 8 December 2006, respectively, in
which the role and function of UNMIN has been stipulated. Hence, the exit of
UNMIN without the completion of the peace process or an amendment of the
Constitution will lead to a Constitutional crisis in our country.
Currently, we are in the process of forming a new Government, but this
caretaker administration is conspiring to delay the election for the new Prime
Minister until after 15 January 2011, when the term of UNMIN expires.
Against this backdrop, on behalf of my Party and myself, I would like to
officially request an extension of the UNMIN tenure, which is essential for the sake
of peace and democracy in Nepal. In case this is not possible, I would like to request
you to set up a United Nations political office to follow up the peace process. I am
hopeful that the United Nations, under your able leadership, will not abandon
Nepal’s peace process midway and thereby promote conflict and violence in a
country which has twice been elected to the United Nations Security Council.
(Signed) Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”
Chairman, UCPN (Maoist) and Former Prime Minister
Kathmandu, Nepal

4

11-20186

S/2011/1

Annex III to the letter dated 5 January 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Letter dated 4 January 2011 from the Chairman of the Unified Communist Party
of Nepal (Maoist) to the Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal
We would like to inform you that the letter of the office of the Prime Minister and
Council of Ministers dated 31 December 2010, written to your office, has drawn the
serious attention of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (UCPN). Our Party
expresses strong objections to that letter and wishes to clarify its position as follows:
1.

The Government’s argument that the Special Committee (SC) will
automatically take charge of the tasks done by the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), according to its mandate, after UNMIN
leaves, is totally against the letter and spirit of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and Agreement on Monitoring of the Management of
Arms and Armies (AMMAA) as provided in article 147 of the Interim
Constitution of Nepal. Our Party takes it as a misinterpretation and
violation of CPA and AMMAA and totally disagrees with it. Without any
further understanding and agreement among the concerned parties of the
peace process, SC cannot do the work which UNMIN is doing.

2.

The exclusion of the Nepal Army from the purview of monitoring by the
mechanism which monitors the People’s Liberation Army combatants is
totally against CPA and AMMAA and cannot be agreed to.

3.

CPA and AMMAA are the fundamental basis of our peace process,
without any additional understanding and agreements. The Government’s
unilateral conception that SC is fully competent to perform all the tasks
of the peace process, including monitoring, integration and rehabilitation,
is totally against those agreements.

4.

UCPN (Maoist) strongly objects to the Government’s request for the
transfer of documents and equipment used by UNMIN, while
implementing its mandate to SC. In this respect, our Party requests
UNMIN not to hand over those materials to SC or the Government
without any further understanding and agreements among the concerned
parties of the peace process, the major political parties and the
Government. Those materials, including arms and ammunition, are very
sensitive parts of the peace process. To hand over such sensitive
materials, which are under the jurisdiction of UNMIN, without consensus
among the concerned parties of the peace process and major political
parties, will be strongly objectionable to us. This may even risk the
breaching of the peace process itself.

We believe that UNMIN will take our concerns seriously and will not act
according to the unilateral letter of the Government. We also hope that UNMIN will
brief the United Nations Security Council about our concern raised in this letter.
(Signed) Prachanda
Chairman

11-20186

5
