66

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

l. Decides, as an interim measure, to authorize the
Secretary-General to draw on the Working Capital Fund
in the amount of $25,000 in 1973 for assistance to Governments, at their request, in co-operation with the organizations of the United Nations system and the League
of Red Cross Societies, where appropriate, in the
elaboration of national preparations to meet natural
disasters;
2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to explore
various means, including support through the United
Nations Development Programme, of making adequate
provision subsequently for this purpose and to report
on this matter to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

3009 (XXVII), Employment of women in senior
and other professional positions by the
secretariats of organizations in the United
Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling the declarations and instruments adopted
by the United Nations acknowledging the equality of
status of men and women-inter alia, the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 18 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights18 and the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women 19-and also relevant instruments of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Recalling its resolution 2715 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, in which it requested the Secretary-General
to include in his report to the General Assembly on
the composition of the Secretariat data on the employment of women at senior and other professional levels,
including their numbers and the positions they occupy,
Noting with appreciation that the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat
submitted to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session20 included for the first time some information
on the employment of women, showing the number
of women and the level at which they were employed
in senior and professional positions within the secretariats of organizations in the United Nations system,
and that a further report has been submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session21 which
likewise includes data on the employment of women,
Noting that, as at 30 June 1972, no women were
employed within the United Nations Secretariat at the
Under-Secretary-General or Assistant-Secretary-General level, that only three of the total of 59 employed
at the D-2 level were women, and that only four of
the total of 181 employed at the D-1 level were
women,
Further noting that in the less senior and professional ranks of the Secretariat the percentage of women
is in inverse proportion to the level of the position,
18 See resolution 2200 A

(XXI), annex.

19 Resolution 2263 (XXII).
20 A/8483.
2 1 A/8831 and Corr. I and Add.1.

ranging from 6.2 per cent of the staff at the P-5
level to 40.4 per cent at the P-1 level in posts subject
to geographical distribution, and from 7.3 per cent
at the P-5 level to 39.8 per cent at the P-1 level for
the Secretariat as a whole,
Noting as well that in all the other organizations
in the United Nations common system there are no
women at the highest levels, only one woman employed
at the D-2 level and only 10 women at the D-1 level,
l. Notes with satisfaction the recent appointment
by the Secretary-General of a woman to the rank of
Assistant Secretary-General and hopes that more women
will be appointed to positions at high levels of the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
annual report to the General Assembly on the composition of the Secretariat more comprehensive data
on the employment of women in the secretariats of
the organizations in the United Nations system, so as
to show the nature of posts and types of duties performed by women at the professional and policy-making
levels;
3. Urges once again the organizations in the United
Nations system to take or continue to take appropriate
measures, including more extensive publk:izing of the
right of individuals personally to apply for vacant
positions, in order to ensure equal opportunities for
the employment of qualified women at the senior and
professional levels and in policy-making positions;
. 4. Calls upof! Member States, when proposing naho~a.ls for_ appomtment to the senior and profession.ii
pos1t1oi:is m t~e secretariats of the organizations in
the Umted Nations system, to give full consideration to
submitting the candidatures of qualified women for all
positions, particularly at the policy-making level.
2113th plenary meeting
18 Deccmher 1972
3010 (XXVII).

International Womrn's Yt•ar

The General Assembly,
Considering that twenty-five years have elapsed since
the first session of the Commission on the Status of
Women was held at Lake Success, New York, from
10 to 24 February 1947, and that this is a period
which makes it possible to take stock of the positive
results obtained,
Bearing in mind the aims and principles of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, adopted by the General Assembly in rernlution 2263 (XXII) of 7 November 1967,
Recognizing the effectiveness of the work done by
the Commission on the Status of Women in the twentyfive ~ear~ since. its establishment, an<l the important
contnbut1on which women have made to the social
political, economic and cultural life of their countries'
Considering that it is necessary to strengthen uni~
versa! recognition of the principle of the equality of
men and women, de jure and de facto, and that both
legal and ~ocial measures have to be taken by Member
States which have not yet done so to ensure the implementation of women's rights,
Recalling that its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970, containing the Intcrnationa 1 Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Develop-

Resolutions adopted on the report■ of the Third Committee

ment Decade, includes among the goals and objectives
of the Decade the encouragement of the full integration of women in the total development effort,
Drawing attention to the general objectives and
minimum targets to be attained in the course of the
Second United Nations Development Decade, as defined by the Commission on the Status of Women
and adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2716 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
Considering that, with those ends in view, the proclamation of an international women's year would
serve to intensify the action required to advance the
status of women,
l. Proclaims the year 1975 International Women's
Year;
2. Decides to devote this year to intensified action:
(a) To promote equality between men and women;
(b) To ensure the full integration of women in the
total development effort, especially by emphasizing
women's responsibility and important role in ~conomic,
social and cultural development at the national, regional and international levels, particularly during the
Second United Nations Development Decade;
(c) To recognize the importance of women's increasing contribution to the development of friendly
relations and co-operation among States and to the
strengthening of world peace;
3. Invites all Member States and all interested organizations to take steps to ensure the full realization
of the rights of women and their advancement on the
basis of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
4. Invites Governments that have not yet done so
to ratify as soon as possible the Convention concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers
for Work of Equal Value, 1951,22 adopted by the
International Labour Conference at its thirty-fourth
session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
consultation with Member States, specialized agencies and interested non-governmental organizations,
within the limits of existing resources, a draft programme for the International Women's Year and to submit it to the Commission on the Status of Women at
its twenty-fifth session in 1974.

2 I 13th plenary meeting
18 December I 972
3011 (XXVII).

Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2393 (XXHI) of 26 November 1968 and 2857 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1656 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
Noting with interest that, in implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions, additional information on
capital punishment has been provided by several Member States,:.i:i
22 International Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No.
100, p. 795.
2a ST/SOA/118 and Add.I.

67

1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the
report to be submitted to the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-fourth session in such a way as to
update the reports on capital punishment24 provided in
1962 and 1967 and to inform the Council of the progress made in collecting the information requested in
paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2857
(XXVI);
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider at its fifty-fourth session the present situation
and trends with regard to capital punishment.

2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3012 (XXVU).

Assistance in narcotics control

The General Assembly,
Recalling that assistance to developing countries is
a concrete manifestation of the will of the international community to honour the commitment contained
in the Charter of the United Nations to promote the
social and economic progress of all peoples,
Recalling the special arrangements made by the General Assembly under its resolution 1395 (XIV) of
20 November 1959 with a view to the provision of
technical assistance in narcotics control,
Reaffirming its resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, in which it welcomed the establishment
of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1664 (LII) of 1 June 1972, in which the
Council urged States, institutions and individuals to
contribute to the Fund in any form and according to
their capacity,
1. Welcomes the fact that the Economic and Social
Council expressed satisfaction with the successful result of the United Nations Conference to Consider
Amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, particularly that a new article 14 bis2 6
was adopted concerning technical and financial assistance to promote more effective execution of the
provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961;26
2. Declares that, to be more effective, the measures
to fight drug abuse must be co-ordinated and universal;
3. Declares further that the fulfilment by the developing countries of their obligations under the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, calls for adequate technical and financial assistance from the international community.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3013 (XXVII). International instruments
relating to drug ahm;e control

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1658 (LII) and 1665 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
24 Capital Punishment (United Nations publication, Sales
No.: E.67.lV.15).
as See E/CONF.63/8, p. 10.
2'United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
