S/PV.8598

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8598th meeting

Tuesday, 20 August 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-25779 (E)
*1925779*

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

destroyed. This is sometimes the case for a generation,
as the time needed for that rekindling of community so
central to a living country is no small thing.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: One month ago, I stated to the
Security Council that we are facing a crucial moment
in the destiny of the conflict in Yemen (see S/PV.8578).
Events since then have, if anything, made this moment
even more crucial. As we have seen in Aden and
Abyan, questions regarding Yemen’s future are being
posed more forcefully than before. The fragmentation
of Yemen is becoming a stronger and more pressing
threat, which of course makes our efforts in the Yemeni
peace process more urgent than ever. There is no time
to lose. The stakes are becoming too high for the
future of Yemen, the Yemeni people and, indeed, the
wider region.
I remember vividly one senior Yemeni leader
saying to me some months ago:
“What we want — all that we want — is the return
of civility in our lives, to return Yemen to the social
fabric that has nurtured its people for centuries”.
He was right. The immediate tragedy of death, injury,
disease and hunger happens within a context of the
destruction of the State and of society. A civil war is
a curse upon a country’s people. The conflict is fought
out in the streets and in the countryside where live the
civilians, and their lives are changed, damaged and
2/14

20/08/2019

Yemen cannot wait. Since the previous briefing,
I had an opportunity to meet with representatives of
the Yemeni parties and the international community,
and the parties continue to assure me of their strong
desire for a political solution. I believe that they and the
international community also share my sense of urgency
to move forward with the discussions on a solution to
end the conflict and resume the political transition.
This sense of urgency is in painful contrast to our
efforts so far to resolve the conflict. Every single step
that we have discussed in the Security Council Chamber
these many months has been fought over, negotiated,
stressed and delayed. Nothing comes easily in Yemen.
For example, when I started this assignment, in the early
months of 2018, I was given clear assurances that the
opening of Sana’a airport was imminent. We are still
waiting. Even the mercy flights, painfully negotiated
over many months by my colleague Lise Grande and the
World Health Organization, have yet to begin. And the
Stockholm Agreement, a confidence-building measure
with a simple humanitarian purpose, has demonstrated
how vulnerable such agreements are when commitment
to a peaceful solution wavers. The list of frustrations is
long, and it must not grow longer.
Before I turn to the situation on the front lines and
in Aden, I would like to provide a few updates on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and other
developments in Yemen. The core of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement is the governorate-wide ceasefire and the
humanitarian imperative of maintaining the flow of
life-saving assistance through its three ports. To this
day, eight months later, there have been no major
military operations in the city of Al-Hudaydah or in
the surrounding area, and there has been a sustained
reduction in violence, as we have so often observed in
the Security Council. Aid continues to move through
the ports, which is, by itself, a major achievement,
that continues to benefit the civilian population in
Al-Hudaydah, first, but also elsewhere in Yemen, who
rely on that humanitarian pipeline.
Implementing the remaining parts of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement will be an important step
on the way towards resuming the political process to
which I have just referred. I am encouraged by the
ongoing communication with both parties and their
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

commitment to an enhanced ceasefire mechanism
under the leadership of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), which
has recently been discussed in the Redeployment
Coordination Committee under auspices of UNMHA.
Together with my colleagues in the Mission, we are
continuing our efforts to drive the process for the
redeployment of forces and the establishment and
operation of a tripartite monitoring mechanism. Since
the previous briefing, we have presented a proposal to
the parties to make further progress on implementing
the first phase of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. I expect
a final official response from both by 25 August; I am
confident that it will be forthcoming. It is clear from my
discussions with the parties that they are considering
the proposal very carefully.
I would like to add that the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement was only ever intended to be a temporary
measure to avert further conflict. It was intended to
be a humanitarian stop-gap. It was not designed, as
some might think, to set a precedent for addressing the
underlying issues of the conflict, the most central of
which, of course, is the issue of sovereignty. Following
many months of negotiations, both parties are fully
aware of what the other is able to accept, and I hope,
based on that knowledge, their responses to me by
the beginning of next week will be constructive and
practical on the way forward.
I am very encouraged that we now have an
agreement — to which I think my colleague Ursula
Mueller will also refer, and I hope there is no overlap
on this point in our briefings — on facilitating access
for a United Nations assessment mission scheduled to
be deployed, I think, on 27 August, to assess the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, the dilapidated vessel near the port of
Ras Isa, with its cargo of oil. The assessment mission,
under the auspices of the United Nations Office for
Project Services, is critical to mitigating the risk of
severe environmental consequences along the Yemeni
shore of the Red Sea, as we have discussed here in
the Chamber.
Negotiations on the implementation of the
exchanges of prisoners and detainees are ongoing.
It is a fundamentally humanitarian gesture, which
numerous civil society groups, particularly women’s
groups, have vocally advocated, publicly and privately.
The parties sat for several days in Stockholm, and in
subsequent months held detailed technical discussions
here in Amman. The slow pace of those negotiations

S/PV. 8598

is prolonging the suffering of the prisoners and their
families. I believe that we should be able to address the
concerns of both parties to the proposal that I have put
on the table in front of them, to which I referred before.
I hope that it receives a positive response.
Like everyone, I am frustrated that progress
on Al-Hudaydah has not been quicker, that I am not
able to announce more dramatic developments on
the Agreement and that there has been no tangible
implementation of the agreements on Taiz or on the
exchanges of prisoners and detainees to which I have
just referred. The Stockholm Agreement is a key
milestone in Yemen’s peace process, and it would be
of considerable benefit to the parties and the Yemeni
people were it to be fully implemented. But it is also
clear that we must not allow the implementation of it to
override our broader imperative to bring the conflict to
an end; indeed, again, Yemen cannot wait.
Military operations have continued in several
governorates, including Sana’a, Sa’dah, Taiz, Al-Jawf,
Al-Baydah, Hajjah and Al-Dhale’e, as well as on
Yemen’s border with Saudi Arabia. The continued
impact of the military operation on civilians, as I am
sure we will hear from my colleague, is horrifying,
including the attack on a market in Sa’dah, in late July,
and I also, of course, condemn the continued attacks by
Ansar Allah targeting civilian infrastructure in Saudi
Arabia, including the recent extension of that targeting
to civilian facilities in the eastern part of the country.
Further threats to civilian life, further events of this
kind and acts of military provocation only inevitably
deepen the divide between the parties, increase the
impact of the conflict beyond Yemen’s borders and
postpone the attention that we all believe is required to
the efforts to bring a resolution to the conflict.
I turn now to events in Aden and Abyan. These
events show us the complexity and volatility of the
challenge that we face in achieving peace and the
dangers should we not succeed. We certainly cannot
underestimate the risks that these events pose for the
future of Yemen.
On 7 August, following attacks in Aden a few
days before, clashes broke out between presidential
protection brigades and forces affiliated with the
Southern Transitional Council. Subsequently, the
Southern Transitional Council took control of military
camps and surrounded key State institutions in Aden
by force. Last night forces affiliated with the Southern

19-257793/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

Transitional Council also took further steps to increase
their military control in the neighbouring governorate
of Abyan. That violence has led to the deaths of dozens
of civilians and injury to hundreds more. I am alarmed
by that violence, as, I am sure, will be the members
of the Security Council. I condemn the unacceptable
efforts by the Southern Transitional Council to take
control of State institutions by force.
I also deplore the harassment of Yemenis of northern
origin in Aden that preceded these recent events, such
as through physical violence, forced displacement and
denial of freedom of movement, including the targeting
of Government officials and their supporters.
Simply stated, a continuation of this current
situation is simply untenable. The functioning of State
institutions will almost certainly break down further,
and daily life for the people will become even more
difficult than is already the case. There is indeed a grave
and present risk of further damage to Yemen’s social
fabric and of the spread of violence to other southern
governorates. At this time, it is frankly difficult to
know where these events will lead us.
I am grateful to all those Member States, including
members of the Council, that have called for restraint
and dialogue. In particular, I welcome the efforts of the
coalition to restore calm and the efforts exerted by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in particular to convene a
dialogue in Jeddah to discuss the situation and resolve
its difficulties.
I believe it essential that that meeting take place
in the very near future so as to prevent a further
deterioration of the security and safety of Yemen’s
citizens in the south and to ensure the continuity of
governance, security and basic service provision in
Aden and other relevant areas, under the exclusive
authority of the State.
In this context, and with these events in mind, we
must also be alive to the danger of the resurgence of
the activities of violent extremist groups. The Council
will recall that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has
taken control of the capitals of Abyan and Hadramaut
for significant periods of time in recent years. During
the past month alone, we have seen attacks by Al-Qaida
and by the so-called Islamic State in Aden, Abyan and
Al-Baydah governorates. The further fragmentation
of the security situation in Aden and other areas
almost certainly will allow those activities to expand
and gather momentum once again, as we have seen
4/14

20/08/2019

before, with a terrible impact on the civilian population
and on prospects for future stability in this key
strategic location.
The situation on the ground is changing with great
speed. We need to seize any opportunities for progress,
and the United Nations remains committed to inclusive
dialogue to resolve differences and to address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including southern
groups, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.
As recent events remind us, long-term questions
about Yemen’s future remain unresolved. I believe that
these can be resolved only through peaceful political
means. That is why I have always talked with numerous
groups from southern governorates as well as elsewhere
in Yemen and have long advocated for their inclusion
in the peace process. There is a range of views to be
taken into account in any dialogue on the future of
Yemen, and we need all of its citizens to assist us in
making sure that future is stable and secure. This is of
vital importance to the efforts to end the conflict and
to ensure the resumption of the political transition that
has been interrupted in recent years.
I hope that all Yemeni stakeholders from all parts of
the country take the events in Aden as a clear sign that
the current conflict must be brought to an end swiftly
and peacefully and in a manner that addresses the needs
of Yemenis across the country. The implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement is politically significant and
has had tangible benefit on the ground, but surely that
cannot be a precondition for achieving peace in all of
Yemen. Every additional day of this conflict adds to the
tragedy and the misery; no country can tolerate these
stresses and the stresses of internal conflict indefinitely.
And, finally, Yemen cannot wait.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: Events in Yemen over the past several
weeks have shown yet again just how volatile and
devastating this war is. Its impact is seen most clearly
in the suffering and injustice inflicted on millions of
civilians. For months now we have advocated progress
on five key priorities to reduce the suffering in Yemen.
The Security Council endorsed those priorities in its
resolution 2451 (2018).
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to review where these five priorities
stand today, specifically: first, respect for international
humanitarian law; secondly, unhindered humanitarian
access; thirdly, funding for the United Nations response
plan; fourthly, the economy; and, fifthly, the urgent
need for peace.
First, with regard to respect for international
humanitarian law, unfortunately, the conduct of
hostilities in Yemen continues to have devastating
consequences for civilians and civilian infrastructure.
As we heard, fighting in Aden earlier this month
between Government forces and forces affiliated
with the Southern Transitional Council resulted in
300 killed or injured, civilians among them. For days,
residents were trapped in their homes as clashes,
including using heavy weapons, raged in densely
populated neighbourhoods. Houses were damaged or
destroyed, and the pipes of a major water system were
damaged, temporarily restricting the water supply to
200,000 people.
Violence has since subsided in Aden, although
tensions remain, but fierce fighting continues
elsewhere, including in Abyan last night. Last week,
strikes on a family home in Hajjah killed 12 civilians,
including six children; another 16 were wounded. The
week before that, an attack on a market in Sa’ada killed
or injured 40 people as they shopped for food and other
necessities. Eighteen children were among the victims.
The images from those and similar incidents are
the stuff of nightmares. De-escalation across Yemen is
urgently needed, ideally through a nationwide ceasefire
that would end all violence.
But ceasefire or not, all parties must uphold
international humanitarian law. All feasible steps
must be taken to avoid harm to civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Such steps include verifying targets,
taking precautions in the choice of weapons and
cancelling an attack if it is expected to cause
disproportionate civilian harm.
The second point relates to humanitarian access.
Let me begin with some good news. After months of
discussion, the World Food Programme (WFP) and
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities have now signed an
agreement that includes detailed technical procedures
to protect food aid from being diverted. The agreement
will also strengthen the methods used to identify the
people who need food assistance. Delays in finalizing
the agreement have meant that the WFP had to, as a

S/PV. 8598

last resort, suspend food assistance to 850,000 people
in Sana’a city two months ago. Distributions are
now restarting.
As mentioned by the Special Envoy, Ansar Allah
authorities have also approved plans for a United Nations
assessment of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. After years
without maintenance, the tanker is at risk of rupturing.
It is storing an estimated 1.1 million barrels of oil,
and a spill would create a major environmental and
humanitarian disaster. The United Nations assessment
team arrived in Djibouti today and is scheduled to
travel to the tanker next week. Cooperation and support
from all stakeholders are key to this work.
While we welcome these steps forward, we
must also emphasize that many problems remain
unresolved. Humanitarian agencies continue to face
severe restrictions. In the north, Ansar Allah-affiliated
authorities have imposed more than 50 formal directives
and dozens of informal directives in recent months.
These directives at times overlap or contradict each other.
They are further complicated by a continuous stream of
unofficial changes and new policies. Currently, more
than 100 humanitarian projects are awaiting agreement
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north.
In
Government-controlled
areas,
official
regulations are less heavy, but delays persist in getting
humanitarian projects up and running. Allow me
to cite a specific example. The multi-donor Yemen
Humanitarian Fund currently has 39 projects awaiting
clearance. Those projects are ready to assist 2.5 million
people across the country through cholera programmes,
emergency food, nutrition and protection services.
Thirty-two of the 39 projects are stuck with Ansar
Allah-affiliated authorities in the north, while the rest
are awaiting approval by the Government of Yemen. On
average, they have been stalled for more than 90 days.
It is difficult to understand why such lengthy delays
are necessary in a severe emergency. International
humanitarian law requires all parties to take steps to
facilitate humanitarian relief for civilians in need.
Beyond bureaucratic impediments, agencies also
continue to face movement restrictions, interference
and harassment, as well as insecurity.
However, despite these challenges, the United
Nations and partners are staying and delivering.
As tensions rose in Aden in early August, the World
Health Organization and UNICEF, working with health

19-257795/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

authorities, vaccinated nearly 400,000 people against
cholera. When clashes erupted the following week,
more than 300 United Nations staff remained in Aden,
and they will continue to do so. A regular United
Nations flight arrived in Aden yesterday, bringing in
additional humanitarian workers.
Yemen remains the world’s largest humanitarian
operation, with food, water, health care and other services
being provided across the country. Humanitarian
agencies working through the United Nations response
plan are assisting an average of 12 million people every
month. But much of this is about to stop.
That brings me to my third point, namely, funding
for the aid operation. Since last month’s briefing
(see S/PV.8578), there has been no major increase in
funding for the 2019 response plan. Only 34 per cent of
plan requirements have been met. At this time last year,
the humanitarian response plan was 65 per cent funded,
thanks to generous contributions from the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well
as many other donors. That funding saved millions of
lives. Since the pledging conference six months ago,
nearly all donors have paid most or all of their 2019
pledges. Some have paid even more. But the largest
donors, Yemen’s neighbours in the coalition, have so
far paid only a modest share of what they promised.
Essential programmes are now closing down. The
Council heard last month about the cancellation of
vaccination campaigns, supplies for health facilities
and cholera prevention programmes. The cuts are now
much deeper. In the next few days, water and sanitation
programmes will stop in four governorates, leaving
300,000 displaced people at extreme risk of cholera. By
the end of September, such programmes for a further
1 million people will also stop. In September, we will
be forced to shut down life-saving programmes for
2.5 million malnourished children. As an immediate
consequence, more than 23,000 babies suffering
from severe malnutrition — babies whose lives could
otherwise be saved — will risk death.
This is a tragedy because we know that, with
adequate resources, we can save millions of lives and
reduce people’s suffering. We know that we can roll
back cholera because we did it last year. A smart, highly
effective cholera response saw new cases plummet from
1 million in 2017 to 380,000 in 2018. But new cases
have already exceeded half a million this year. We have
6/14

20/08/2019

also recorded more than 800 deaths, more than five
times as many as we saw in the same period last year.
We also know we can prevent famine, because we
are doing it right now. A new assessment has found
that the risk of famine, although still very serious,
might be receding in some places. This comes after we
doubled food aid in areas with the worst hunger and
expanded other programmes. Without funding, we will
lose this initial progress and the risk of famine will
again intensify.
And we also know that the United Nations and our
partners are uniquely placed to deliver positive results.
Our programmes reach all 333 districts across Yemen.
Our nationwide presence and relationships enable
us to assist people in all locations based strictly on
their needs.
Independent third-party monitoring confirms that
the overwhelming majority of our aid goes where it
is supposed to. When concerns emerge, we act. The
Council saw this in June when the WFP suspended
food aid in Sana’a over diversion concerns, which have
now been addressed. Individual agencies also maintain
rigorous internal controls. United Nations agencies
commissioned eight internal audits this year, and three
more are planned.
The fourth point is the economy — a key driver
of humanitarian needs that is getting worse. Yemen’s
currency is again losing value, sinking to YRI600 to the
dollar, versus YRI215 before the crisis. A recent report
by the International Monetary Fund predicts further
depreciation, with inflation rates up to 45 per cent. That
means prices of food, fuel and other essentials — almost
all of which must be imported — will rise even higher
for ordinary Yemenis. Many people already cannot
afford current prices.
In the past, substantial injections of foreign exchange
through the Central Bank of Yemen have stabilized the
exchange rate. We hope Yemen’s partners will again
provide that support. At the same time, we understand
that the Government is considering new regulations on
commercial fuel imports. Fuel is essential to running
generators, distributing food to markets and carrying
out many other activities. Its availability is also a key
determinant for the prices of food, water and other
essentials. The use of any mechanism to regulate those
imports risks worsening the humanitarian situation.
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The final point is peace. Only a political solution in
Yemen can sustainably address the country’s enormous
humanitarian crisis. The Council recognized that
important link in resolution 2451 (2018). We call on all
stakeholders to support the Special Envoy’s efforts to
end the conflict as swiftly as possible. Peace is needed
now more than ever.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
I will focus in my statement on two issues,
namely, political and security developments and
humanitarian developments.
With regard to the former, it has been eight months
since the Stockholm Agreement entered into force — a
period characterized by stalemate and failure to make
any concrete progress. That runs counter to the wishes
of the Security Council, in particular on the need to
advance towards a political solution based on a United
Nations-sponsored dialogue and resolutions 2451
(2018), 2452 (2019) and 2481 (2019), as well as a number
of press statements that stress the need to implement
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement in full.
The Stockholm Agreement has not been the
subject of any constructive measures to achieve its
goals. The blockade on Taiz started four years ago and
continues to this day. There has not been any progress
on implementing the memorandum of understanding
on Taiz or the agreement to exchange prisoners and
detainees. Parties continue to struggle to implement
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and to complete the first
phase, but that will be impossible without respecting
the understandings and agreements reached through
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, especially
those regarding the concept of operations.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy and
his proposals to end the deadlock on the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. We stress the need for
such efforts to be based on understandings that would
ensure that the Yemeni Government can exercise full
sovereignty across its territory.

S/PV. 8598

We reiterate our established position that there is
no military solution to the crisis in Yemen. We stress
the need to ensure military de-escalation, as noted by
the Special Envoy a while ago. It is extremely important
to fully and concretely implement the three elements of
the Stockholm Agreement as the optimal path towards
resuming the next round of consultations, which would
focus on the broader aspects of ending the crisis.
With regard to security developments, the State of
Kuwait condemns, in the strongest terms, the continued
attacks against civilian and vital infrastructure in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The most recent
attack was on the Shaybah oilfield. We fully support
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the measures it is
taking to ensure its security, stability and territorial
integrity. The Houthis’ continued and escalated attacks
against Saudi territories are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and a clear and direct
threat to regional security and stability. In that regard,
we stress the need to fully implement the arms embargo
as per relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are concerned about recent developments in
Aden and look forward to the efforts of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to host a dialogue in Jeddah between
the Yemeni Government and representatives of the
Southern Transitional Council. We hope that the
dialogue will lead to the return of security and stability
to Aden, while ensuring the unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.
Pertaining to the humanitarian situation, it is still
difficult in Yemen due to the ongoing crisis and increased
challenges of lack of food, the spread of diseases and
obstacles to humanitarian efforts. The World Food
Programme had to suspend its operations in Sana’a for
two months before resuming them few days ago after
receiving certain assurances, including to not divert
humanitarian assistance from its main destination.
We once again call on all parties to cooperate with
humanitarian and relief agencies, not obstruct their
work and ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
workers, whom we thank and commend for their
tireless efforts to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need, despite the difficulties
they are facing.
In conclusion, we renew our call on all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, as well as the exchange
of prisoners and the understandings on Taiz. That would

19-257797/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

complement the efforts made by the Special Envoy to
reach a political solution based on the agreed three terms
of reference — the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015).
That would end the crisis in Yemen and safeguard its
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity and ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, for his detailed briefing. We are also grateful
to the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her equally thorough, concise
and clear briefing.
I would like to begin my statement today by
expressing our deep concern about the escalation of
attacks and clashes in Yemen this month, first in Aden
and, until recently, in Sana’a. All those clashes kill and
harm civilians. The destruction of basic infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and shopping centres, as
we have seen, only worsens the living conditions of
the citizens, who are have been suffering through the
conflict since it began almost five years ago.
We call on all the parties concerned in Yemen not to
unleash new attacks and to continue with the settlement
tracks proposed by the Council and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, in respect of all resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015) and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, by taking urgent steps to bring such attacks
to an end.
The Government of Yemen and the Houthi
movement must continue to work towards advancing
the goals of the Stockholm Agreement. In that regard,
we welcome the successful meeting that the parties held
last month on a United Nations vessel in the Red Sea,
under the leadership of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
during which they were reached an agreement on the
operational details of the entire redeployment envisaged
in the Stockholm talks. We hope that in that same spirit
they will subsequently be able to address the agreement
on local security forces, as well as the issue of revenue
and governance. Similarly, significant progress
should be facilitated on the other dimensions of the
results reached in Stockholm, such as the exchange of
prisoners, which would foster trust between the parties.
8/14

20/08/2019

Our delegation laments the terrible humanitarian
situation that the Yemeni people have long been
enduring. Civil society is increasingly affected,
especially by hunger. Three-fourths of the Yemeni
population require humanitarian assistance, given that
the country has been suffering a blockade, which has
left more than 22 million people without access to food,
medicine and other basic products for their survival.
There are 2.3 million people who have been
displaced from their homes, and, in more than four
years, 65,000 civilians have been killed or injured,
according United Nations data. Powerful data from the
International Committee of the Red Cross indicate that,
owing to the events that have occurred in Aden this
month, the city’s hospitals are experiencing significant
difficulties and urgently need basic items.
We therefore reiterate our full support for the
humanitarian workers and their efforts in that difficult
context. They must also be protected. Commercial
and humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed,
is obstacle-ridden by the closure of key access points
and other challenges that have plunged the country into
chaos. That is why we urge the parties to do their utmost
to facilitate the implementation of the humanitarian
response plan and ensure that measures are adopted
that fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Lastly, as we have reiterated on several occasions
here in the Chamber, and in agreement with the other
delegations, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes
that the only way to resolve the conflict in Yemen is
through political means, and we hope to always have
the full support of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the review of the situation in Yemen. We commend
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their
substantive and insightful briefings.
Côte d’Ivoire, like the entire international
community, remains deeply concerned about the risk of
stalemate in the conflict in Yemen, with its devastating
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.
The deadlock in the political process, as well as the
violent fighting in recent days in Aden, particularly
near the international airport, constitute a significant
escalation in the situation.
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The opening of new fronts that deepen the
fragmentation of the Yemeni conflict reveal its
complexity and underscore the urgent need to include
all parties in the peace process. Moreover, the attacks
on Saudi infrastructure, which my delegation strongly
condemns, are likely to undermine regional security
and stability and the paltry achievements of the peace
process, including the ceasefire.
In the light of that worrisome situation, Côte
d’Ivoire reaffirms its conviction that there can be no
military solution to the crisis and reiterates its call
for a political settlement. In that regard, my country
welcomes the efforts of the regional forces that have
led to an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of
the Southern Transitional Council from key points in
Aden. Similarly, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of
the trilateral meeting in Tehran on 17 August, which
included Iranian representatives, the Houthi movement
and delegations from the United Kingdom, France,
Germany and Italy, with a view to finding a solution to
the political and humanitarian crises.
That initiative serves to highlight the need to
promote constructive dialogue among all the parties
to achieve a comprehensive agreement and a political
solution that, by necessity, would include the full
implementation the Stockholm agreements of December
2018. In that context, the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement seems to us essential.
We therefore urge all the parties, including those
with influence over the warring factions, to comply with
the ceasefire and continue the redeployment of military
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa, under the aegis of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, in accordance with the agreement on the
details of the concept of operations for the first and
second phases of the redeployment.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the urgent
deployment of local security forces in those ports, in
order to guarantee security and foster trust, as well as
to allow the population to benefit from the revenues
of those ports, in a country that has been bled dry,
particularly in terms of its free-falling economic
situation. Moreover, my delegation urges the parties to
expedite the process relating to the exchange of 15,000
prisoners and the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz, in order to facilitate
the opening of reliable humanitarian corridors.

S/PV. 8598

The humanitarian crisis in Yemen, considered the
worst in the world, remains a major concern for my
delegation. After several years of conflict, Yemen is
now a country on the verge of total collapse. According
to United Nations agencies, 24 million people are in
a humanitarian emergency and 10 million are in a
situation of acute food insecurity, not to mention the
3.3 million internally displaced persons. That already
alarming situation is further exacerbated by the
persistence of deliberate and unacceptable obstacles to
the delivery of food aid.
Мy delegation therefore urgently appeals to all
Yemeni parties to refrain from any instrumentalization
and manipulation of humanitarian assistance, which
constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). We
also call on them to respect the obligation to protect
civilians and put an end to the recruitment of child
soldiers. My country furthermore urges bilateral and
multilateral partners to continue their funding to
support humanitarian assistance aimed at saving lives,
alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people and
addressing the special needs of women and girls, who
are the most vulnerable in times of conflict.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for Mr. Martin Griffiths for his tireless efforts to
reach a political settlement to the Yemeni conflict
and for mobilizing the necessary resources to counter
the adverse effects of the humanitarian crisis. Côte
d’Ivoire strongly encourages the monitoring teams of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and the World Food Programme in their commitment
to creating the necessary environment for achieving
a definitive and sustainable resolution to the crisis
in Yemen.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me add
our thanks to Special Envoy Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings and the
tireless efforts of their teams.
The United States is deeply concerned about the
outbreak of violence and deadly clashes in Aden.
Violence plays into the hands of those who seek to
prolong this conflict, at the cost of the Yemeni people,
and exacerbates the humanitarian crisis that the United
Nations and others are working hard to address. We call
on the parties to respect the rule of law, adhere to the
agreed-upon ceasefire and participate in good faith in

19-257799/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

20/08/2019

reconciliation talks proposed by Saudi Arabia. Dialogue
represents the only way to achieve a stable, unified and
prosperous Yemen. Resolving the overall conflict and
finishing the work initiated by the National Dialogue
Conference is the best way for Yemenis to shape their
political future.

First, with regard to the political situation, we
continue to urge all parties involved in the war in
Yemen to cease hostilities and fully implement the
Stockholm Agreement. We believe that, in order to
achieve sustainable peace in Yemen, differences among
the parties cannot be resolved militarily.

In addition to maintaining the ceasefire, it is essential
that the parties continue to respect the Government
institutions that underpin economic stability, such as
the Aden branch of the Central Bank of Yemen, and that
they allow humanitarian aid workers unfettered access
to civilians affected by the unrest. We further call on
all parties respect Yemen’s territorial integrity.

In that regard, we call on all sides to carry out their
respective obligations as set forth in the Stockholm
Agreement. Its implementation is of paramount
importance, as it will assist in building confidence
among the parties and improve the chances of reaching
a broader political agreement. We welcome any positive
steps taken by the parties to resolve the conflict so far,
which help de-escalate tensions.

We are pleased to see a successful resolution to
the negotiations between the Houthis and the World
Food Programme (WFP) that enables the resumption
of general food distribution in Sana’a city and prevents
a worsening food security situation. It is critical that
the WFP and all humanitarian organizations be able
to operate and provide life-saving assistance without
the threat of diversion or corruption. We hope, for the
sake of Yemenis in need, that the Houthis signing of
that agreement means that the delivery of food aid will
continue for the duration of the crisis.
While humanitarian assistance will not solve
the conflict, it is critically important to the millions
of Yemenis whose lives depend on it. The stoppage
and reduction of humanitarian programmes seen this
year, as a result of severe funding gaps, underlines
the need for immediate financial support for the
Yemen response. As one of the largest humanitarian
contributors in Yemen, the United States once again
calls on all donors to step up assistance in Yemen and
fulfil immediately the financial commitments pledged
in Geneva in February.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller for their
briefings. South Africa wishes to express its support for
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy and commend
him on all the efforts that he is undertaking to find a
peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen.
My delegation would like to address two points in
our intervention today, namely, the political situation
and the humanitarian situation.
10/14

South Africa firmly believes that, in order to
ensure a long-term solution to the crisis in Yemen,
it is necessary for all parties to commit to a political
process. We continue to support a negotiated political
settlement that engages all parties in an inclusive all
Yemeni-led dialogue to resolve differences and address
the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The recent developments in southern Yemen are of
deep concern. We wish to encourage players in the region
to continue the process of seeking a solution to this
new development that will support the United Nationsmediated process and the Stockholm Agreement. We
are encouraged by positive developments in the region
to increase cooperation and work to achieve that goal.
We further call on all the countries of the region to
prioritize dialogue to address any political differences
that might exist.
Secondly, concerning the humanitarian situation,
South Africa remains extremely concerned about the
serious humanitarian crisis in Yemen. To date, over
15 million people — half the population of Yemen — are
facing starvation; 1.1 million people are affected by
cholera; and 3 million people have been forced to flee,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Vulnerable groups, especially women and children,
most often face the severe consequences of war, and
that is no different in Yemen. This unprecedented
humanitarian crisis of epic proportions is a strong
indicator of the human toll of continued military
action and conflict in Yemen, which requires an
urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a
negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis.
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

South Africa also calls on all parties to abide by
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We welcome the full reopening of the World
Food Programme’s aid distribution after its partial
closure in June. We remain hopeful that that critical aid
channel will remain open and free of misuse.
The continued violence by all parties to this
conflict is not conducive to peacebuilding measures.
To enable the latter, South Africa calls on all parties
to de-escalate the fighting in other parts of the country
and commit to a general ceasefire to enable dialogue
and inclusive peaceful negotiations.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict will be a negotiated,
Yemeni-led political settlement that is inclusive and
fair and that puts the interests and well-being of all the
citizens of Yemen first.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller,
for their briefings. China supports the Special Envoy
in advancing the political process in Yemen and
appreciates the tireless efforts of the United Nations
and its relevant agencies in improving the humanitarian
situation in the country.
We are deeply concerned about the recent
large-scale bloody clashes in Aden, and we welcome
the current de-escalation. Following the clashes, the
entire international community expressed its concern
about the situation in Aden. The Ambassadors to
Yemen from China, Russia, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France immediately issued a joint
statement expressing concern and urging peace talks.
We hope that all the parties concerned will act in the
best interests of Yemen and its people, exercise reason
and restraint, resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations and restore stability and normal life in
Yemen as soon as possible.
A political solution is the only way out for Yemen.
All the parties in Yemen should resolve issues by
political means, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, its
Implementation Mechanism and the outcome document
of the National Dialogue Conference. As countries of
the region play an important role in the issue of Yemen,
they should strengthen dialogue and cooperation with

S/PV. 8598

the United Nations to create the necessary conditions for
all parties in Yemen to ease tensions, enhance mutual
trust and dialogue and promote the political process.
The Security Council should remain united and
provide support to Yemen’s political process. The
Stockholm Agreement is an important step towards a
political solution to the Yemeni issue. We hope that it
will be implemented in earnest. Under United Nations
mediation, all parties in Yemen should continue to hold
dialogue and consultations on outstanding issues, such
as local security forces, port revenues and so on. The
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and the Redeployment Coordination Committee should
strengthen coordination to push for an early resolution
of relevant issues.
China supports maintaining Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. China
supports the role of the United Nations as the main
channel of mediation and will play an active and
constructive role in promoting the political settlement
process of the Yemeni issue.
It is the Yemeni people who suffer the most in the
country’s war. The international community should step
up its humanitarian assistance to Yemen. China hopes
that donor countries will strengthen their coordination
with the United Nations to make good on their pledges.
The parties concerned should ensure that humanitarian
supplies can reach all people and areas in need of
assistance. China has provided Yemen with multiple
shipments of humanitarian aid, including food and
medicine, through bilateral and multilateral channels,
and is willing to continue to do so to the best its ability.
China expects the prompt restoration of peace and
stability and the realization of development in Yemen
to enable its people to have a normal life.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s debate. We also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their useful briefings.
We would like to express our support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen in an attempt to prevent a further escalation
of the conflict and for the sense of duty that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
demonstrated in such difficult circumstances.
Peru deplores the ongoing violence in Yemen and
the unique impact that it has had in recent weeks on

19-2577911/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

the south of the country, following the clashes reported
in Aden between separatist forces and the legitimate
Government of Yemen, which could have led to the
fragmentation of Yemeni institutions. We hope that the
most recent developments that resulted in the partial
withdrawal of separatist forces from Government
positions in Aden will give way to strengthened dialogue
and a genuine commitment to reconciliation, which will
have a positive impact on the peace process promoted
by the United Nations. In that regard, the meeting
being proposed is timely and essential. Nonetheless,
we would like to express our deep concern about the
lack of tangible progress in the implementation of the
important agreements reached in Sweden, owing to
the rigid positions adopted by the parties, and how the
stalemate continues to undermine the momentum and
credibility of the peace process and affect the image of
the Organization.
In such circumstances, we would like to stress that
it is important for the Council and countries with the
greatest influence on the parties to exert the necessary
political pressure in order to reaffirm their commitment
to what was agreed in Stockholm and make their
positions more flexible on crucial issues, such as the
composition of local forces and the channelling of port
revenues through the Central Bank.
The Council must also be consistent with regard
to its responsibility to protect Yemeni civilians, in
particular when all parties to the conflict continue to
violate international law and international humanitarian
law. We also stress the importance of addressing in
tandem the humanitarian situation, which, as we just
heard from Ms. Mueller, appears to be deteriorating.
We are particularly concerned about the alarming
levels of food insecurity, the outbreak of diseases, such
as cholera, and the deterioration of economic indicators
that deepen the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Against that tragic backdrop, we wish to express
our full support for the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and other agencies deployed in Yemen
and reiterate the moral and legal duty to allow them
full access to those in need. That is why we continue
to expect that the recent agreement between the
World Food Programme and the Houthi authorities on
the selection and registration of the beneficiaries of
humanitarian assistance will be fully implemented.
Similarly, like other delegations and in line with
Ms. Mueller’s remarks, we await the disbursements
pledged at the donors conference in February to ensure
12/14

20/08/2019

that the operations of the humanitarian response plan
are no longer disrupted.
Lastly, our belief that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Yemen compels us to continue actively
supporting the work of the Special Envoy to end the
conflict and the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Ambassador Wronecka, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish you and the
delegation of friendly Poland every success.
I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
Current developments in Yemen complicate
international efforts and the efforts of the Council to
achieve a political settlement to the conflict in Yemen.
The solution would be based on the agreed terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). The current developments
also prolong the conflict and hamper efforts to end
the coup d’état staged by the rebellious Houthi armed
militias supported by Iran. The coup led to a large-scale
humanitarian disaster, while a settlement would lead to
the recovery of the hijacked State institutions and meet
the aspirations of the Yemeni people to build a new
federal Yemen based on justice, equality, the rule of
law, peace, security and development.
A few days ago, the temporary capital of Aden
and the State institutions were subjected to an armed
rebellion against the legitimate Government by the socalled Southern Transitional Council and its Security
Belt Forces, which receive financial, logistical and
media support from the United Arab Emirates. The
Yemeni Government reiterates its position as set out
in its Foreign Ministry communiqué of 10 August,
which described the events in Aden as an armed
rebellion that undermines Yemen’s stability, security
and unity and is at variance with the main aim of the
coalition that supports legitimacy in Yemen — ending
the coup d’état and Iran’s interference in Yemen and
19-25779

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the region. I would like to explicitly underscore that,
without the full support provided by the United Arab
Emirates to plan, stage and finance the rebellion, it
would not have happened. The disintegration plan is
full swing despite all the calls for calm from the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Yesterday’s attack in Abyan
governorate continues today against the military police
headquarters, a special security forces encampment
and other State institutions.
The Yemeni Government holds the Southern
Transitional Council and its supporter responsible for the
military rebellion. The Government further calls on the
United Arab Emirates to immediately cease providing
support to those rebellious militias, to conform with
the aims of the Coalition and to stop supporting plans
that would undermine the unity, security and stability
of Yemen as well as the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which leads the Coalition against the Iranian
plan in Yemen and the region.
The Yemeni Government values the distinct and
sincere position of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia expressed by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, and
Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al Saud, as well as the communiqués of the Arab
Coalition for supporting the legitimate Government
led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in particular
the communiqué dated 10 August, which calls on the
rebellious militias to withdraw from all civilian and
military facilities; allow for the return of legitimate
forces to such facilities; hand over weapons pillaged
from military bases; stop interfering in the functions
and works of State institutions; stop all violations
against innocent citizens and military, security and
civilian authorities throughout the regions controlled by
the Southern Transitional Council; and stop subjecting
the city of Aden and its peaceful population to further
chaos and fighting.
The Yemeni Government welcomed the call of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia addressed to the Yemeni Government and all
parties to meet in Jeddah in order to maintain the
constant Yemeni national interests. We dealt with it
positively and with high degree of flexibility knowing
the Kingdom’s good faith and sincere intentions.
Despite that call, forces of the Southern Transitional
Council supported by the United Arab Emirates have
continued at all levels the military escalation on the
ground. Accordingly, we renew our rejection and

S/PV. 8598

condemnation for the continued financial and military
support provided by the United Arab Emirates to the
southern transitional forces, which is unlawful, and we
call to cease such support immediately.
The Yemeni Government underscores once again
the need to implement the Stockholm Agreement, in
particular the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, as a necessary
step for building trust, establishing lasting peace in
Yemen based on the agreed terms of reference and
alleviating the suffering of our Yemeni people. We call
for the launching of redeployment operations, pursuant
to the agreed operations plan, and the implementation
of the tripartite verification mechanism that covers all
those operations.
The situation relating to the floating oil tanker
FSO SAFER, in the port of Ras Isa, which is carrying
1,140,000 barrels of crude oil, is particularly alarming.
The Yemeni Government contacted the United Nations
and its agencies on that situation in March. We call
on the Secretary-General and the Security Council
to urgently take the necessary measures in order to
put pressure on the Houthi militias so that they allow
a technical team to assess the situation and start
emptying and maintaining the tank as soon as possible.
Regrettably, more than two months after that call, the
technical team did not accomplish its mission because
the Houthi militias did not allow it to reach the tanker,
turning a blind eye to the natural catastrophe that could
be unleashed, which would harm all the coastal States
surrounding the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, not to
mention international transport passages in the region
and the economic as well as environmental damages
that will affect the livelihoods of all coastal populations
dependent on fishing.
Armed Houthi militias continue all kinds of stark
and explicit violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Those violations include
arbitrary detention, abductions and abuses against
Yemeni civilians in the absence of legal proper
procedures. The militias are randomly using huge
quantities of landmines in all the areas under their
control, including Al-Hudaydah and Taiz governorates,
as well as in coastal villages along the Red Sea.
Indeed, at least 172 civilians have been killed and 136
injured by landmines since January 2018. Moreover,
improvised explosive devices have been placed at
sea, posing a threat to international navigation. They
further restrict the movement of civilians in and around
Taiz governorate by setting up barriers and trenches

19-2577913/14

S/PV.8598

The situation in the Middle East

and using snipers. Even women were not spared from
violations by the armed Houthi militias.
The militias have also been impeding the delivery
of humanitarian aid, terrorizing humanitarian workers
and illegally seizing their personal belongings as well
as those of humanitarian organizations in Sana’a,
while also disrespecting their independent status. They
practice violence and compulsion on beneficiaries and
impose administrative and bureaucratic impediments
on them. The Houthi militias try to use hunger as a
means to impose their sectarian armed agenda.
The Yemeni Government condemns in the strongest
terms the attacks against the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia by the Houthi militias, most recently targeting
the Shaybah oilfield. We categorically reject the use of
Yemeni territories by the Houthi militias for launching
such attacks against neighbouring countries.
As a remarkable step, the Houthi militias have
normalized their relations with the Iranian regime.

14/14

20/08/2019

Indeed, they have now even appointed a Yemeni
Ambassador to the Iranian regime. The Yemeni
Government totally rejects this act by the militias
and the political regime in Iran. We condemn it, as it
explicitly contravenes the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions by seeking to legitimize the presence of the
armed militias, in violation of State sovereignty.
It is high time for the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and implement its own resolutions
relating to Yemen, as well as to bring an end to the
suffering of Yemeni people due to the unjust war, now
entering its fifth year, led by the Houthi militias with
the support of Iran.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

19-25779
