VIII.

285

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Reaffirms its instruction to all its subsidiary organs
to complete their reports for the following session of the
General Assembly no later than I September and, where
necessary, to report to the Assembly in addenda to the
reports of the organs concerned any activity undertaken
after the adoption of such reports;
7. Decides that no subsidiary organ of the General
Assembly may meet at United Nations Headquarters
during a regular session of the Assembly unless explicitly
authorized by the Assembly;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide interpretation services for informal meetings on an ad
hoe basis in accordance with established practice;
9. Authorizes the Secretary-General to apply maximum overprogramming of meetings whenever possible to
achieve better utilization of conference resources;
10. Requests the Committee on Conferences and the
Secretary-General to take account of the following principles in drawing up the draft calendar of conferences and
meetings:
(a) The biennial calendar of conferences and meetings
approved by the General Assembly shall govern the meetings programme during the period concerned;
(b) All United Nations meetings shall be conducted
within the resources allocated by the General Assembly for
that purpose;
(c) Between sessions of the General Assembly, departures from the calendar may, in special or unusual circumstances, be approved by the Committee on Conferences
provided that changes affecting the subsequent year of the
biennium shall be approved by the Assembly;
(d) Subsidiary organs of the General Assembly shall
not, without the approval of the Assembly, create new
standing bodies or ad hoe sessional or inter-sessional
bodies that require additional resources, and other principal organs of the United Nations should make similar
decisions with regard to their respective subsidiary bodies,
if they have not already done so;
(e) An adequate interval of time, to be determined by
the body concerned, shall be allowed between sessions of a
body to permit Member States to derive maximum benefit
from the activities and to provide sufficient time for the
preparation of future activities;
(I) United Nations bodies shall meet at their respective
established headquarters, subject to the exceptions to this
principle approved by the General Assembly;
(g) The capacity of the documentation services of the
Secretariat to process and issue in time the documentation
required for the sessions of all scheduled organs should be
taken into account;
(h) No more than one special conference of the United
Nations shall be convened at the same time;
(1) In any given year, no more than five special conferences should be convened, unless the General Assembly
specifically decides otherwise;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the most
rational and effective use of all United Nations conference
centres and facilities;
12. Requests the Committee on Conferences to continue its periodic examination of the rules governing conference planning;
29 Ibid., Supplement No. 30 (A/40/30 and Corr. I).
JO/bid., Supplement No. 7A (A/40/7/Add.l-18). document A/40/71
Add.12; A/40/653 and Add.I: AIC.5/40/26: AIC.5140141: AIC.5140144; Al
C.5140145 and Corr. I

II
I. Urges all United Nations bodies to increase their
efforts to ensure that their requests for conference-servicing resources correspond accurately to their requirements;
2. Further urges those bodies to plan their work well in
advance in order to make full use of the conference-servicing resources allocated to them and so that any unused
conference-servicing resources can be reassigned to ensure
their most effective utilization;
3. Requests subsidiary organs of the General Assembly
to include in their reports to the Assembly a statement on
the progress made in response to the relevant provisions of
Assembly resolution 39/68 B of 13 December 1984 on the
rational and efficient utilization of conference-servicing
resources;
4. Urges intergovernmental bodies reporting to the
Second Committee of the General Assembly that have not
yet adjusted their meeting cycles to conform to that Committee's biennial programme of work to do so as soon as
possible;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to review the composition and frequency of planning missions for meetings
and conferences held away from Headquarters, in particular those sent to cities where United Nations conference
facilities already exist;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Committee on Conferences at its substantive session of
1986 on the results of that review concerning planning
missions sent in 1985 and, as far as possible, in 1986;

III
I. Decides that the Committee on Conferences should
review the question of the provision of summary records
at its substantive session in 1986;
2. Also decides that the present experimental arrangements for summary records, established by the General
Assembly in its resolution 37/14 C of 16 November 1982,
should remain in effect until the Assembly, upon the recommendation of the Committee on Conferences, takes
further action.
121st plenary meeting
18 December 1985

40/244.

United Nations common system: report of
the International Civil Service Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the eleventh annual report of the
International Civil Service Commission 29 and other
reports related thereto, 30
Reaffirming the importance of maintaining and developing further a single unified international civil service
through the application of common personnel standards,
methods and arrangements,

I. Takes note of the action taken by the International
Civil Service Commission in response to General Assembly resolutions 39/27 of 30 November 1984 and 39/69 of
13 December 1984; 31
3 I /hid., Supplement No. 30 (A/40/30 and Corr. I), para. 7.

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

286

2. Approves the range of 110 to 120, with a desirable
mid-point of 115, for the margin between the net remuneration of officials in the Professional and higher categories
of the United Nations in New York and that of officials in
comparable positions in the United States federal civil
service, on the understanding that the margin would be
maintained at a level around the desirable mid-point of
115 over a period of time;
3. Requests the Commission:
(a) To develop further the methodology for calculating
the margin based on net remuneration, 32 taking into
account the views expressed at the current session, 33 and to
study the possibility of calculating the margin as specified
in paragraph 2 above based on a comparison of net remuneration for both services in New York and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
(b) To further elaborate procedures for the operation of
the post adjustment system within the approved range of
the margin of net remuneration, which would enable the
Commission to maintain the margin at a level around the
desirable mid-point of 115 over a period of time, and to
report thereon to the Assembly at its forty-first session;
4. Also requests the Commission to continue its studies
of the post adjustment system as it relates to United
Nations officials posted outside the base city of the system,
the effects of exchange rate fluctuations and the possibility
of eliminating post adjustment at the base city of the system, and to report thereon to the General Assembly no
later than at its forty-second session;
II
Approves the recommendations of the International
Civil Service Commission contained in paragraphs 180
and 181 of its report 29 concerning support by organizations
of the United Nations common system for staff with
dependent disabled children;

III
I. Welcomes the recommendations of the International Civil Service Commission contained in paragraph
245 of its report 29 concerning the introduction of special
measures for the recruitment of women, is cognizant of the
contents of paragraphs 246 and 247 of the same report and
requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress made in this

IV
I. Requests the Secretary-General in his capacity as
Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and, through him, the other executive heads of
organizations participating in the United Nations common
system, to promote endeavours to maintain and
strengthen the common system for the regulation and coordination of the conditions of service;
2. Also requests the executive heads of participating
organizations, through the Secretary-General, to inform
their respective governing bodies of the present resolution;
3. Urges Member States to ensure that their representatives in organizations of the United Nations common
system are informed about the positions taken by them in
the General Assembly on matters relating to the conditions of service;
4. Expresses its concern over actions taken by some of
the participating organizations which have led to disparities in the United Nations common system;
5. Requests the International Civil Service Commission to report in detail to the General Assembly at future
sessions on the consideration and implementation of the
decisions and recommendations of the Commission by
organizations of the United Nations common system.
121 st plenary meeting
l 8 December l 985

40/245. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/246 of 18 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board for 1985 to the General Assembly and to the member organizations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 34 chapter II of the report
of the International Civil Service Commission 29 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 35
Welcoming the improvement in the actuarial situation
of the Fund as revealed by the valuation as at 31 December 1984,

regard;

2. Welcomes further the recommendations of the
Commission contained in paragraph 252 of its report concerning the development of recruitment sources, including
national recruitment services;
3. Requests the Commission:
(a) To undertake a study of the mobility of Professional staff in the United Nations common system, including the frequency and average length of their assignments
at different duty stations;
(b) To re-examine the scope of the education grant in
relation to the purpose for which it was originally
approved;
4. Also requests the Commission to re-examine the
question of the mandatory age of separation from service
of staff of organizations of the common system and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session;
32 Jbid., Supplement No. 30 (A/40/30 and Corr. I), annex I.
33 Jbid., Fortieth Session, Fifth Commlltee, 29th, 30th, 37th, 38th, 42nd.
44th to 48th, 50th, 53rd and 63rd meetings; and 1b1d., Fifth Commiuee Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum

PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR THE
PROFESSIONAL AND HIGHER CATEGORIES

1. Takes note of chapter II of the report of the International Civil Service Commission 29 and section III.C.5 of
the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board; 34
2. Requests the International Civil Service Commission, in co-operation with the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board, to:
(a) Carry out a comparative study of the levels of pension benefits and the ratios of pensions to salaries under
the United Nations pension scheme and that of the comparator country;
(b) Complete its review of the methodology for the
determination of pensionable remuneration for the Professional and higher categories, for monitoring the level of
pensionable remuneration and for adjustment of pension34 Ibid., Forueth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/40/9).
35 A/40/848.
