II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

versal cultural values through fruitful co-operation
between developed and developing countries;
3. Recommends that Member States adopt or
strengthen the necessary protective legislation with regard
to their own heritage and that of other peoples;
4. Invites Member States to continue drawing up, in
co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories of
cultural property existing in their territory and of their cultural property abroad;
5. Also invites Member States engaged in seeking the
recovery of cultural and artistic treasures from the sea-bed,
in accordance with international law, to facilitate by
mutually acceptable conditions the participation of States
having a historical and cultural link with those treasures;
6. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely with
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conclude bilateral agreements for this purpose;
7. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural
institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its country of origin;
8. Endorses the opinion expressed at the World Conference on Cultural Policies, held at Mexico City from 26
July to 6 August 1982, that the return of cultural property
to its country of origin should be accompanied by the
training of key personnel and technicians and the provision of the necessary facilities for the satisfactory conservation and presentation of the property restored; 26
9. Welcomes the steady increase in the number of
States parties to the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property;
IO. Invites once again those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin".
87th plenary meeting
21 November 1985

40/20. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, 27
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
CO•!)peration ~tween_ the United Nations and the Organizatlon of African Umty and the practical measures taken
for their implementation, in particular resolution 39/8 of 8
November 1984, and its resolution 39/29 of 3 December
1984 on the critical economic situation in Africa and the
Declaration annexed thereto,
265ee N38/456, p. 12. para. 17.
27 N40/S36.
28 See N40/666.
29 Jbid., annex I, declaration AHG/Ded. I IXXI).

23

Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its forty-second ordinary
session and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its twenty-first ordinary
session, which were held at Addis Ababa from IO to 17
July and from 18 to 20 July 1985, respectively, 28
Taking note also of the resolutions, decisions and declarations adopted by the Organization of African Unity on
the promotion of co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Noting, in particular, the Declaration on the Economic
Situation in Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for
Economic Recovery 1986-1990, annexed thereto, adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session, 29
which was devoted mainly to the critical economic situation in Africa,
Considering the important statement by the current
Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity of 21 October
1985, 30 particularly with regard to the critical economic
situation in Africa as well as other matters of concern to
the two organizations,
Gravely concerned about the serious and deteriorating
economic situation in Africa, in particular the effects of the
prolonged drought, desertification and the adverse effects
of the international economic environment on the African
States,
Recalling, in this connection, the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held
at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, 31
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between
the Organization of African Unity and all specialized agencies, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in realizing the goals and objectives set forth in the
Lagos Plan of Action,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination of
the peoples of the area by the minority racist regime of
South Africa and conscious of the need to provide
increased assistance to the peoples of the region and to
their liberation movements in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Conscious of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them cope with the situation caused by the acts of aggression committed against
their territories by the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the situation of the
refugees in Africa and the urgent need for increased internation~I assistance to help African countries of asylum
cope with the heavy social, economic and administrative
burden imposed on their fragile economies,
Recognizing the important role which the various information units and departments of the United Nations system can play in disseminating information to bring about
a greater awareness of the grave situation prevailing in
southern Africa as well as the social and economic problems and the needs of African States and their regional and
subregional institutions,
30 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. l'/enary
Meetings, 42nd meeting.
31 A/S-11/14, annex I.

::24:__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.=Ge.::n:::::e:.:.r•=l:.::.A.::s:.::.se.:..:m:.:.b.:..:l.:..y_-.::F_orti_·e_th_Sess_i_o_n_______________________ _

Aware of the need for continuous liaison, consultations
on matters of common concern, exchange of information
at the secretariat level and technical co-operation on such
matters as training and research between the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and commends his efforts to
strengthen such co-operation;
2. Notes with appreciation the increasing and continued participation of the Organization of African Unity
in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral co-operation
among African States and to find solutions to African
problems of vital importance to the international community and notes with satisfaction the increased collaboration
of various organizations of the United Nations system in
support of those efforts;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to work closely with the Organization of African Unity
towards the establishment of the new international economic order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and, in that regard, to take full
account of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990, adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its twenty-first session, in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade; 32
5. Calls upon all Member States and regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the
United Nations system, to implement fully General
Assembly resolution 39/29 on the critical economic situation in Africa and the Declaration annexed thereto;
6. Also calls upon all Member States, and regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the
United Nations system, to give their maximum support to
Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery
1986-1990;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system to the need to give increasingly
wide publicity to all matters relating to the social and economic development of Africa, in particular to General
Assembly resolution 39/29 on the critical economic situation in Africa and the Declaration annexed thereto;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the timely initiative he has taken to alert the international community to the critical economic and social situation in Africa and welcomes the measures he has taken to
facilitate international co-operation and co-ordination to
assist Africa, in particular through the establishment of the
Office for Emergency Operations in Africa;
9. Commends the Office for Emergency Operations in
Africa for its efforts to sensitize the international conthi.unity to the emergency situation in Africa, to co-ordinate
the efforts of the international community and to monitor
the situation in the affected African countries;
10. Expresses its appreciation to donor countries, the
European Economic Community and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for their participation in the round table and consultative groups and
32 Resolution 35156. annex

for their response to the emergency food situation in
Africa;
11. Expresses its appreciation also to the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for the assistance so far
rendered to the African States in dealing with the emergency situation as well as with the critical economic problems that exist on the African continent;
12. Calls upon all Member States and organizations of
the United Nations system to increase their assistance to
the African States affected by serious economic problems,
in particular problems of displaced persons resulting from
natural and other disasters, by implementing fully General
Assembly resolution 39/29 and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990;
13. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his commendable efforts in alerting and sensitizing the international community to the plight of African countries, in
mobilizing additional assistance to Africa, in co-ordinating
the activities of the United Nations system in Africa, and
in monitoring the situation and presenting periodic reports
thereon;
14. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for African States experiencing grave economic
difficulties, as well as for the front-line States and other
independent States of southern Africa, to help them cope
with the situation caused by the acts of aggression committed against their territories by the apartheid regime of
South Africa;
15. Expresses its appreciation to the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme and other interested international financial institutions for their response
to the critical economic situation in Africa as well as their
assistance in the organization of round table and donor
conferences in favour of the least developed countries of
Africa, as well as in the implementation of those special
programmes of economic assistance;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Organization of African Unity informed periodically of
the response of the international community to those special programmes of economic assistance and to continue to
co-ordinate efforts with all similar programmes initiated
by that organization;
17. Calls upon the international community to provide
generous assistance on a long-term basis to all African
States affected by the economic crisis, particularly those
suffering calamities such as drought and flood, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 39/29 and Africa's
Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990;
18. Reiterates the determination of the United
Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism,
racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the political,
economic, cultural and administrative levels between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of
assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
southern Africa, and. in this connection, draws once again

II.

25

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the attention of the international community to the need
to contribute to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle
against Colonialism and Apartheid established by the
Organization of African Unity;

40/21. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvi-

20. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to continue to expand their co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by that organization;

(Malvinas) and having received the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 35
Aware of the interest of the international community in
the peaceful and definitive settlement by the Governments
of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of all their differences, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the interest repeatedly expressed by both
parties in normalizing their relations,
Convinced that such purpose would be facilitated by a
global negotiation between both Governments that will
allow them to rebuild mutual confidence on a solid basis
and to resolve the pending problems, including all aspects
on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
l. Requests the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
initiate negotiations with a view to finding the means to
resolve peacefully and definitively the pending problems
between both countries, including all aspects on the future
of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
renewed mission of good offices in order to assist the parties in complying with the request made in paragraph l
above, and to take the necessary measures to that end;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".

21. Reaffirms its willingness to co-operate with the
Organization of African Unity and its organs in the implementation of resolutions and decisions of mutual concern;
22. Calls upon the competent organs, specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
to continue to ensure that their personnel and recruitment
policies provide for the just and equitable representation
of Africa at all levels at their respective headquarters and
in their regional and field operations;
23. Urges all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
provide material and economic assistance to help African
countries of asylum cope with the heavy burden imposed
on their limited resources and weak infrastructures by the
presence of large numbers of refugees;
24. Invites Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
contribute generously and effectively to the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa; 33
25. Calls upon United Nations organs - in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia - to continue to associate closely the
Organization of African Unity with all their work concerning Africa;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate
continued liaison and consultations on matters of
common interest as well as for the provision of technical
assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, to arrange the date and venue for the next
meeting between representatives of the General Secretariat
of that organization and the secretariats of the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations
system;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of
African Unity and the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system.
87th plenary meeting
21 November 1985
33 A/39/402. annex.
34 Sec also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.B.6, decision 40/410.

nas)34

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands

95th plenary meeting
27 November 1985

40/40. Critical economic situation in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/29 of 3 December 1984, and

the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in
Africa annexed thereto,
Noting the Declaration on the Economic Situation in
Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic
Recovery 1986-1990, annexed thereto, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, 29
Noting further Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/80 of 26 July 1985,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the critical economic situation in Africa, 36
Expressing its appreciation to the international community ~p.d the United Nations system for their positive
resprin,se to the emergency situation in Africa and recognizing the need to continue to extend that support to fulfil
unmet emergency needs,
Commending the Secretary-General for his continuing
efforts in ensuring that the emergency assistance by the
United Nations system and the international community
is delivered to affected countries in a concerted manner,
35 A/40/891.
36 A/40/372-E/1985/104 and Add. I and 2.
