United Nations

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6165th meeting
Wednesday, 22 July 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa/Mr. Rugunda/Mr. Mugoya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Hu Bo
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Chatel
Mr. Tsuruga
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Vargas
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Erdoğdu
Mr. Harvey
Mr. Gee
Mr. Nguyen Luu Hai

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2009/304)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-41816 (E)

*0941816*

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated at the morning session, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are again kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express the gratitude of my delegation for the
convening of this important open debate on postconflict peacebuilding to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), prepared in
response to the Security Council presidential statement
of 20 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/16), and I would like to
extend my thanks and gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his report.
As I am sure that the Council presidency and
members are aware, the first part of my intervention will
be on behalf of both Egypt and Ireland, the co-chairs of
the meeting entitled “Post-Conflict Peacebuilding:
Contemporary Challenges and the Way Forward”,
convened by the Governments of Egypt and Ireland in
Cairo on 18 and 19 May 2009. The meeting touched on
many of the issues contained in the report of the
Secretary-General under consideration today.
Egypt and Ireland took the initiative to convene
the Cairo meeting to engage senior officials from all
regional groups in a discussion on the contemporary
challenges and opportunities in peacebuilding and on
possible solutions to those challenges. The Cairo
meeting took place against the backdrop of emerging
lessons and experiences in peacebuilding from the four
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission: Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau
and the Central African Republic, as well as other
countries emerging from conflict. Another important
factor for the meeting was the forthcoming review of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Peacebuilding Fund in 2010, in
accordance with the founding resolutions of the
Commission.

2

The meeting emphasized the importance of
addressing the underlying social and economic causes
of crises, enhancing coordination and cooperation
among regional organizations and institutions and
donor countries, and assuring the significance of
national ownership and the need to build confidence at
the subnational level. The importance of capacitybuilding — which should be country-specific and
tailored to the needs of the country in question — was
underscored, as was the need to build institutional
capacity, particularly outside of the capitals, and the
need for international actors to reduce the
administrative burden on local actors.
It was also highlighted that there should be an
effective and coherent international response to
peacebuilding, coordinated by the United Nations, and
that the United Nations must not be a substitute for the
Government in exercising its functions and
responsibilities, but should support and strengthen the
Government’s capacity to effectively address the
challenges it faces.
Participants stressed the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the important role of the World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
partnerships with the United Nations. They addressed
the lack of consistent international support and funding
in critical areas, the need for more simplified donor
procedures that would enable quick gains and more
flexible funding, would reduce time frames for
disbursement of funds and would encourage diaspora
remittances.
The meeting also highlighted the important role
of regional organizations in supporting peacebuilding
efforts, both in terms of political support and in
developing regional peacebuilding capacities. It
emphasized that the United Nations should continue to
strengthen partnerships and create greater synergies
with regional organizations to better support countries
emerging from conflict. It was recognized that some
regional organizations lacked the appropriate capacity
to play their potential role, and donor organizations
were therefore encouraged to support them.
In that regard, I would like to inform the Council
of Egypt’s initiative to strengthen the peace and
security structure of the African Union within the
framework of the European Union-African strategic
partnership. The aim of this initiative is to
operationalize
and
develop
the
post-conflict

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

reconstruction and development framework of the
African Union through the establishment of a regional
centre in close institutional collaboration among the
African Union, the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations.
In general, the Cairo meeting provided a valuable
opportunity for Member States to discuss and exchange
views on matters of crucial concern, and we — Egypt
and Ireland — are glad to see that many of those
elements were taken into consideration in the
preparation of the report of the Secretary-General.
Commenting in my national capacity on the
report of the Secretary-General, I would like to
commend the Secretary-General and his team for
preparing the comprehensive report and to express
Egypt’s support for the ideas and conclusions reflected
therein, in particular the emphasis on strengthening
national capacity and ensuring that it is part of an entry
strategy and not merely the basis for an exit strategy,
the necessity of respecting the principle of national
ownership, and that peacebuilding efforts must be
anchored at the country level, with support and
guidance from the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations system
at large and Member States. It is national leaders who
can ensure that vision, strategy and decision-making
respond effectively to the realities on the ground.
Therefore, the United Nations is expected to play a
leading role in the field, by facilitating engagement
between national and international actors and among
international actors, without prejudicing the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
While we agree with the agenda set by the
Secretary-General in the report to strengthen the
United Nations contribution to a more rapid and
effective response in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, there is still a need for clarification
concerning some of the issues reflected.
First, the report gives the impression that the
Security Council is the major player when it comes to
peacebuilding efforts in the immediate aftermath of
conflict — for example, paragraph 14. At that time the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should play an equal role. Secondly, all
aspects of the matters of the pool of civilian experts
and the standing capacities should be further discussed
in detail. I propose in that regard that the Secretary-

09-41816

General present a comprehensive report, which could
be used as basis for discussions among Member States.
Thirdly, enhancing the United Nations leadership team
on the ground and the steps undertaken by the
Secretary-General, as enshrined in the report, to
strengthen the accountability of the Special
Representatives are matters that need further
discussion and elaboration.
Fourthly, the section of the report relating to the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission did not include
specific proposals aimed at strengthening the role of
the Commission through making it more flexible and
efficient in the immediate aftermath of conflict, rather
than recommending that the Security Council consider
how the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission could
contribute to its work during the early phase of the
Council’s consideration of a situation. That
recommendation, though it could lead to increasing the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, could, on the
other hand, also lead to increasing the domination of
the Council over the work of the Commission vis-à-vis
the role of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. Thus, there is a need to further
discuss that proposal to ensure that it will not affect the
institutional balance between the principle organs of
the Organization.
Fifthly, there should be a clear understanding of
the interrelationship between peace consolidation
activities in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
particularly the relationship between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, from all aspects, including the financing
of those activities.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and to the Secretary-General
for presenting his valuable report, with the wish that
the United Nations would benefit from it through
strengthening its response in the immediate aftermath
of a conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure and great honour for me to take the floor
before the Council for a discussion on the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding after a conflict
(S/2009/304). I wish the President of the Council every
success. I also welcome and congratulate the Secretary-

3

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

General and thank him for the relevant, wise and
diverse advice given in his report.
Given that my country is emerging from a
conflict that lasted more than decade, our Government
fully supports the guiding principles set out in the
report. Although all these principles are closely linked
and interdependent, my delegation stresses the
importance of some in particular, beginning with the
principle of national ownership.
Peacebuilding efforts belong essentially to the
countries concerned. The United Nations and the
international community should play a catalytic
support role in that respect, and contribute to
strengthening national capacity as soon as a ceasefire
agreement has been signed.
With respect to leadership, we endorse the
Secretary-General’s proposal to create a high-level
mechanism to ensure good United Nations leadership
on the ground and to support country teams.
With respect to coherence, restoring, keeping and
building peace and post-conflict reconstruction should
go hand in hand. That will require the participation of
all entities of the United Nations system.
Following a conflict, challenges are always
immense and varied. Each situation has its own
specific features, and the means for establishing peace
are very different in each instance and each area. This
debate is taking place at a time when the peacebuilding
process in Burundi has seen significant progress in
most areas, which is likely to stabilize the country once
and for all. We note, for instance, the establishment of
the Independent National Electoral Commission; the
comprehensive implementation of the political
agreements between the Government and the former
rebel movement Parti pour la libération du peuple
Hutu-forces nationales de liberation, which is now a
political party; the commitment of the Government of
Burundi to a policy to demobilize and reintegrate
repatriated persons; and other examples.
In the area of good governance, the culture of
dialogue between national partners is being promoted
through sessions and workshops throughout the
country.
In the area of security, the professionalization of
the defence and security forces and the disarmament of
civilians continue.

4

The regional dimension of security has not been
neglected. The ministers of defence of the countries of
the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries recently reaffirmed their determination to
fight the negative forces at work in the subregion and
to guarantee the security of our common borders.
With respect to the rule of law and the fight
against impunity, my delegation is pleased to announce
that consultations with a view to implementing
transitional justice began on 14 July. The settlement of
land disputes continues, and the Government has
adopted a national land policy and a new land code
adapted to the current situation.
In the light of the challenges ahead, the
peacebuilding process in Burundi requires additional
inputs with respect to our priority peacebuilding plan.
Many imponderables, including the world financial,
energy and food crises, have called all our initial
financial forecasts into question. The Government of
the Republic of Burundi is still awaiting the
implementation of the “Marshall plan” for Burundi
proposed by the Peacebuilding Commission last year,
requests once again the disbursement of funds pledged
by its partners at the roundtable of May 2007, and
thanks those that have already honoured their
commitments.
The Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Burundi is under way, uniting the Government, the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
national
and
international partners around a set of common
peacebuilding objectives. In general, current trends,
achievements and commitments reveal that sound
progress has been made in all areas related to
peacebuilding. Burundi once again thanks the
Secretary-General for his report and his ongoing
support for the peacebuilding process in my country.
The President: I
representative of Canada.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. McNee (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. Let me also join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
important report (S/2009/304) and warmly welcome
his personal commitment to peacebuilding. I should
also like to thank the representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank
for their insightful contributions earlier in the day.

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

Canada has a long history of contributing to
United Nations peacekeeping and peacemaking. That
underpins
Canada’s
strong
commitment
to
peacebuilding, which is also reflected in Canada’s
chairing the country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra Leone.
In that vein, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict as an important step forward for peacebuilding
at the United Nations. The report is a call to action that
points to areas in which the United Nations and the
international community have been either unresponsive
or disjointed.
Over the past decade, the international
community has come to recognize that the fragility of
States in the immediate aftermath of crisis represents
both a central development challenge and a potential
threat to global stability. Failure to adequately address
the early recovery needs of fragile States threatens to
deepen poverty, increases the risk of a relapse into
violence, and poses real threats to regional and
international stability.
At the same time, attention to the early recovery
agenda does not and must not occur in a vacuum. In
this regard, it is significant that this debate comes after
the recent publication of the Secretary-General’s report
on conflict mediation (S/2009/189) and during ongoing
discussions about the future of United Nations
peacekeeping.
The benefits of investing in peacebuilding are
increasingly clear, and Sierra Leone is an excellent
example of the real progress that is possible when the
international community works in unison to support
strong national leadership.
Peacebuilding is a complex, multifaceted task.
While the focus of peacebuilding will vary from case
to case and across time, the key pillars remain the
same. The first is restoring the capacity of the State to
provide public goods to its citizens, including justice
and the rule of law, basic social services and an
enabling economic environment. The second is
rebuilding the legitimacy of the State by ensuring the
democratic accountability of political leaders to their
citizens. The third challenge is to bring about social
reconciliation through proactive efforts to heal the
wounds left by conflict. Fourthly, rapid economic
revitalization must provide jobs and a future to weary
populations and ex-combatants. The final and perhaps

09-41816

most important component is visionary political
leadership that puts the interests of the country and its
people above all else.
Given this context, the report’s critical
contribution is to emphasize cooperation, coordination
and coherence. International actors must pursue
common priorities based on an agreed assessment of
the situation and a clear understanding of roles and
responsibilities. Special effort must be made with the
World Bank to clarify respective responsibilities for
core peacebuilding sectors. Strengthening leadership
teams in the field is an important step towards
improving the United Nations contribution. Canada is
also encouraged by the emphasis placed on the PostConflict Needs Assessment as a unified and inclusive
assessment tool.
Establishing durable peace and prosperity is
difficult without a functioning State. Building peace is
the primary responsibility of national actors. Canada
welcomes the recommendations of the report to urge an
initial assessment of existing national capacity, bolster
capacity for development efforts, and support national
oversight of international assistance. Canada also urges
peacebuilding actors to consider how the expertise
resident in diaspora communities can be better
mobilized during post-conflict recovery. During this
critical period, more can be done to utilize the
strengths of regional organizations, and to encourage
greater South-to-South cooperation in support of
peacebuilding.
This raises an important issue, that is, timely
access to effective technical assistance. The SecretaryGeneral’s
report
(S/2009/304)
offers
useful
recommendations for improving support to United
Nations personnel in the field. Existing experience
with models such as the Standing Police Capacity, the
Mediation Support Unit, and the Justice Rapid
Response mechanism should also be applied to other
areas of need. Closer cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations also offers great promise.
The international community should also re-examine
how bilateral and multilateral civilian response
mechanisms such as expert rosters can be better
coordinated and respond more quickly to crises.
(spoke in French)
The Secretary-General has identified core
peacebuilding objectives, including support for basic

5

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

security, political processes, essential
governance and economic revitalization.

services,

The President: I now call on the representative
of Sweden.

Questions of transitional justice and national
reconciliation
are
central
for
post-conflict
peacebuilding. Local populations must have access to
formal and informal structures that facilitate communal
healing and address abuses committed during the
conflict. An effective justice system is also critical for
fostering accountability, building trust in national
institutions and establishing basic security. Above all,
international assistance must help establish legal
institutions that embrace transparency and respect for
human rights. In this respect, Canada warmly
welcomes the report’s emphasis on the full
participation of women and children in the
peacebuilding process and on the protection of their
human rights.

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the countries of the
stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

Improved financing is crucial. The creation of the
Peacebuilding Fund was an important step in this area,
and work is also under way in the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), to
clarify best practices in post-conflict assistance.
Canada also welcomes both the recent revision of the
Peacebuilding Fund terms of reference and the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for the Fund.
Rapid and flexible financing now may help prevent the
need for more expensive interventions later.
The report also has significant implications for
the Peacebuilding Commission. In our opinion, the
Commission remains underutilized, and it is important
to reconsider its role in the immediate post-conflict
period. Greater ambition with respect to the nature and
scope of the work of the Commission is warranted. The
Commission has the potential to be a central and
effective actor with respect to the prioritization,
coordination and support of peacebuilding strategies.
We should not be willing to settle for less.
In conclusion, it is now up to the United Nations
system to implement the recommendations in the
report. It will be important to provide regular updates
to Member States on progress being made. In other
areas — notably national capacity-building, civilian
rapid response and financing — Member States must
also take the lead. As a committed member of the
Peacebuilding Commission and a major donor to the
Peacebuilding Fund, Canada stands ready to support
these efforts.

6

Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his timely report (S/2009/304).
During the past decade, the international
community has increasingly been called upon to
prevent States from collapsing, fracturing or falling
back into conflict. The task we are confronted with is
often that of assisting in building functioning State
structures in areas torn by political strife and the legacy
of violence. Over the years we have learned important
lessons, and the report of the Secretary-General
provides an opportunity to further strengthen the
peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations. Many of
its important recommendations need to be urgently
implemented. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s continued engagement and to his
commitment to this important agenda.
The report rightly focuses on the immediate
aftermath of conflict. We know from experience that
this is a particularly vulnerable and critical phase of
peacebuilding, characterized by fragile security
conditions, severe humanitarian and human rights
needs and significant political uncertainty. For the
international community, it is a phase where our ability
to deliver assistance is put to a difficult test.
While a basic level of security is vital to
achieving peaceful development, all aspects of
peacebuilding must be considered from the beginning
of the process. The successful disarmament and
demobilization of former combatants requires a
framework in which those people can be reintegrated.
Alongside the deployment of peacekeepers, efforts
must be made to stimulate economic recovery, support
the provision of basic services and restore the rule of
law, good governance and respect for human rights.
The central challenge is to build the structures of
functioning State institutions. That process requires the

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

participation of all relevant stakeholders. National
ownership is essential, as underlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Special efforts should be made to
reach out to women, youth and minority groups at risk
of exclusion.
A coherent strategy among international actors in
field operations is crucial in order to effectively
support national processes. Unfortunately, such
coherence is often lacking. The European Union
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation on
the need for an effective and accountable United
Nations leadership on the ground, empowered to lead
immediate international efforts in support of national
authorities. A common set of priorities is necessary to
bridge the gap between early stabilization and recovery
efforts and longer-term development planning.
Mechanisms for more effective monitoring, evaluation
and adjustment of strategies also need to be developed.
The European Union welcomes the emphasis in
the report on joint needs assessment, planning and
support. Ways must now be found to put this into
practice. We look forward to the recommendations on
the integrated task forces and on Headquarters support
to Resident Coordinators and United Nations country
teams.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for greater
clarity on the roles and responsibilities of core
peacebuilding actors, both within the United Nations
and between the Organization and the World Bank and
other international actors. Those designated as lead
agencies bear a special responsibility to make the
appropriate investments in order to provide timely and
predictable support. Those arrangements should be
subject to regular review.
We have been encouraged by the positive
assessment of the Standing Police Capacity and would
welcome the further development and expansion of
rapidly deployable civilian capacities to other areas
pertaining to the rule of law. We look forward to the
proposed overall review on how the United Nations
can help broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts, particularly from affected regions and from the
South. In that context, the European Union would also
like to stress the important role of women in
peacebuilding, as outlined in resolution 1325 (2000).
The Peacebuilding Commission has existed for
three years. It is unique in its membership structure, its
involvement of civil society and its country-specific

09-41816

approach. The strategic potential of the Commission
lies in its ability to stimulate coordination, mobilize
resources, maintain a spotlight on countries emerging
from conflict and provide advice to all relevant bodies
of the United Nations system. As suggested by the
Secretary-General, the European Union would like to
see the Commission’s advice be more proactively
considered. The 2010 review will offer an important
opportunity to learn from the first years of operation
and to make appropriate improvements. It is also
essential that the Peacebuilding Support Office be
utilized to its full potential. To that end, the role of the
Office should be clearly defined.
Access to timely and flexible funding is often one
of the main challenges to maintaining the momentum
in a peace process immediately after the conclusion of
a peace agreement. The European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recognition of the need to
strengthen the role of the Peacebuilding Fund in the
early stages of peacebuilding. We must strive towards a
Peacebuilding Fund that sets an example by providing
seed funding to bridge the gap between conflict and
recovery at a time when other funding mechanisms
may not yet be available.
Over the past decade, the European Union has
gradually enhanced its capacity to support efforts to
secure peace in war-torn areas around the world.
Today, the European Union is one of the main
contributors to peacebuilding activities, working
closely with the United Nations, the African Union and
other actors in those efforts. The continued
strengthening of those partnerships, particularly with
the United Nations, is a key priority for the European
Union.
The report of the Secretary-General provides
many useful recommendations for strengthening the
peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations. It is
fully in line with the appreciated efforts of the
Secretary-General to enhance the overall coherence,
effectiveness and accountability of United Nations
operations in the field. The European Union is
committed to supporting that agenda for change in all
relevant intergovernmental forums as well as at the
country level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening

7

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

this special debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2009/304) on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict — a report that
confirms the critical role of the United Nations in
addressing the many gaps in the international response
to conflict situations.
The report rightly focuses on the critical period
immediately after conflict, when virtuous cycles must
be set in motion to lay foundations for lasting peace.
So often, however, we have failed in that, with nearly
30 per cent of all conflicts that ended in negotiated
settlement resuming within five years.
Time is of the essence in the immediate postconflict period. A fragile peace can quickly unravel if
peace dividends are not quickly apparent. The
availability of expert teams that can deploy and begin
work at very short notice is an essential bridge to a
fuller and more coordinated response.
The pace of deployment to missions such as the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, where less than 35 per cent of international
civilian posts had been filled a year after its
establishment, and the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad, which had firstyear vacancies of 91 per cent, is of great concern.
Those are stark and depressing numbers. They help
make the case for civilian stand-by capacity and for
United Nations human resources management reform.
We were pleased that the report also
acknowledges that the United Nations must improve its
coordination, both internally and with national and
international actors. The delivering as one philosophy
must underpin United Nations peacebuilding efforts,
just as it must in any other area. United Nations
country leaders — the people on the ground — need
greater powers and support from Headquarters to
achieve their most immediate, and invariably urgent,
objectives. Competent appointees, with well-defined
delegations given the freedom to act quickly and
decisively, could save lives, save time and save
infrastructure and institutions essential to the
peacebuilding process.
The report also recognizes the need for rapid
assessments to determine both existing capacity and
the most immediate demands for external support.
Capacity development, where it is needed, should not
be part of an exit strategy; it should begin straight
away.

8

New Zealand follows the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission with considerable interest.
Its composition, objectives and working methods offer
significant promise. But, despite that, we have yet to
see concrete results. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s consideration of how it might
better realize its potential, including channelling its
resources and promoting greater coherence.
New Zealand favours an integrated approach to
addressing the underlying causes of conflict, with the
participation of security, diplomatic, development and
local actors. We commend the report for emphasizing
the importance of local context in developing a
peacebuilding strategy.
New Zealand has been a significant contributor to
peacebuilding activities that have made a tangible
difference on the ground. The Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands promotes long-term
stability, security and prosperity by supporting
improved rule of law, more effective, accountable and
democratic government, economic growth and
enhanced public-service delivery. We also adopt an
integrated whole-of-government approach to our
contributions in Timor-Leste and Afghanistan.
The image of the Blue Beret interposed between
previously warring parties has become one of the
Organization’s successes. But the benefits of
peacekeeping, ceasefires and truces can be quickly lost
without the next stage, namely, that of peacebuilding,
which makes short-term peace sustainable by fostering
democracy, leadership, justice, reconciliation, human
rights and economic and social development.
New Zealand is committed to working with the
United Nations and others to ensure more durable
solutions to preventing future conflict. The United
Nations must remain as committed to peacebuilding as
it is to peacekeeping. One is immediately important to
end conflict and save lives; the other is absolutely
necessary to prevent the resumption of conflict and to
rebuild lives and societies. History will judge not only
how we achieved the first, but also how we sustained
the second.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today on

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

this vitally important topic. I know that the time is
short, so I will summarize my statement.
Australia welcomes the report (S/2009/304) of
the Secretary-General, as have others today. Postconflict peacebuilding is a key challenge of our time.
The Secretary-General’s leadership is critical to
advancing United Nations efforts to address that
challenge. His report provides important guidance to
all our efforts to improve our response in the aftermath
of conflicts.
We fully endorse the principle that peacebuilding
following a conflict is the responsibility of the
Government of the affected country. There must be
local ownership of all efforts. At the same time — and
this is not a contradiction — stronger and betterresourced United Nations leadership on the ground will
result in better outcomes for the partner country. To
improve analysis, planning and coordination, for
example, the role of the resident coordinator’s office
should be strengthened. We also welcome the
recognition that there should be a commensurate
increase in the accountability of senior United Nations
leadership.
We need to recognize the importance of the
security-development nexus and to ensure an integrated
approach among the various mission elements. We
would argue that the importance of effective civilmilitary-police relations needs to be a key
consideration for those taking leadership roles in
missions and also in the training and preparedness of
deployed civilians.
We welcome the report’s acknowledgement of the
role that local and traditional authorities and civil
society have in recovery and development. Australia’s
experience in the Pacific, like New Zealand’s, has
demonstrated the importance of supporting traditional
leadership — including those outside the formal State
apparatus — in recovery efforts.
We also welcome the report’s emphasis on the
needs of women and girls. The early post-conflict
period provides an opportunity to consolidate new
leadership and employment roles that may have been
taken on by women during the period of the conflict.
In terms of the international architecture,
Australia welcomes the enhanced cooperation
framework recently agreed between the World Bank
and the United Nations.

09-41816

With regard to deployable civilian capabilities,
we in Australia are in the process of developing such a
capability. We look forward to cooperating with the
United Nations and others in undertaking a
comprehensive review of how to broaden and deepen
the pool of civilian experts and improve their
interoperability.
In conclusion, I should to thank you again,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
debate, to reiterate our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for the important report that has brought all
together and for the valuable ideas that he has shared
with us, and finally, to underline our willingness to
keep working to improve all our efforts in this area.
Mr. Gutiérrez Reinel (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to highlight the fact that the
Security Council scheduled this open debate on postconflict peacebuilding shortly after the recent
submission of the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) to the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission and, in particular, shortly
after the conclusion of the high-level Conference on
the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development.
That timing is significant because Peru believes
that, in the current context of financial crisis, we must
make efforts to prevent peacebuilding processes from
being affected. We must do everything possible to
ensure that early recovery processes in post-conflict
States are maintained and, in this context of crisis,
even strengthened. It is well known that those
processes face a range of problems that hamper their
implementation, such as the lack of infrastructure in
countries benefiting from cooperation and the lack of
trained cooperation personnel owing to the working
and security conditions in post-conflict countries, as
well as the slow distribution of funds.
From that perspective, my delegation considers
that there are a number of steps that should be taken
immediately to strengthen the current peacebuilding
processes. These include placing priority on improving
the institutional capacity of Governments. That is
fundamental, because national actors are the real
protagonists in developing the work and the
implementation of peacebuilding processes.
With regard to the very nature of conflicts,
notwithstanding certain similarities in the economic

9

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

and social factors that may be observed in some, every
conflict has its own internal and external dynamics, as
well as its own ethnic, tribal, constitutional or
historical referents. That means that no two cases or
relevant groups of actors are alike — hence the
complexity and great sensitivity of the management
and design of strategies for peacebuilding processes.
Therefore, such processes require designs that
improve the division of labour so as to promote
effective management in the implementation of
projects, the greater involvement of women as
important actors in any process, and a diffusion of
decision-making throughout the structures of
cooperating organizations in order to ensure better
effectiveness in project implementation.
Such clear and concrete measures would
strengthen the management capacities of all actors
involved in peacebuilding processes. In particular, they
would help to attain an objective that is an integral part
of peacebuilding processes — strengthening the
institutionality of the State. As we have seen, that is a
process whose aspects are two sides of the same coin
and thus interconnected. Therefore, actions should be
aimed at promoting both the peacebuilding process and
the State-building process, not only simultaneously but
in parallel.
In such an exercise, it is important, in the light of
the prognosis set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, that a series of actions be taken to effectively
bridge the strategic gap between weak institutional
capacities and delayed project financing, without
neglecting work in three areas that have a direct
bearing on the peacebuilding and the State-building
processes — governance, security and development —
seeking a fair balance that avoids giving one area preeminence over another.
With respect to international cooperation, my
delegation believes that, as a matter of priority, it
should be channelled towards strengthening the
political system and conflict settlement, the training of
civilian teams and the design and implementation of
projects that will have a swift social impact, which is
crucial in order to gain the support of the local
population. To that end, financial institutions,
including the World Bank in particular, are natural
allies in peacebuilding efforts and essential to their
success.

10

All of this involves a medium- and long-term
commitment, with the participation of the international
community and the full agreement of the State
concerned. It may be of several years’ duration, in
many priority areas and, in some cases, quite farreaching. A strategic vision of the peacebuilding
process is required to that end. It is thus essential to
build an alliance among the political, social,
educational and economic powers of the State and the
relevant international actors.
To the society involved in peacebuilding
processes, it should be made clear that international
cooperation is aimed at strengthening the exercise of
its sovereignty, with full respect for international law
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
but that such cooperation has a time frame and must
follow an agenda with clearly defined objectives and
specific goals that will ensure its viability.
I should like to conclude by highlighting the
important work accomplished thus far by the
Peacebuilding Commission, by reaffirming Peru’s
constructive support for the leadership of the United
Nations and the Commission in the work being done in
peacebuilding processes, and by emphasizing my
country’s full readiness to contribute decisively to
those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Today’s Security Council debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding is of crucial importance; the subject
merits follow-up and further comprehensive work. It is
significant, Sir, that this debate is taking place under
the presidency of a noble son of our continent, Africa,
which continues to be a stakeholder in international
peacebuilding efforts.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on this
theme (S/2009/304) contains reflection, analysis and
forward thinking about how to fill the gaps and make
United Nations efforts more effective and better
adapted to the needs of countries affected by conflict.
Let me draw four fundamental elements from this rich
report which in my delegation’s view are of particular
importance.
First, peacebuilding efforts should be launched as
soon as a peace agreement is signed and should be
integrated into the implementation of peacekeeping

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

operations. Such an approach would enable the
international community to respond in good time to the
priorities of countries emerging from conflict, help
those countries to implement the peace agreements
they have signed, create peace dividends that can calm
populations and help restore trust.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly
emphasizes the importance of economic recovery,
which should be integrated into other peacebuilding
tasks such as security sector reform; rule of law,
including the protection of human rights; bolstering
State authority; and transitional justice.

Secondly, national ownership — encompassing
both Government and civil society — of the
peacebuilding process is fundamental. When the
Government or authorities of a country emerging from
conflict takes ownership of the process of defining and
implementing peacebuilding strategies, it becomes
engaged and takes responsibility for the success or
failure of the process. But national ownership, however
necessary, is not enough. The contribution of the
international community is also needed, including that
of the international financial institutions, through
financial and technical assistance and capacitybuilding.

In conclusion, I stress the important role of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I have been participating
in its work for some eight months, and I have seen the
tremendous work the Commission is doing; it is
pragmatic and invaluable for the countries concerned.
Since it became operational, the Commission has
played an extremely important role by designing
integrated peacebuilding strategies, adopting a countryspecific approach to the States on its agenda,
promoting integrated strategies and mobilizing
resources. The role of the Peacebuilding Commission
should be enhanced and better integrated into the
architecture of the United Nations system and its
partners, including through the promotion of regular
interaction and productive cooperation between the
Commission and the Security Council.

Thirdly, there is a need for predictable, rapid and
flexible financing for the implementation of
peacebuilding strategies. Here, we hope that the recent
review of the terms of reference of the Peacebuilding
Fund will make it possible to ensure flexibility and
speed in the timely disbursement of funds, as well as
their optimal utilization.
Fourthly, the international community’s activities
in the field require coherence and coordination, with a
view to producing the desired outcome. In that regard,
the competencies and experience that the United
Nations has gained in this sphere enable the
Organization to assume a leadership role in channelling
international action that responds to the needs of the
society in question.
I said that I would mention four elements, but a
fifth is extremely important as well: the role of
regional actors in the creation of conditions conducive
to peacebuilding in countries emerging from conflict.
You, Mr. President, are well placed to see the very
valuable contributions made by neighbouring countries
and regional groupings. Experience continues to show
that the contributions of neighbouring countries and
regional or subregional groupings can make or break a
peacebuilding endeavour. The special contribution of
such regional actors is extremely important: they
should be involved in a constructive way, to bring
about peace, stability and regional cooperation.

09-41816

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): I would like to join
my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for
his timely and valuable report (S/2009/304). I would
also like to thank the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Muñoz, for his very
comprehensive briefing.
Germany fully supports the statement of the
European Union presidency to be made by the
representative of Sweden later and shares its analysis
of peacebuilding challenges.
Today more than ever, the international
community is facing the challenge of supporting postconflict countries on their way back to sustainable
peace and stability. It is often said that winning peace
is almost as difficult as winning a war. The fact that
30 per cent of countries fall back into conflict within
five years of a peace agreement underlines the
magnitude of this challenge.
The report provides an excellent road map for the
way ahead with its numerous recommendations. I
would like to focus my statement on three particularly
important challenges.

11

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

The first issue at stake is national ownership.
National ownership is key to all peace building efforts.
However, in the immediate aftermath of a conflict,
national ownership cannot be taken for granted. There
are often insufficient national capacities to fully enable
the country to exercise its ownership. Therefore, it is
vital to strengthen the national capacity to re-establish
the institutions of Government, restore the rule of law,
provide basic services and handle other key
peacebuilding needs. We also must support the national
authorities by establishing a prioritized early strategy
to address the causes of each particular conflict.
Secondly, there is need for effective and
accountable senior United Nations leadership on the
ground. This is a prerequisite to corral the international
assistance behind the early national strategy. Thereby
we can provide timely and predictable support. To
achieve a comprehensive and coherent approach we
will need a clear division of labour and responsibilities
among the various actors. In particular, we must strive
for close coordination between the United Nations and
the World Bank.
Finally, there is the timing of international
support. We need to rapidly and efficiently lay the
groundwork for durable peace and sustainable
development. To that end, it is essential for
peacebuilding efforts to start as early as possible after a
conflict, if possible alongside peacekeeping efforts.
The new terms of reference for the Peacebuilding Fund
provide enhanced opportunities for faster and more
flexible funding for peacebuilding activities in the
crucial moments directly after a conflict.
Germany will, in particular, strengthen its
national capacities to contribute to international
peacebuilding missions. We will also support efforts
within the framework of the United Nations and
regional organizations to increase the rapidity and
efficiency of our response to conflicts.
We look forward to a strengthened role for the
Peacebuilding Commission in tackling the challenges
ahead. The comprehensive review in 2010 will provide
a good opportunity to discuss the Peacebuilding
Commission’s future role and activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin, Sir, by expressing my thanks for the

12

opportunity to participate in this open debate which
you have convened in such a timely fashion to address
the question of post-conflict peacebuilding. This issue
is relevant to us, in view of our own experiences since
the signing of our Peace Agreements in 1996, with a
significant United Nations presence. I wish also to
express my thanks to the Secretary-General,
Mr. McKechnie of the World Bank and Ambassador
Heraldo Muñoz, for their presentations, which have
undoubtedly enriched this debate.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s emphasis on
the importance of national ownership, the central idea
of his report (S/2009/304). This recognition is, in our
view, essential since a firm and lasting peace agenda
can be executed only when the main national actors
find in it a minimal agenda for compromise and
consensus.
At the same time, we find useful the commitment
undertaken to promote a coherent and efficient
response by the United Nations system. In this regard,
we believe it is important to make use of the full
potential of the Peacebuilding Support Office, and, to
this end, we concur in the importance of clearly
defining its role, taking into account the
complementarity that it could offer to other Secretariat
bodies.
We believe that equal attention needs to be given
to the fact that the broader support from bilateral
donors and non-governmental organizations should be
coherent, coordinated and sustained, and above all
complementary to the efforts to build confidence in the
peace process. That is particularly critical and there is
a need to prevent such support from exacerbating the
causes of conflict or from generating new sources of
tension, as has happened on some occasions in the past.
As regards the proposal on predictable
international assistance, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to create new systems for
recruitment of personnel from neighbouring regions,
from countries with similar socio-economic, cultural or
linguistic structures, or that have already undergone a
process of post-conflict transition.
We appreciate the ideas put forward for an
enhanced capacity for rapid deployment of personnel,
although this proposal seems complex to us because of
the costs that it might involve in terms of keeping
professional staff on permanent standby, especially for
developing countries. We trust that the proposed

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

review and the information provided by the SecretaryGeneral on the basis of the relevant provisions of
General Assembly resolutions 61/279 and 63/280, will
contain mechanisms that are more flexible and that will
make it possible to draw upon the capacity of the
southern hemisphere.
The report of the Secretary-General reminds us of
the importance of responsiveness, harmonization,
flexibility and risk-tolerance in the financing
mechanisms for the capacity of the system to give an
appropriate response. The establishment of multi-donor
trust funds and other pooled financing mechanisms for
a country seems to us to be a measure that meets these
requirements. However, we continue to be concerned
about the trend of allocating earmarked funds to the
detriment of regular funding, an imbalance which we
believe to be the main cause of a lack of coherence in
the United Nations system.
As regards the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we have been interested to see the
proposals of the Secretary-General with a view to
continuing to improve its advisory function and its
function as a forum for a discussion on aid
effectiveness and for mutual accountability. The review
envisaged for 2010 offers us an important opportunity
to learn lessons from the experiences of these first few
years and to take decisions on the improvements that
need to be made.
We welcome the report’s reference to the
Economic and Social Council, although we regret the
fact that it is limited to the issue of financing for
development. That ignores one of the main functions of
that organ, which is to coordinate the activities of the
specialized agencies and making recommendations to
them, especially in the context of the humanitarian
segment and the operational activities segment.
Finally, allow me to touch on a matter closely
related to today’s discussion but not covered by the
reflections of the Secretary-General, namely the
desirability of initiating peacebuilding activities in
countries that are still in conflict, taking into account
the importance of effective coordination and
mobilization of resources from the peacekeeping stage
to the peacebuilding stage.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

09-41816

Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. My
delegation expresses its appreciation for this morning’s
briefing by Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz, Chairman of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We also thank the
representative of the World Bank for his statement.
Brazil welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2009/304). It provides valuable insights
on how to improve United Nations effectiveness in
post-conflict situations. I would like, in particular, to
comment on six aspects mentioned in the report.
First, we appreciate the strong emphasis the
report places on country ownership. This principle
should be the sine qua non for any strategy for
peacebuilding. However, country ownership brings
enormous challenges. Governments often lack the
human and material resources needed to undertake the
most elementary of tasks. But there are no shortcuts.
We should spare no effort to strengthen local capacity
so that the country concerned can tread its own path
towards peace and development.
Secondly, the report correctly acknowledges the
importance of regional actors in peacebuilding.
Countries from the region usually share linguistic and
cultural values and, very often, similar political and
economic contexts. They are therefore very well placed
to provide assistance. Also, the contribution from the
global South should not be underestimated. SouthSouth cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding offers
very promising avenues that have yet to be fully
explored.
It is in the light of this perception that we should
consider the Secretary-General's proposals for ensuring
adequate and timely leadership on the ground. Standby
civilian capacity mechanisms could benefit from the
contribution of regional actors and developing
countries. Their mandate should include, first and
foremost, support to domestic institutions. Also, as the
report indicates, they should not replace ongoing
efforts to improve regular recruitment processes and
human resources management.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General noticed that there
are recurrent priorities to be taken into consideration in
peacebuilding. They encompass a broad range of areas,
from the restoration of key State functions to the
promotion of economic recovery. Setting priorities

13

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

among priorities is indeed necessary. However,
peacebuilding is a multidimensional enterprise.
Priorities will necessarily contemplate different areas,
especially in the fields of security and development, in
which coordinated and simultaneous actions are
indispensable. It is true that lack of security hampers
economic development. But it is also true that peace
cannot be sustainable in the midst of misery and
despair.
Fourthly, we totally agree that funding is the
backbone of peacebuilding. Any strategy, no matter
how sophisticated or creative it might be, will have a
short life in the absence of adequate financing. That is
why we endorse the appeal by the Secretary-General
for innovative and more flexible financing schemes,
tailored to the specificities of peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Fund has been extremely useful and will
continue to be so under its new guidelines. But it was
envisioned as a catalytic tool that needs
complementary funding from other sources, on a
reliable and continuous basis.
Fifthly, we praise the focus of the report on the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Peace dividends
should become visible to the population as soon as
possible. Early recovery prevents the spiral of
instability that could make the situation even more
difficult and lead to the resumption of conflicts. Brazil
believes the Peacebuilding Commission can also play
an important role in countries in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, should their Governments so
request.
However, it should be borne in mind that many
countries where conflict subsided years ago either
suffer from donor fatigue or, worse still, have never
been able to attain sustained international assistance.
That is the case of Guinea-Bissau and the other
countries currently on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The contribution of the Commission in
these cases has been quite valuable, most notably with
regard to the galvanization of international attention
and the mobilization of resources.
We hope — and this is my sixth and final
point — that the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to the Peacebuilding Commission can serve as a good
basis for a comprehensive dialogue on how to enhance
the Commission’s work even further. Particular
attention should be devoted to ways to streamline the
Commission in the United Nations system and

14

strengthen its coordination with United Nations bodies
and
other
stakeholders,
including
regional
organizations, the international financial institutions,
civil society and the private sector. The 2010 review
process will be a golden opportunity to address this and
other issues.
The President: I give the floor next to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Davies (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I had
an opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency when I addressed this body during
the recent meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone in
respect of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Let me
once again, Mr. President, congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and express the sincere gratitude of my delegation for
inviting us to participate in this debate.
My delegation's appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
jointly presented to the Security Council and the
General Assembly (S/2009/304). I would also like to
thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank for their valuable
presentations this morning.
The Peacebuilding Commission was established
to marshal the resources of the international
community and to offer advice and propose strategies
for post-conflict recovery, with a special focus on
reconstruction, institution-building and sustainable
development in countries emerging from conflict.
In order to accomplish these goals, the
Committee set itself the following objectives: first, to
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery; second, help to ensure
predictable financing for early recovery activities and
sustained financial investment over the medium to
longer term; third, extend the period of attention by the
international community to post-conflict recovery; and
fourth, to develop best practices on issues that require
extensive collaboration among political, military,
humanitarian and development actors. Therefore, any
consideration of a report presented concurrently to the
Security Council and the General Assembly should be
gauged by the above parameters, with regard to the
attainment of the priorities of the countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission.

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

Four years have gone by, and the proposed
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery and the development of best practices on
issues that require extensive collaboration among
political, military, humanitarian and development
actors have evolved substantially, as spelled out in the
report before us. The countries on the Commission’s
agenda continue to receive the international
community's attention. It is very crucial to advance
these objectives to the next level and to help to ensure
predictable financing for early recovery activities and
sustained financial investment over the medium to
longer term.
Peacebuilding is a powerful conflict-prevention
mechanism both in societies that have experienced
violent conflict and in those on the verge of sliding into
conflict. However, studies reveal that the United
Nations and the international community have tended
to invest more resources on conflict resolution and
peacemaking than on the preventive aspect.
The consolidation of peace in societies emerging
from conflict depends entirely on the efforts and
initiatives undertaken to address the immediate
aftermath of conflict — a phase characterized by the
complete withdrawal of the remnants of arms from
communities, the reassimilation of internally displaced
persons, refugees and ex-combatants into civil society
and the provision of relief. These, in our opinion, rank
among the key components required for stabilizing
post-conflict situations in order to pave the way for
various reform initiatives and long-term recovery
programmes.
We must bear in mind that if these factors remain
unaddressed, the potential for societies to slide back
into conflict can be imminent. It is also worth noting
that studies have shown that societies emerging from
violent conflict are more likely to relapse into
hostilities in the first five to ten years following the
end of conflict. Thus a rapid and effective engagement
of the above-mentioned components can be crucial for
the future stability, recovery and the sustainable
development of those societies.
On the home front, Sierra Leone has come a long
way. Since the end of the war, we have had three
general elections, the last of which brought the
opposition party, the All People’s Congress of
President Ernest Bai Koroma, to power. We recently
had the quarterly review of the implementation of the

09-41816

mandate
of
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. Leadership of
actors on the ground is well coordinated. The numerous
strategic frameworks have been completely streamlined
in President Ernest Bai Koroma’s Agenda for Change.
The recently concluded second generation of the
poverty-reduction strategy and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations country team as a coordination
mechanism for partnership collaboration with the
Government have been realized.
The recent hiccup in mid-March that tested our
resolve for peaceful coexistence as a nation was swiftly
addressed by the Government and the Executive
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
by
encouraging the leaderships of two main political
parties to take responsibility for the actions of their
supporters. That effort brought the inter-party dialogue
back on track and, since then, the situation has
normalized.
The high-level event, hosted at the request of the
Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific meeting, the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McKee, and the Government of Sierra Leone on
10 June this year, sought to move forward the Sierra
Leone peacebuilding agenda by marshalling support
for the Government’s Agenda for Change and the
second phase of the poverty-reduction strategy by
announcing the establishment of a $350 million donor
trust fund for the implementation of those strategic
frameworks. The Government appeals for, and looks
forward to, a favourable response now and at the
forthcoming Consultative Group meeting, to be held in
London in November.
On behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone, I
would like to register our sincere appreciation for the
continued engagement of the United Nations, our
bilateral partners and the international community on
Sierra Leone and for the determination to consolidate
peace and democracy and to put Sierra Leone on the
path to sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate the Council for
having convened this debate on such an important
topic. Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is crucial in guaranteeing peace, security and
the minimal conditions for human development for

15

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

millions of people who have emerged or who are
emerging from conflict, as well as in preventing such
conflicts from reoccurring.
In that respect, Uruguay would like to take this
opportunity to highlight certain aspects of the report
(S/2009/304) presented this morning by the SecretaryGeneral that we find to be particularly relevant.
Probably the most striking point in that report
relates to the need to give greater coordination and
coherence within and beyond the United Nations
system to peacebuilding efforts. That point,
summarized in the need to approach this issue from a
comprehensive standpoint that encompasses the
various key areas to stabilize a country and to begin to
give it concrete steps in its economic and social
development, is crucial for the international
community’s peacebuilding efforts to be effective and
sustainable.
In that regard, we are convinced that the
Peacebuilding Commission is a key tool to improving
the current situation, and we hope that the 2010 review
process creates a favourable climate for that body to
fully engage in the area of coordination.
In that respect, let
me stress that the
Peacebuilding Commission is unique in being probably
the only intergovernmental forum that brings together
developing and developed countries to jointly discuss
peacebuilding and reconstruction; that links political
aspects, such as those of security and development;
that so closely involves itself in specific countries; and
that has a level of legitimacy that probably no other
body has.
Meanwhile, we fully agree with a number of
concepts highlighted in the report, such as the need to
strengthen national ownership and to give priority to a
country’s own needs, which goes hand in hand with
strengthening national capacity from the start.
Likewise, we appreciate that issues linked to
security, undoubtedly indispensable to providing a
minimum framework of stability, be only one area in
which the Secretariat has proposed seeking
considerable progress in the coming months. Support
for governmental institutions that serve essential
functions, the reintegration of returnees, early
employment generation, the rehabilitation of basic
infrastructure and various aspects of economic

16

revitalization are activities of equal priority, without
which peacebuilding is not sustainable.
As we have already stated in other thematic
debates, it also seems important that dialogue and
peace processes be inclusive and representative, and
we agree that regional organizations can play a positive
role in that respect.
From the standpoint of a developing country that
has actively cooperated in peacekeeping as well as in
early recovery activities, primarily through valuable
human resources, we particularly appreciate the
emphasis placed on the need for the United Nations to
draw more on/take better advantage of the capacities in
the southern hemisphere in order to contribute to the
task of peacebuilding. In that regard, we hope to see
the realization of the idea put forward by the SecretaryGeneral in the report of creating new systems of
outreach to appropriately qualified personnel from
developing countries. Uruguay, along with the rest of
our region, has valuable human resources to contribute
in various areas key to peacebuilding.
Somewhat linked to the aspect mentioned earlier,
there is one matter that caught our attention it was not
covered properly in the report of the Secretary-General.
It concerns the support that military personnel deployed
in peacekeeping operations could contribute, precisely in
that early period, when there is a transition towards a
peacebuilding phase or when both tasks — peacekeeping
and peacebuilding — occur simultaneously.
The role of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders
must not be underestimated. The support that such
personnel can contribute in key areas such as providing
security and strengthening the rule of law, including
areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as security sector reform and
even expanding State authority, must be drawn on. The
positive effect of quick-impact projects should also be
taken into account. There are over 100,000 women and
men deployed in 16 missions who can provide a
resolute contribution in the early stages of restoring
stability.
To conclude, as is clear from the report and this
debate, much remains to be done with respect to
mechanisms of the management, financing and
coordination of peacebuilding. That is only natural,
bearing in mind that this Organization has undertaken
systematic and institutionalized efforts in this area for

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

only a short time. For that reason, Uruguay believes
that it is extremely timely for all of us to take this
opportunity to renew our support to the Peacebuilding
Commission and take advantage of the approaching
2010 review to strengthen it and make it an even more
effective tool for the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Brevik (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). We fully
agree with the report’s emphasis on national ownership
and on the need to meet countries’ demand for
strengthening of national and local capacities.
The role of the United Nations should be to
coordinate international efforts. To fulfil this role, the
United Nations country team must be able to draw on
staff quickly and assign them to appropriate positions
without having to engage in time-consuming
administrative rules and regulations. Norway therefore
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to Member States to approve reform packages on
human resources.
We also welcome the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to create a senior-level mechanism at United
Nations Headquarters to ensure that the right
leadership and support teams are in place as early as
possible.
Despite the comprehensiveness of the report,
Norway would have liked to see the roles of the
various sectors described more fully in the report. We
believe that undefined responsibility leads to a lack of
accountability. We trust that the work in this area will
continue in the time ahead.
Although significant progress has been made in
comprehensive strategic planning, there remain serious
challenges in trying to coordinate security, political,
humanitarian and development efforts in post-conflict
situations. The report addresses this fundamental
dilemma by stating that the senior United Nations
leadership team has the responsibility to ensure
strategic coordination and linkages between the
relevant frameworks. All parts of the United Nations
system need to improve dialogue and coordination and
should be provided with incentives to avoid
duplication, inefficiency and delays in the
commencement of operations. Member States need to

09-41816

take a lead role in requesting and supporting these
improvements.
In that regard, Norway commends the steps taken
to improve the working relationship between the
United Nations and the World Bank with the
Partnership Framework Agreement. This is of vital
importance and will hopefully improve both the
strategic coordination and the collective impact of the
United Nations and the World Bank’s efforts on the
ground.
The Peacebuilding Commission should play a
more central role in ensuring that the international
community is a more reliable partner to Governments
of post-conflict countries. The role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in promoting greater
coherence and synergies between the different parts of
the United Nations system and other partners should be
strengthened. It is essential that adequate resources be
made available to the Peacebuilding Support Office in
order to support the Peacebuilding Commission and
administer the Peacebuilding Fund in an efficient
manner.
As stated in the report, the Peacebuilding Fund
should strengthen its focus on core peacebuilding
activities. Thus far, the Peacebuilding Fund has largely
supported later-stage peacebuilding activities rather
than providing a rapid, flexible and risk-tolerant
approach directed at the immediate aftermath of
conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General sets out an
agenda to strengthen the United Nations response in
the immediate aftermath of conflict and the facilitation
of an earlier, more coherent response from the wider
international community. Successful implementation of
the agenda requires political will, prioritization and the
alignment of funding from Member States. Let me
reiterate Norway’s commitment to the reinforcement of
the existing peacebuilding mechanisms and our support
for the recommendations stated in the report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Singh Puri (India): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for scheduling today’s debate. We are
addressing a topic that we believe is very relevant to
the raison d’être of the United Nations. I also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in

17

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304),
which underpins today’s discussion.
The report collates several significant findings
and recommendations. Key among these is the need for
a more coherent and effective international engagement
during the brief window between the cessation of
conflict and the establishment of a peace process, and
the more complex process of ensuring that such
processes remain on track. There are clearly two levels
of intervention in support of a peace process. The first
is at the national and local level, and the second is at
the regional and international level. Both processes
must move in lockstep.
However, that said, there are several elements of
detail that require attention. These include the need to
ensure that the supporting external interventions focus
on delivering a peace dividend, expanding national
capacity and ensuring the expansion of basic economic
capacity so that surplus labour — especially young
people — can be gainfully employed.
Such efforts need to be based on recognition of
the complexity of post-conflict scenarios. Not all peace
processes and agreements address the underlying
causes of conflict. Similarly, not all local actors are
untarnished by the rigours of conflict. Yet we need to
work pragmatically with the actors and circumstances
as we find them, not as we would wish them to be.
From that standpoint, it is important to ensure that
priority-setting be a local endeavour. It is both
politically unworkable and strategically perilous for the
international community to involve itself in
determining national priorities. Sustainable peace
requires genuine national ownership of the process, not
a process that is nationally owned only in times of
difficulty.
It is therefore essential that from the outset peace
consolidation efforts be focused upon expanding the
capacity and competence of the local Government to
deliver services. Without this, there can be no national
ownership or development, and without either there
will be no sustainable peace. There is a particular
contribution that the nations of the South can make in
this context, both with regard to providing training and
services and with regard to providing appropriate
technologies. These potentialities need to be explored
further.
At the same time, there is also a need for greater
efforts to align national and international efforts in

18

multilateral forums. Through better alignment and
coordination, we can conceivably achieve more
coherent interventions and inputs on the ground. This
requires better horizontal and vertical coherence. That
is to say, we need more coherent efforts by the
international community to integrate sometimes
disparate efforts in dealing with cross-cutting themes in
a peacebuilding context. Too often, the well-meaning
efforts of the international community tend to be at
cross purposes, thereby undermining the collective
effort.
Similarly, vertical coordination is also required,
in particular within the United Nations and its agencies
and programmes, to ensure that a common objective is
matched by a clear road map to that objective.
Coordination and consultation between the United
Nations and the international financial institutions,
especially the World Bank, must also be expanded.
The report clearly recognizes that if the United
Nations is to be a lead actor in the process of
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
more must be done to improve its efficiency. It is of
course positive that the report recognizes such lacunae.
It is also important that the report implicitly recognizes
that of itself; the significant convening power that the
United Nations brings to the table is not enough. Thus,
section V of the report dwells at length on the means
by which the United Nations and its funds and
programmes may be able to contribute more effectively
to the process. Naturally, as practitioners on the ground
will be better able to assess the potential efficacy of
such measures, perhaps in time more deep-rooted
reform will be required.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the need
for further consideration and discussion of the complex
issue of post-conflict peacebuilding. We need to be
able to frame this debate within a conceptual
framework that tries to answer certain larger questions
regarding the purposes and principles of international
involvement in post-conflict peace consolidation.
These include the question of where early recovery fits
within the larger continuum of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and where the transition from
peacekeeping
to
peacebuilding,
and
from
peacebuilding to peace consolidation and development,
begins.
We also need to ask ourselves how international
investment, both in money and political will, can be

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

expanded in support of peacebuilding. In that context,
there is clearly a need to expand the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and to deepen its strategic
relationship with the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Social and Economic Council.
I look forward to a continuing dialogue on this
subject in this and other forums within the United
Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Thailand, I wish to
warmly congratulate the delegation of Uganda upon its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I would like also, Sir, to express
our sincere appreciation for your leadership in
convening this timely Security Council debate on the
very important issue of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Like other delegations that took the floor earlier,
the Government of Thailand shares the commitment of
the international community to this critical issue and
stands ready to work with partners to advance the
agenda for the benefit of people on the ground. In this
connection, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to share our views on the issue with the
Council.
First, Thailand welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) and would like to
thank the Peacebuilding Support Office for its
commendable work. We agree with the emphasis of the
report on early action and national ownership in the
peacebuilding process. The report highlights critical
gaps in peacebuilding efforts and provides useful
recommendations on ways and means to strengthen the
United Nations response as well as international
cooperation on this matter.
Secondly, Thailand supports the strengthening of
United Nations leadership and coordination on
peacebuilding. As the largest intergovernmental
organization, with specialized agencies spanning a
comprehensive set of issues and a close partnership
with a variety of civil society organizations on the
ground, the United Nations is, we believe, in a unique
position to bring all relevant actors on board to ensure
more effective coordination and a more coherent
response at both the policy level and on the ground in

09-41816

support of the priorities and strategies of all countries
concerned. With a common vision and a coherent
coordination mechanism among the United Nations
agencies, donors and other relevant actors, countryspecific needs and priorities would have a better
chance of being fulfilled and limited resources would
be better utilized.
Thirdly, Thailand is of the view that security and
economic challenges must be addressed simultaneously
and given equal weight when priorities for
peacebuilding are being determined. Security and
development are interconnected and cannot be tackled
in isolation. It is important to keep in mind that there is
no one-size-fits-all solution or formula for rebuilding a
society that has undergone conflict. Every situation is
unique and the particular dynamics of each case, as
well as the competing demands and interests of all
parties concerned in a given society, should be taken
fully into account when setting a country’s priorities
and strategies. In other words, the process must be
bottom-up to be durable.
Fourthly, to promote national ownership and
sustainable peace in the long run, Thailand believes
that local expertise and resources should be fully
mobilized, while the country’s resources management
capability should also be strengthened. When
international experts are called on to deliver advice and
services on the ground, geographical balance and
representation should be taken into consideration. And
at the start of a peacebuilding process, the relevant
actors should have an end goal in sight. It is important
to stress that peacebuilding is not a perpetual process,
but a supportive beginning to sustainable peace and
development.
Fifthly, Thailand believes that regional actors can
significantly influence the peace process and that
engagement with such key players in peacebuilding
efforts is indispensable. Therefore, we encourage
closer and more systematic consultations, as well as
sharing of experience, between the United Nations and
relevant regional partners throughout the peacebuilding
process, from the very outset.
We also recognize the potentially positive
contribution of South-South cooperation and trilateral
partnerships in assisting countries emerging from
conflict, bearing in mind the comparative advantage of
the sharing of experience between developing countries

19

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

or those with similar social, cultural or political
structures, with the support of the donor community.
Sixthly, Thailand strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Security Council
should proactively consider how to more actively
utilize the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission in
its consideration of post-conflict situations. We also
support the Secretary-General in his view that, for
countries on the Security Council’s agenda, the
respective roles of the Council and the Commission
need to be seen as complementary and parallel, rather
than sequenced in a manner that could diminish the
Commission’s role during earlier phases where it could
add significant value.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Thailand’s firm
commitment to peacebuilding and our strong support
for a holistic approach to the issue of peace and
security. We believe that in the present age of
globalization and increasing interdependence, it is
imperative to address conflicts comprehensively —
both upstream and downstream. Conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should always be
looked at in their totality. We are committed to
supporting the work of the United Nations in this
regard. We look forward to constructive consultations
leading to the review of the arrangements of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2010, with the goal of
strengthening its contribution to the effects of
peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Uganda’s assumption of the
stewardship of the Security Council for this month. We
appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
discussion of the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).
We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
which contains an objective analysis of the challenges
and opportunities of post-conflict peacebuilding. While
the challenges addressed in the report may not be new,
the value-added of this report is the fresh perspective
and impetus it could provide on the ways and means of
addressing these challenges in a more timely and
effective manner. Drawing on past experiences, a
closer review of ground realities and expectations and
an extensive process of consultations, the report

20

outlines an agenda that can guide and better inform our
collective action in forging more coherent, efficient
and predictable responses to the peacebuilding needs of
countries emerging from conflict.
While the report’s focus is on the initial two-year
post-conflict period, it is good to note that it addresses
a wide range of policy issues and practical tools in a
manner that retains the broader and long-term
perspective of peacebuilding. But since there is a
proven risk of relapse into conflict within the first five
years, it is important for the international community
to devote particular attention to doing things right in
the immediate aftermath of conflict.
It is true that the challenges are immense in that
period, but so are the hopes and aspirations of the
people affected by conflict, who are determined to
seize the opportunity of peace and to turn a new page
for a better and more secure and prosperous future.
That is what must happen. It is those people who have
the greatest interest and highest stakes in
peacebuilding. It is therefore only logical that they
have full leadership and ownership over the process.
However, since countries emerging from conflict
face complex and fragile situations, and most often
lack the capacities and resources to overcome the
challenges on their own, it is incumbent upon the
international community to help them to lay
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
That partnership is at the heart of successful
peacebuilding. It comes as no surprise that the report of
the Secretary-General is structured around those
central pillars of national ownership, with the good
governance and honest and sincere purpose that are
essential. That must also include international
partnership, with sufficient resources and the will to
understand, not dominate.
Today, peacebuilding is an established component
of the comprehensive approach to conflict prevention
and resolution. It is a direct manifestation of the
interlinkage between peace and development. The
general principles of effective peacebuilding are well
recognized. As the Secretary-General has observed, it
entails a common strategic vision based on clearly
defined and agreed national priorities, and coherent
and concerted action backed by the required capacity
and resources aligned with that strategy.
We believe that, in order to succeed, that
endeavour must be people-centric, responsible to the

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

specific needs and circumstances and designed to
reinforce their confidence in and support for the peace
process. The central objectives of establishing security,
promoting
inclusive
political
processes
and
reconciliation, delivering early tangible peace
dividends and building national capacities for
governance, economic recovery and development
should all be sensitive to that human dimension of
peacebuilding.
While there is a fair degree of convergence on the
principles and objectives of peacebuilding, the main
challenge is to translate it fully into practice. The true
test of the Secretary-General’s report will be in the
implementation of his recommendations. That requires,
above all, the political will and commitment, not only
of national actors but also of international partners, to
stand behind and implement a common strategy, not
one that is divergent. While the latter need to
demonstrate more understanding and flexibility to
align their support with national priorities and to
eliminate conditionalities, the former, on their part,
also need to inculcate the required responsibility and
values of governance that correspond to ownership and
infuse confidence among all partners.
The Secretary-General is right in saying — and
this is very important — that investment in national
capacity-building should be part of the entry, rather
than — in that well-known and oft-used phrase — the
exit strategy. Priority should be on identifying, tapping
and harnessing the civilian capacities available
nationally before resorting to regional or international
expertise, as required. I would now like to remind my
colleagues of what Mr. Brahimi said in this very
Council on 20 May 2008.
“We should have as many international staff as
we need to get the job done, but not one single
staff member more than that. Our goal in the
mission, individually and collectively, should be
from the outset to work ourselves out of a job.”
(S/PV.5895, p. 10)
The most ominous gap, however, is in funding
and resources. The various recommendations contained
in the report aimed at generating rapid, flexible and
predictable funding would require cooperation and
support from Member States, in particular from donors,
as well as enhanced collaboration with the international
financial institutions, which have not been so
forthcoming to this institution in the past and which

09-41816

would need to show more operational flexibility in the
assistance programmes for countries emerging from
conflict, considering their plight and special
circumstances.
From the point of view of enhancing national
ownership and capacity, it should also be very
important that most of the funding also be provided
through governmental channels. But it would make a
lot of sense to devote attention, from the very outset, to
mobilizing international resources, especially through
better management and the exploitation of natural
resources, for the benefit of a country and its people.
Peacebuilding is a complex undertaking
involving parallel and coordinated efforts on the
security, political, humanitarian and development
fronts. The United Nations, with its wide-ranging
mechanisms, capacity and expertise, is well-placed to
coordinate and lead international action in this field —
of course, with the support of other partners,
particularly the World Bank.
We welcome the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral to improve the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations. The Peacebuilding Commission, with
its unique composition and specific mandate, has a
pivotal role in those efforts. Strengthening the
Commission and utilizing its full potential is therefore
essential in advancing the peacebuilding objectives of
the United Nations. For effective responses in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, it would make more
sense if the Peacebuilding Commission were engaged
from the very outset of the involvement of the United
Nations, particularly where integrated peacekeeping
missions are deployed. The Commission also has a
critical role to play in the follow-up to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Full implementation of the report
would also entail the engagement and contribution of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the success
of peacebuilding efforts will be gauged eventually by
the tangible benefits and results on the ground, not
merely by the organizational skill that we have to show
here. We hope that this debate, which to us is part of
the process that began in the Peacebuilding
Commission last week, will contribute to that same
objective, which is at the very heart of the SecretaryGeneral’s excellent report.

21

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): May I also join
preceding speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding, an issue that deserves greater
international attention, particularly in the context of the
complex and varied challenges faced by countries
emerging from conflict.
In the same vein, my delegation would like to
commend the report (S/2009/304) of the SecretaryGeneral before us on the issue of peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Our appreciation also
goes out to the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank
for the important presentations they made earlier today.
We would like to emphasize that the
Peacebuilding Commission should have the central role
in post-conflict peacebuilding. The Commission, in
institutional harmony with the Peacebuilding Fund and
the Peacebuilding Support Office, should act as the
primary body responsible for the coordination of
coherent and integrated peacebuilding activities, as
envisaged by the foundational resolutions 60/180 of the
General Assembly and 1645 (2005) of the Security
Council.
At the same time, we would like to underline the
importance of a more cohesive relationship among the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. In the context of the 2010 review of the
mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission, we look
forward to working closely with all concerned on how
to enhance and strengthen that mandate to make it
more effective.
My delegation fully supports the emphasis placed
in the Secretary-General’s report on the principle that
post-conflict societies must take charge of their own
destiny. With a view to the achievement of that goal,
we call upon international partners to align their
financial, technical and political support around a
commonly agreed national strategy that essentially
takes into account national ownership and priorities.
We also emphasize the need for all post-conflict
strategies and interventions to address the needs of
women; young people, particularly ex-combatants; and
children, including child soldiers, as the case may be.

22

We strongly emphasize the need for national
capacity-building from the very outset in order to
establish sustainable peace so that countries are
prevented from relapsing into conflict. In that regard,
existing national capacities must be taken into account.
Bangladesh also encourages the involvement of
civil society and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in development activities at the local level. We
believe that that could, in effect, significantly
contribute to the process of achieving sustainable
economic growth, leading to sustainable peace and
development in countries emerging from conflict.
In that context, I should like to mention that a
leading NGO of Bangladesh, with wide-ranging
operations and interventions in terms of health,
education, agriculture and microfinance development
projects, has recently begun to work in the
reconstruction processes of post-conflict countries such
as the southern Sudan, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
same organization has been making invaluable
contributions to the reconstruction of Afghanistan since
2002, amid formidable challenges. That could be
considered an ideal example of a successful SouthSouth cooperation and development initiative.
The
Secretary-General’s
recommendation
concerning rapidly deployable and skilled civilian
capacity deserves detailed examination. Any initiative
towards building such capacity should be thoroughly
discussed in more inclusive forums, such as the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
We reaffirm the importance of a more rapid and
flexible funding mechanism, as well as predictable
funds. These are of the utmost importance to
supporting national and local authorities in delivering a
peace dividend at an early stage.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiatives to
streamline coordination among Headquarters, special
representatives of the Secretary-General, United
Nations country teams, national Governments and the
Peacebuilding Commission. While we recognize the
need for an extended role for United Nations leadership
on the ground in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
we would like to emphasize that such efforts should
not undermine national ownership of the peacebuilding
process. Rather, efforts must be taken to facilitate,
promote and complement the country specific capacity
building mechanism and ownership of the process.

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

In that regard, given the evolving scenario of the
peacebuilding process, we would stress the need for the
further harmonization and consolidation of United
Nations-led initiatives, regarding which lessons learned
from the Security Council-mandated integrated
peacekeeping missions could be taken into account.
Finally, we strongly emphasize the need for
greater synergy between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activities, as many of the important
elements of peacebuilding process — such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform and the rule of law — emanate directly
from Council-mandated peacekeeping operations.
We believe that, if peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict is to succeed, focus
should be on identifying context-sensitive approaches
that will provide for sustainable national political
dialogue aimed at reconciliation among the parties to
the conflict, with the participation of all stakeholders.
The involvement of all stakeholders in identifying key
national priorities is essential, and the involvement of
women in that process is a key element. Unity of vision
should be maintained when designing a clear and
coordinated mandate to define the leadership role of
the United Nations agencies on the ground. Adequate
attention should be provided at an early stage to avoid
duplication of efforts and ensure the efficient use of
scarce resources.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Allow me first
to take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to the Ugandan presidency of the Security
Council for taking the initiative of convening this
crucial debate on peacebuilding and for the invitation
to take the floor. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his timely report (S/2009/304) and his
remarks. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Heraldo Muñoz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Mr. Jordan Ryan, Assistant Administrator
and Director of the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery at the United Nations Development
Programme; and Mr. Alastair McKechnie, Director of
the Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries Group at
the World Bank, for their important briefings.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the Swedish Presidency of the European
Union.

09-41816

As underlined by the Secretary-General, the postconflict phase offers a window of opportunity that can
be essential in supporting countries previously
involved in conflict in developing a path towards
normalcy. However, in the phase of developing such a
path, the situation often remains fluid and the peace
fragile. Getting the timing and sequencing right among
priorities requires a delicate balance, as the SecretaryGeneral puts it. A coordinated approach is therefore
needed, as are the definition of clear priorities and
flexible tools and the availability of quickly deployable
human and financial resources.
In that light, the revision of the terms of reference
of the Peacebuilding Fund is very welcome. The
international community as a whole should collaborate
in that process at the multilateral and bilateral levels.
Peacebuilding should be conceived as a single process
in which everyone can participate and contribute in an
integrated manner. That is the spirit in which the 2005
World Summit decided to establish the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Italy welcomes the Secretary-General’s report,
since it represents a true road map for activities to be
performed in the aftermath of a conflict — a real
policy document for all the actors involved. The
principle of national ownership is central. The
peacebuilding intervention should be anchored at the
country level — again, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral — with the engagement of all the actors
involved. That means an inclusive process sensitive to
the requests of civil society.
The fundamental role of regional and subregional
organizations — in particular, the African Union —
must also be emphasized, as must the need to develop
forms of collaboration within the United Nations.
There is a need to improve the effectiveness and
coherence of the United Nations system’s response,
along with the concept of accountable United Nations
leadership on the ground.
An effective peacebuilding effort requires the
capability on the ground to deploy civilian experts as
well. We are encouraged by the positive assessment of
the Standing Police Capacity, which constitutes a
useful reference for building a rule-of-law standing
capacity. Quite rightly, another review has been
proposed on how the United Nations can help to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian experts.

23

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

The Peacebuilding Commission was created in
2005 to fill the gap between peacekeeping and postconflict rehabilitation. It plays a central role by
bringing coherence to the recovery of countries
emerging from conflict. That is why it was decided that
the Peacebuilding Commission should be an advisory
body not only for the General Assembly, but also for
the Security Council.
An interesting suggestion has been made by the
Secretary-General that the Security Council consider
more proactively the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We subscribe to this suggestion. It is an
important point which aims at enhancing the
consultative role of the Commission vis-à-vis the
whole United Nations system and as the principal
organ responsible for the definition of mandates and
for conflict management.
Our approach to peacebuilding seeks to foster
political and democratic stabilization while stimulating
economic growth. In this framework, Italy’s assistance
in the energy sector in Sierra Leone is one example of
the possibilities that we have at our disposal. Another
example involves the fight against drugs and crime, an
endeavour that is critical to peacebuilding. During its
tenure in the Security Council, my country actively
promoted the inclusion of these aspects in the
mandates of the United Nations Offices in Sierra Leone
and Guinea-Bissau, and contributed to a number of
security sector reform and rule of law initiatives led by
the Economic Community of West African States, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
My country intends to strengthen its technical
support for the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in West Africa. A task
force of selected police officers of the Guardia di
Finanza, Italy’s customs police, will be deployed in
Dakar within the framework of UNODC’s law
enforcement capacity-building programme in the fight
against illicit drug trafficking.
As the country chairing the G-8 this year, Italy
has been actively engaged in fulfilling the commitment
taken by the G-8 at Sea Island and Hokkaido. In the
G-8 leaders’ declaration, emphasis was placed on the
need for a comprehensive approach to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. During the G-8 meeting in Trieste,
prior to its meeting in L’Aquila, the G-8 foreign

24

ministers welcomed the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict — the report we are discussing today — and
encouraged all relevant actors to consider its
recommendations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s meeting. I
also appreciate the Secretary-General’s insightful and
comprehensive report (S/2009/304) and his briefing on
the five key points this morning.
The immediate aftermath of conflict presents a
unique set of challenges and opportunities. That period
is a most delicate and fragile time. Early action taken
at that stage is critical because it will shape and
determine the overall future of the peace process. It
may not be an exaggeration to say that the window of
opportunity for establishing sustainable peace depends
mostly on how the immediate aftermath of the conflict
is managed. My delegation welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report as an answer to this challenge and
fully endorses the recommendations contained in the
report. Looking forward to rapid and full
implementation of those recommendations, I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, our efforts in early recovery stages should
be focused on having a quick impact on the ground.
Immediately after the conflict, immense demands tend
to arise in virtually every sector of the political, social
and economic arenas, while the national capacity to
accommodate these demands, virtually destroyed
during the conflict, has yet to be restored. Thus, our
efforts at this stage should be focused on meeting those
most urgent and immediate demands and responding to
peacebuilding priorities.
Among other tools, quick-impact projects have
proven to be instrumental in this area. The United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire is one of the United
Nations missions that are actively employing this tool
with successful results. My delegation hopes that
quick-impact projects will be more fully integrated into
our peacebuilding strategies at their early stages.
Secondly, integrated leadership and expertise
from the United Nations needs to be present on the
ground at the earliest possible stage. In this vein, my
delegation welcomes the recommendations of the

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General to establish senior-level leadership
mechanisms and support teams that would be present
on the ground at the earliest critical juncture. I also
appreciate the recommendation to broaden the rapidly
deployable civilian expert groups.
While peacebuilding efforts should be countryspecific, in many cases involving post-conflict
countries certain priorities are observed recurring at the
early stages. With the experience and lessons learned
so far, my delegation believes that we will be able to
develop ready-made toolkits to address those recurring
priorities.
Thirdly, the role and capacity of non-State actors
and civil society need to be recognized and integrated
into the peacebuilding process. As the report points
out, we look forward to United Nations Volunteers
playing a catalytic role in mobilizing civil capacity to
re-establish the fabric of society. In addition, the role
and participation of women in the process should be
particularly ensured, as many of my colleagues have
emphasized during today’s debate.
Fourthly, while the strategic partnerships of the
United Nations with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions are imperative, more
coherent partnerships with development agencies, most
notably the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), should be reinforced. The early engagement
of these agencies will ensure a smoother transition
from early post-conflict stages to peacebuilding and
ultimately to longer-term sustainable economic
development. The expertise of UNDP in assisting
national capacity will also be instrumental in early
national capacity restoration. Additionally, how we can
secure the synergy effect between the integrated
peacebuilding offices and United Nations country
teams is another area that deserves our close attention.
Fifthly, as Ambassador Muñoz properly pointed
out this morning, we recommend that the Security
Council consider the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission in a more proactive manner. There has
been an increasing number of observations that
peacekeepers are early peacebuilders. Moreover, the
mandates of the current peacekeeping missions clearly
overlap with peacebuilding activities, as is illustrated
in the case of the United Nation Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Considering this fact, our discussion on
peacekeeping missions should closely incorporate the
peacebuilding aspect, especially in the early stages.

09-41816

Finally, I would like to emphasize that national
ownership is an indispensable principle in the
peacebuilding process. National authorities should take
the primary responsibility for rapidly re-establishing
national institutions, restoring the rule of law and
revitalizing economies. National ownership should also
be respected in the consideration of the peacebuilding
process in cases where advice is requested. When a
post-conflict country requests to be advised by the
Peacebuilding Commission, its request should be
considered in a most prompt manner, focusing on the
interests of the people on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
Allow me to focus on three aspects of the report
(S/2009/304) that we are discussing today.
First, we welcome the exemplary consultation
process for this report. That way of proceeding well
illustrates the potential role of the Peacebuilding
Support Office as a catalyst. To be effective, the Office
should play that role in conjunction with strong
leadership of the Secretary-General. The Security
Council has an important role to play in supporting that
combination by recognizing the functions of the two
actors and by supporting them. In mission management
in particular, we invite the Council to increase its
consultation of the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
potential asset is its ability to mobilize the skills of a
wide range of actors.
We support the proposal that the Chairs of the
country-specific meetings of the Peacebuilding
Commission be invited to participate in the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council concerning
the countries in question. Before us, we have specific
examples of the challenges of coherence, in the reports
on mediation and on peacebuilding and in the New
Horizon non-paper on peacekeeping. To head up those
efforts concerning the crucial and complementary
aspects of the United Nations system, we would like to
see a note by the Secretary-General that highlights
their complementarity and gives us an overview of the
various available financial instruments. Only if the
complementarity of instruments and the transparency
of financial flows are considerably improved will there
be more effective, flexible and predictable funding for
peacebuilding.

25

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, the report stresses the need to develop
national and regional capacities and the skills of the
senior managers and of the teams deployed on the
ground. We welcome those recommendations, and my
country is willing to share the experience acquired
through our own pools of national experts.
The credibility and the effectiveness of the
United Nations depend above all on the skills of its
permanent staff and on a cross-cutting awareness of
conflict issues within the various institutions of the
United Nations system. Peacebuilding is not the
exclusive preserve of any one body, but is the
responsibility of all actors under the active leadership
of the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, the United Nations and the World Bank,
as well as our capitals, must provide the personnel in
the field with the best possible support by establishing
a more effective, coherent and coordinated support
system. The report shows us that there are already a
number of instruments that favour a joint approach,
such as, for example, the Post-Conflict Needs
Assessment or integrated task forces. We must ensure
the effective use of those instruments and not multiply
the reporting and the number of planning and
monitoring instruments. That effort must be made
jointly with the development banks, regional
organizations and the donor community.
We are convinced of the importance of qualified
leadership in the countries concerned, supported by an
able team. In that regard, we would like the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies to recognize
strengthened authority of the Resident Coordinator visà-vis the United Nations country team, particularly
when the Coordinator holds the post of Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We propose
that the Chief Executives Board make a decision in that
regard.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of measuring all improvements in
processes and institutions by their positive impact in
the field.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make following statement on behalf of
the Council:
of

26

“The Security Council recalls the statement
its
President
(S/PRST/2008/16)
and

emphasizes the critical importance of postconflict peacebuilding as the foundation for
building sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) as
an important contribution towards a more
effective and coherent international response to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council also
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s
strong
commitment expressed in the report to improve
the United Nations peacebuilding efforts, and
urges him to pursue these objectives.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of national ownership and the need
for national authorities to take responsibility as
soon as possible for re-establishing the
institutions of Government, restoring the rule of
law, revitalizing the economy, reforming the
security sector, providing basic services and other
key
peacebuilding
needs.
The
Council
underscores the vital role of the United Nations in
supporting national authorities to develop an
early strategy, in close consultation with
international partners, to address these priorities,
and encourages international partners to align
their financial, technical and political support
behind this strategy.
“The Security Council stresses the need, in
countries emerging from conflict, to draw upon
and develop existing national capacities at the
earliest possible stage, and the importance of
rapidly deployable civilian expertise to help
achieve this, including, where appropriate,
relevant expertise from the region. The Council,
in this regard, welcomes the recommendation of
the Secretary-General for a review to be
undertaken to analyse how the United Nations
and international community can help to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian experts, giving
particular attention to mobilizing capacities from
developing countries and especially women.
“The Security Council recognizes that postconflict situations require from the outset
experienced and skilled leadership on the ground
with effective support teams, and requests the
United Nations to increase its efforts in this

09-41816

S/PV.6165 (Resumption 1)

regard. The Council welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to enhance the authority and
accountability of senior United Nations
representatives in carrying out their duties and
responsibilities.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need
for the United Nations system to strengthen
strategic partnerships with the World Bank and
other international financial institutions, and to
complete by the end of 2009 the clarification of
roles and responsibilities for key peacebuilding
needs and to keep these under regular review, so
that the appropriate expertise is generated to
achieve a timely and predictable response.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and recognizes the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding, welcomes the progress it has
achieved, calls on it to further enhance its
advisory role and support for countries on its
agenda
and
looks
forward
to
the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the
Commission’s founding resolutions on how its
role can continue to be enhanced.
“The Security Council recognizes the
critical importance of rapid, flexible and
predictable
funding
for
post-conflict
peacebuilding. The Council urges Member States
to help achieve this, building on the
recommendations of the report and in particular
increasing the impact of the Peacebuilding Fund,
improving donor practices to make funding faster
and more flexible and making use of in-country
multi-donor trust funds, which are designed to
accommodate the funding requirements of
donors.
“The Security Council reaffirms that ending
impunity is essential if a society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed
conflict and to prevent future such abuses. The
Council notes that justice and reconciliation
mechanisms can promote not only individual

09-41816

responsibility for serious crimes, but also peace,
truth, reconciliation and the rights of victims.
“The Security Council, in accordance with
its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
underlines the key role women and young persons
can play in re-establishing the fabric of society
and stresses the need for their involvement in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies in order to take account of their
perspectives and needs.
“The Security Council reaffirms the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and the need to
strengthen their capacity in post-conflict
peacebuilding.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of launching peacebuilding assistance
at the earliest possible stage. The Council affirms
the importance of early consideration of
peacebuilding in its own deliberations and of
ensuring coherence between peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development to
achieve an early and effective response to postconflict situations. The Council will strive to
apply this integrated approach and requests the
Secretary-General to intensify his efforts in this
regard.
“The Security Council invites the SecretaryGeneral to report within 12 months to the
Security Council and the General Assembly on
progress achieved in fulfilling his agenda for
action to improve the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, taking into consideration
the views of the Peacebuilding Commission.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/23.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

27
