254

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

Rights and other intemational organs to re-establish
human rights and fundamental freedoms have been
ignored by the Chilean authorities,
Consideringfurther, inter afia, the recent reports, resolutions and conclusions of the Human Rights Committee,
the Sub-Commission on Prevention ofDiscrimination and
Protection of Minorities and the Intemational Labour
Organisation, as well as the Chilean Human Rights Committee and the Vicaría de la Solidaridad of the Catholic
Church in Chile,
Recognizing the importance of the fact that the Chilean
authorities have announced their intention to permit the
entry into Chile of the Special Rapporteur, in the exercise
of bis mandate, to investigate the situation of human
rights in that country,
1. Takes note of the preliminary report of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation ofhuman rights in Chile, submitted in accordance with Commission on Human Rights
resolution 1985/47; 191
2. Once again expresses its dismay at the suppression
in Chile of the traditional democratic legal order and its
institutions and their replacement by a constitution which
does not reflect the freely expressed will of the people and
whose provisions considerably restrict the enjoyment and
exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms
through the institutionalization and consolidation of states
of emergency and the extension of the jurisdiction of the
military tribunals, all of which amounts to an integrated
system negating civil and political rights and freedoms;
3. Expresses its indignation at the persistence of serious and systematic violations of human rights in Chile, in
particular the suppression of social protests which has
caused a considerable number of deaths and injuries and
mass and individual arrests, at the intimidation of
national human rights organizations, at the frequent
reports oftorture and ill-treatment, and at the treacherous
crimes in which the police forces are judicially implicated;
4. Reiterates its alarm at the fact that, in general, the
arbitrary or improper actions ofthe State police and security agencies continue to go unpunished;
5. Reiterates its concern at the inetfectiveness of the
remedies of habeas corpus or of amparo and of protection,
owing to the fact that the judiciary, notwithstanding sorne
positive actions in this field, does not always exercise its
powers of investigation, monitoring and supervision in
this respect, and peñorms its functions under severe
restrictions which undermine its independence;
6. Once again calls urgently upon the Chilean authorities to restore and respect human rights in accordance with
the obligations they have assumed under various intemational instruments, so as to re-establish the principie of
legality, democratic institutions and the etfective enjoyment and exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and, in particular:
(a) To put an end not only to the state of seige, as was
done in June 1985, but also to the régime of exception and
especially the practice of declaring "constitutional states of
emergency" under which serious and continuing violations
of human rights are committed;
(b) To investigate and clarify without delay the fate of
persons who were arrested for political reasons and later
disappeared, to assist and inform their families of the
results of such investigation and to bring to tria! and punish those responsible for their disappearance;
(c) To respect the right to life and the right to physical
and moral integrity by putting an end to the practice of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
191 A/40/647, annex.

or punishment and to put an immediate end to intimidation and persecution as well as to kidnappings, arbitrary or
abusive detention and imprisonment in secret places;
(d) To respect the right ofnationals to live in and freely
enter and leave their country, without arbitrary restrictions or conditions, and to cease the practice of relegación
(assignment to forced residence) and forced exile;
(e) To restore the full enjoyment and exercise oflabour
rights, including the right to organize trade unions, the
right to collective bargaining and the right to strike, to pul
an end to the suppression of the activities of trade union
leaders and their organizations and to comply with the
provisions of the intemational agreements of the lnternational Labour Organisation to which Chile has subscribed;
(/) To respect and, where necessary, restore economic,
social and cultural rights, in particular the rights intended
to preserve the cultural identity and improve the economic
and social status of the indigenous populations, including
the right to their land;
7. Conc/udes, on the basis ofthe preliminary report of
the Special Rapporteur and of other data at its disposal,
that it is necessary to continue to monitor the human
rights situation in Chile;
8. Expresses its conviction that an unrestricted, in situ
investigation of the human rights situation in Chile
requires that the Special Rapporteur, in fulfilment of his
mandate, should have access to ali the information and
data which could be provided by those persons and bodies
that are interested in the situation of human rights in
Chile;
9. Requests the Chilean authorities to co-operate more
fully with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their comments on bis report to the Commission on Human Rights
at its forty-second session;
10. Invites the Commission on Human Rights, at its
forty-second session, to proceed to an in-depth consideration of the report of the Special Rapporteur and, taking
account of all the relevant information at its disposal, to
adopt the most appropriate measures for the etfective restoration of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Chile, including the extension of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, and requests the Commission to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the
Economic and Social Council.
I 16th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/146. Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need for further co-ordinated and concerted action in promoting respect for human rights in the
administration of justice,
Guided by the principies em bodied in articles 3, 5, 9, 1O
and 11 ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 6 as
well as the relevant provisions of the Intemational C'ovrnant on Civil and Political Rights, 7 in particular article 6,
which explicitly states that no one shall be arbitrarily
deprived of his life,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 2858 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971 and 3144 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973
on human rights in the administration of justice,
Reca//ing Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/47 and 1984/50 of25 May 1984, in which, ínter alia,
the Council approved the procedures for the etfective

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

255

implementation of the Standard Mínimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners 192 and the safeguards guaranteeing
protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty,
Bearing in mind a/so the provisions of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, 72
Considering the work in progress with regard to the draft
Body of Principies for the Protection of All Persons under
Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 1 18 of 14 December 1984, in
which, inter alia, it requested the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention ofCrime and the Treatment of
Offenders to give urgent attention to the matter of devising
ways and means to ensure more effective applkation of
existing standards and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session,
Acknowledging the important work accomplished by the
Seventh Congress, in particular in relation to the formulation and application of United Nations standards and
norms in the administration of justice under item 7 of its
agenda, 193
l. Deplores the continued use of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, prohibited under
intemational law, and strongly condcmns the practice of
summary or arbitrary exccutions;
2. Welcomes the Basic Principies on the Independence
of the Judiciary, adopted unanimously by the Seventh
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, 194 and invites Govemments
to respect them and to take them into account within the
framework of their national legislation and practice;
3. Encourages the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights, in giving further consideration
to the question ofthe independence and impartiality ofthe
judiciary, jurors and assessors and the independence of
lawyers, which is currently on its agenda, to take into
account the Basic Principies adopted by the Seventh
Congress in making final recommendations at its thirtyninth session;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the Model Agreement on the Transfer of Foreign Prisoners and recommendations on the treatment of foreign prisoners, 195 also
adopted unanimously by the Seventh Congress, and
invites Member States to take the Model Agreement into
account in establishing treaty relations with other Member
States or in revising existing treaty relations;
5. A/so takes note with appreciation of the recommendations made by the Seventh Congress with a view to
ensuring more effective application of existing standards,
in particular the Standard Mínimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 196 and safeguards guaranteeing the rights of
those facing the death penalty;
6. Calls upon Member States to spare no effort in providing for adequate mechanisms, procedures and
resources so as to ensure the implementation of these recommendations, both in law and in practice;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to assist Member
States, at their request, in implementing these recommendations and to report thereon to the Committee on Crime
Prevention and Control;

8. Requests the Economic and Social Council, through
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, to give
special attention to effective ways and means of implementing existing standards, to pay due attention to new
developments in this area and to keep these matters under
constant review;
9. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to
continue to co-operate with the Secretary-General in these
endeavours by providing assistance, as may be appropriate, and by submitting proposals for relevant action to the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control;
10. Decides to consider at its forty-first session the
question of human righls in the administration of justice.

192 First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Cnme and the
Treatment ofOjfenders, Geneva, 22 August-3 September 1955: report prepared by the Secretaria/ (!Jnited Nations publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4),

pared by the Secretaria/ (United Nations publicat10n, Sales No. E.86.IV. I ).
chaf.' IV, sect. R.
1 4 /bid.. chap. 1, sect. D.2.
191 lh,d.. sect. D.I
1% Resolution 341169, ann,·,

annex LA
193 See Seventh Unlled Nations Congress on thc Prevenuon o( Cr1me and

the Treatment ofOl[enders. Milan. 16 fogust-6 Seplember 1985· report pre-

116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/147. Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances
The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978
concerning disappeared persons, and its resolution 39/ 111
of 14 December 1984 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Deeply concerned about the persistence, in certain cases,
of the practice of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Expressing its pro.found emotion at the anguish and sorrow ofthe families concerned, who should know the fate of
their relatives,
Convinced ofthe importance ofimplementing the provisions of its resolution 33/173 and of the other United
Nations resolutions on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances, with a view to finding solutions for
cases of disappearances and helping to eliminate such
practices,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1985/20 of 11 March 1985, 1º in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the tenn of the mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or lnvoluntary
Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council decision 1985/142 of 30 May 1985, in which the Council
approved the Commission's decision,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances for its humanitarian work and to those Governments that have co-operated with it;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the term ofthe mandate of the Working Group, as well as to study at its fortysecond session the possibility of extending to two years the
term of the mandate of the Working Group;
3. Also welcomes the provisions made by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 1985/20 to enable
the Working Group to fulfil its mandate with even greater
efficiency;
4. Appeals to ali Governments to provide the Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectivcs and their working methods based on discretion;
