c

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

:th
MEETING:

NEW

28 JUNE

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/201

Adoption

of the agenda

5) . . , . . . . . . . , , , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . , .

.. .. . . . . . . . . . . , . . (. , . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . , .

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1)
., . . , . . . . . . , , , . . , . . . . .. . . , . . . . , . .. .. .

SIPV.2015

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of fhe Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2015TH
Held in New York

MEETING

on Tuesday,

President: Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada).

28 June 1977, at 4 p.m.
Mr. C. B. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. M Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. B. Mkupa (United Republic of Tanzaniaj and
Mr. S. G. Mwaie (Zambia) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States: Benin,
Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT: I have received a letter from the
representative of Cuba in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda.
Accordingly,
I propose, in conformity with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite him
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 5)
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l2350 and Add-l)

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representative of Cuba to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes to
address the Council,

The meeting was called to order at 4.IS p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Alarctjn (Cuba)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wus adopted.

5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria. I welcome him and
invite him to take a pIace at the CounciI tabIe and to make
his statement.

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1)

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the other decisions taken at the 2014th meeting, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Egypt, Gabon,
Guinea, Lesotho, Nigeria, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic or Tanzania and Zambia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President, I wish, first of all,
to thank you and the members of the Council for the kind
invitation to the Federal Republic of Nigeria to speak in
this crucial debate concerning racist Rhodesia’s violations
of the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique. I should like to associate
myself with the several speakers before me who have paid.
appropriate tribute to you. Your wisdom, patience and
political sagacity are too well known for me to recount
here. Suffice it to say, however, that Africa as well as the
world community looks forward to your guidance in
ensuring that this important debate is successfully concluded. This is not the time for the usual empty words and
pious resolutions, It is a time for concrete and effective
action against the racist minority regimes of Ian Smith and
Vorster.

At the invitation of the President, h!r. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. J. E dos Santos (Angola), Mr. D. I;. Kwelagobe
(Botswana),
Mr. A. E, Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. G.
Rawiri (Gabon), Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisst {Guinea),
Mr, C. D. Molapo (Lesotho), Mr. ,J. N. Garba (Nigeria),

7. On 22 March 1977 [1989th meeting], I had the honour
of addressing the Council on the question of South Africa.
Today, we have the onerous duty of drawing the attention
of the international community to the urgent situation in
Zimbabwe arising from the dangerous
threat to inter‘)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2014th meeting, I invite the Minister for
Development and Economic Planning of Mozambique to
take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. dos Cantos
[Mozambique) took a place at the Council table.

1

which has been oppressed and exploited for decades. If
Smith thought that his criminal acts of wanton .aggression
would have the effect of intimidating both the freedom
fighters and the front-line States, then he had better
prepare.himself for a bitter disappointment.

national peace and security created by the savage attacks by
racist Rhodesian forces on the peace-loving people of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique.
8. We have now been told that, since Mozambique decided
courageously and in conformity with this body’s resolutions to close its borders against racist Rhodesia 15
months ago, over 143 armed incursions have been made
into the Republic of Mozambique by the armed bandits of
the racist regime at Salisbury. The world watched helplessly
while over 1,000 innocent men, women and children were
murdered in cold blood. Both the General Assembly and
the Security Council have adopted numerous resolutions
and pious declarations against the repressive racism and
aggressions of the Smith rCgime. The. suffering people of
Zimbabwe can only conclude that those declarations,
resolutions and international conventions are no more than
a gratuitous contribution to the seemingly endless process
of paving the way to hell albeit with good intentions,

14. Indeed, the brutal repression meted out against the
majority African population as well as the senseless
incursions into neighbouring States have merely served to
stiffen nationalist resistance in the Territory and harness
broader support for the liberation struggle among the
front-line States until final victory is achieved. Moreover,
those incursions have served once again to arouse world
indignation against unprovoked attacks on defenceless and
innocent civilians.
15. WY salute Mozambique for its undaunted courage,
valour and perseverance in the face of such provocations,
and we wish to assure it that it is not alone in its present
plight, We equally salute the heroic freedom fighters of
Zimbabwe, whose steady progress has caused panic in the
Smith camp. No matter how long and bitter the struggle is,
victory will certainly be theirs since their cause is just,

9. For over 12 years, the Western Powers have, like some
latter-day Pontius Pilate, washed their hands of the crucifixion of the African majority in .Zimbabwe. Today, the:
blood of innocent Africans can no longer be washed clear
from the hands of the oppressors of our brothers and sisters
in Zimbabwe and the rest of southern Africa. If rebel leader
lan Smith has become so steeped in African blood that
turning back from his disastrous course is as difficult as
going on with it, then not only he but also his allies in racist
South Africa and in the West must equally bear the moral
burden of their Macbeth’s.dilemma:

16. In the face of these events, the Council, and indeed
the entire United Nations Organization, has a moral
responsibility to provide Mozambique with all material
assistance which will enable the Maputo Government not
only to repel such criminal acts of aggression but also to
serve as a credible deterrent against such reckless adventure
in the future. Further, we suggest that the United Nations
should increase its level of technical assistance support to
Mozambique as ti matter of utmost urgency and priority, SO
that the Territory’s economy can be speedily rejuvenated
and placed on a firm footing for the purposes of orderly
and steady progress, In meeting these demands the Council
will, in effect, be resuscitating the faith of the international
community in the continued and justifiable existence of the
United Nations. Finally, we call on all Western countries to
join hands with the progressive forces of the world in the
strict application of all sanctions, including an oil and arms
embargo against the Smith rdgime and its racist mentors in
South Africa. This is indeed the very minimum we can
demand of the Council, if the explosive situation, whose
clouds appear to be gathering ominously on the southern
African horizon, is to be defused.

10. The People’s Republic of Mozambique is a sovereign
and independent country recognized as such by the world
community.
The racist clique at Salisbury is not so
recognized by any State Member of the United Nations,
Yet the world has stood by with arms folded while that
illegal, criminal racist rBgime has contantly
violated the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member State.
11. Nigeria has always expressed its scepticism and reservations regarding the possibility of a peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Zimbabwe which arose from the rebellion of
the white minority there. Following the latest incursions of
Rhodesia into Mozambique, it should now be clear to
everybody that Smith and his henchmen at Salisbury are
not in the least committed to the idea of a peaceful and
orderly transfer of power to the African majority in
Zimbabwe.

17. Nigeria believes that if the forces of racist Ian Smith
can exercise the so-called right of hot pursuit, the people of
Mozambique and, indeed, the people of Africa have the
duty and the obligation to exercise the same right. Nigeria
believes that the people of Mozambique and the people of
Africa should reserve the right not only to wage open war
against the rebel rBgime at Salisbury but also to call on their
friends within and outside Africa to help to stamp out this
undoubted threat to the continent and to international
peace and security.

12. It is not a mere coincidence that this latest criminal
aggression against a sovereign State Member of our great
Organization should have been carried out at a time when
the Anglo-American initiative was under way. And, as if to
indicate that the racist clique has no regard for anybody,
the commander of the invading force had the effrontery to
tell a stunned world that his army would remain inside
Mozambique until it had achieved its nefarious objective of
destabilizing the People’s Republic of Mozambique.

18. Early this year, my head of State put the case of
Nigeria’s commitment to the liberation OCsouthern Africa
very lucidly when he declared:

13. That event has again proved that the only language
that is intelligible to the racists is one forged in their own
furnace of naked violence and force. Only armed struggle
remains as a legitimate weapon in the hands of a people

“The Nigerian Government and people are totally
committed to the cause of freedom and respect for
2

human dignity in southern Africa, not simply for its own
sake but because we are convinced that African freedom
is a sacred duty that must be done.”

massacred by the forces of racism in South Africa and
Rhodesia. This is why the Organization of African Unity
has decided to come before the Council to express not only
its sense of urgency at this threat to international peace and
security but also its collective righteous indignation at the
continuing defiance of international opinion by the illegal
and racist r&imes of Smith and Vorster. History-and even
recent history-has
shown that no force of arms, no matter
how sophisticated, can suppress the resolve of an oppressed
people to achieve its God-given right to self-determination,
freedom and equality. No force of arms can suppress the
desire of a people to be free.

General Obasanjo went on to add:
“In the pursuit of this objective, we shall not consider
any sacrifice too great nor any weapon too mean to
hasten the end of all oppression and injustice in southern
Africa and to ensure the total liquidation of apartheid,
foreign domination and economic exploitation.”
19. Nigeria believes, and Africa is convinced, that the idea
of freedom from oppressive racism is one whose time has
come. For 500 years, the people of Africa endured the
ravages of Fascist Portuguese colonialism. Today, GuineaBissau, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, Mozambique
and Angola are free. For centuries, the peoples of the
African continent were exploited, abused and humiliated.
But, in the last two decades, Africa has risen up in arms
against its oppressors and exploiters, There appears to be no
other alternative open to Africa unfreeing itself from the
remnants of colonialism and racism except armed struggle.
Nigeria unreservedly supports the armed struggle in
southern Africa. It will continue to give all material, moral,
financial and diplomatic support to the struggle for
freedom and national liberation in Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa. The battle lines have been clearly drawn.
Nigeria can be found only on the side of justice and truth,
that is, on the side of the peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, on the side of the courageous children of Soweto,
who have made and even at this very moment continue to
make the supreme sacrifice in the struggle for freedom,
equality and fundamental human rights.

23. A lot has been said recently about cxtracontinental
forces in Africa. But it must be said that, in the struggle of
the African peoples for freedom, independence and racial
equality, the Soviet Union and other progressive socialist
countries have remained the constant and unshakable
supporters of Africa. We also salute the Nordic countries of
Sweden, Norway and Denmark for their moral, humanitarian and financial support for the aspirations of the
oppressed peoples of Africa; We appeal to the progressive
forces in the other countries of the West to look beyond
short-term considerations of strategic and economic interests to the urgent need for human rights and the
preservation of international peace and security in southern
Africa.
24. I should like to conclude by restating Nigeria’s
unreserved condemnation of the aggressive and repressive
acts of racist Ian Smith and his illegal regime. We equally
condemn his backers at Pretoria and elsewhere. Nigeria
wishes to reiterate before this august body its total and
unequivocal commitment to and support for the liberation
struggle in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa, Nigeria
subscribes to the decision of the Organization of African
Unity to regard any further act of aggression against any
member State as constituting an act of aggression against
the entire continent of Africa.

20. The front-line States of Angola, Tanzania, Botswana,
Zambia and Mozambique have been subjected to flagrant
armed incursions, either by the apartheid regime in South
Africa or its protege, the racist minority clique at Salisbury.
The General Assembly and the Security Council have, as I
said earlier, adopted several resolutions condemning those
naked acts of aggression and reckless violations against all
norms of accepted and acceptable international behaviour.
Now the wanton bombings of peaceful Mozambican villages
and the brutal killings of innocent women and children in
Mozambique, Zambia and other front-line African States
can no longer be ignored by Africans and other peace-loving
people of the world.

25. Nigeria is determined and prepared, in concert With aB
member States of the Organization of African Unity and
other progressive forces of the world, to take appropriate
retaliatory measures against any further violations of the
territorial integrity of the front-line States. We can no
longer remain impervious to the sufferings of our brothers
and sisters in southern Africa. The racist and mjnority
regimes at Pretoria and Salisbury and their supporters
elsewhere must be prepared to take full responsibility for
the consequences of any further wanton and senseless
adventures.

21. Two weeks ago, the Federal Military Government of
Nigeria alerted its armed forces to the fact that, in the
unfolding situation in southern Africa, Nigeria could not
remain uninvolved if a racial conflagration were to engulf
southern Africa in the immediate future. As we have always
said, Nigeria is the country that contains the largest
concentration of black people in the world. If a racial
war-indeed,
a genocidal war-embraces
the whole of
southern Africa tomorrow,
Nigeria, will inexorably be
drawn into that conflict.

26. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho. 1 welcome him and invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
27. Mr. C. D. MOLAPO (Lesotho): It was hardly a month
ago that 1 was honoured to appear before the Council with
regard to one of the crucial and explosive episodes that are
constantly
gripping the southern part of our mother
continent Africa. Despite the existence of the most
important and historic document the world has ever seen,
the Charter of the United Nations, despite the numerous

22. Nigeria therefore wishes to declare before the Council
that it can no longer remain on the sidelines while its
brothers and sisters in Zimbabwe, Namibia, South Africa
and in independent Mozambique are being cold-bloodedly
3

declarations and resolutions of the Security Council and
other United Nations organs condemning imperialism,
coIoniaIism, apartheid andracialdiscrimination,and,above
all, despite the wavesof freedom,self-determinationand
national independencethat havesweptover the continent
of Africa, southern Africa is still beset with the most
obnoxious and heinousforms of imperialism,
colonialism,
apartheid and racism.
28. It is in Rhodesia,Namibiaand South Africa where,
contrary to the wishesof the oppressed
Africanswho arein
the majority, and the wishesof the world Community at
large, there exists the last but stubbornbastionof coloniaIism, inhuman apartheid and abhorredracism.A majority of the white racist settlersrefuse to accept the
inevitable, namely, a life in harmonyand peacewith the
rightful ownersof the land.Insteadthey haveembarkedon
the path of confrontation, aggression,
massacres
and the
extermination of the African peoples.

munitY about the grave situation and increasingtension
likely to endangerinternational peaceand security in our
area.
32. Today I wish to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President,and, through you, to the other membersof
the Councilfor giving me this opportunity to speakon yet
another very grave and seriousact of unprovoked but
wanton aggressionperpetrated again by the rebellious
forcesof the racist Ian Smith-this time againstthe sister
People’s
Republicof Mozambique.

33, Like previousspeakers,I take this opportunity to
extend to you, Sir, my Simre COngratUhtiOnSon your
assumption
of the presidencyof the Council for the month
of June and to expressmy gratitude for the very able
mannerin which you have dischargedyour duties. You
representa great country with which my country enjoys
specialand distinctly the bestof relations,a country whose
record on decolonization,antiapartheid and anti-racismis
29. There is no doubt in our mindsthat the writing on the impeccable,We are therefore more than confident that,
wall is clear to the racists.They are well awarethat their under your wiseguidance,the Council will take a positive
time has run out, but they are determinedto plungeOUT andconstructivedecision.
region and, they hope, the whole world into a racial
conflagrationand blood-bath.Surely,the wholeworld, and
membersof the Security Councilin particular,shouldnot 34. Onthe morningof 18 June 1977,the Governmentand
and cannot afford to let a few bigotedracialmaniacs
cause peopleof Lesotho learnedwith shock, dismay, disbelief
the destruction of humanity. I need not remind the and, indeed,graveconcernthat dastardlyand cowardly acts
andwar had beenand were beingbrutally and
Council, whose permanent memberswere among the of aggression
founders of this noble Organization, that the United criminally executed by the forces of the Smith regime
Nationswasformed to put an endonceandfor all to racial againstthe lives and propertiesof the people of Mozamworld warslike the last world war. It is perhapsnow more bique,in blatant violation of the sovereigntyand territorial
than before that the Councilisbeingcalleduponto live up integrity of that Republic. To us the messagewas clear:
noneof our countriesis safeor free solong asour brothers
to the basictenetsof the Organization.
are languishingunder brutal oppression in Zimbabwe,
30. The oppressedbut heroic peoplesof Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa. My Go+ernment did not
Namibia and South Africa will fight for their lands.They hesitate,therefore, to condemnin no uncertain terms the
andillegal actsof the forces of Ian Smith and
will meet andhave met the criminalviolenceof the racists irresponsible
with violence-the only languagethe racistwhite minority declaredour unreservedsupport for the heroic people of
rCgimesunderstand.The eventswhichhavebroughtushere Mozambique.
today are a living testimony that the racists,in feelingthe
burden and pinch of the armedstruggleof the freedom 35. Thosefrantic attemptsby Smith to halt the liberation
fighters, are in blind fury and desperationunleashing
their of Zimbabwe-evento the extent of threatening acts of
sophisticatedweaponry againstthe freedom-lovingand aggression
againstZambia and violating the sovereignty of
independent African countries in the region, namely, Botswana-notonly constitute a direct challengeto Africa
Mozambique, Angola, ZambiaandBotswana.The only sin but are also intended to convince even those who still
that those countrieshave allegedlycommittedis that they believein the rationality of Smith that it is a wasteof time
have loved, cherishedand, indeed,valued freedom,inde- to hope for a negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe. By
pendence and human dignity, in accordancewith the
invadingand occupying the Mozambican towns of Mapai
Charter and the resolutionsof the United Nations. The andothers,Smith defiedthe world community andinsulted
African struggle is for the noble principlesof human the Organizationof African Unity. lt is therefore right and
dignity, justice and equality. The white minority racists Proper that the OAU Council of Ministers, currently
want to maintainthe status quo: inequalityandoppression. meetingin its twenty-ninth ordinary sessionat Libreville,
Gabon,shouldhavemandatedus to expressAfrica’s grave
31. I camebefore the Councilin Novemberof lastyear to
concern at the escalationof the acts of aggressionand
appeal for the Council’sintervention and assistance
fol- violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
IOWing the Unibid dOSUreof three of our vital border Mozambiqueby the forcesof Ian Smith. It is the legitimate
posts by the Republic of South Africa, A few days and concertedview of the entire OAU membershipthat the
thereafter; the sisterRepublicof Botswanaalsocalledupon Security Councilmust take effective measures,
particularly
the Council to intervene and provide It with assistance thoseProvidedfor under CharterVII of the Charter, since
following the repeatedand unprovokedacts of aggression that is the only way of bringing to a speedy end the
and incursionsinto Botswanaby the rebel forces of Ian Prevailingsituation in Zimbabwe,which is now the immeSmith and his henchmen.On that occasion,I had the diate sourceof a seriousthreat to international peaceand
honour again to warn the Council and the world corn- to securityin southernAfrica.

36* It Will be recalled that, last August, the Smith
murderers
massacred
innocent Zimbabwe refugees to the
h*rror
alld wrath
of the world community. All those acts
and the Present acts of the forces of the rebel Smith were
executed
in complete disregard to the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. To
begirl witll,
Rhodesia is not a State under international law
and t11erefore cannot claim any rights or privileges under
interrJational
law. Rhodesia is an outlaw, a rebel and an
Outcast- The racist leader of the white settlers, Jan Smith,
‘Ias rePeatedlY
attempted, in vain, to invoke principles of
internntional
law to justify his nefarious acts of aggression
against
Mozambique
and Botswana, in particular, the
so-cnlled
principle
of prc-emptive self-defence and the
principle of hot pursuit.

definitely making a mockery of principles of international
law and we want to make it clear that this mockery or rape
shall not deter us from continuing to provide refuge to the
oppressed black people from the still-to-be liberated pa& of
southern Africa.
41. I have elaborated at great length on the fallacy of the
doctrine of hot pursuit because of my anxiety that the
international community
should openly express itself
against that doctrine. It is being flaunted by South Africa
and Rhodesia. It will cause the most serious unrest in that
region..
42. It is important to note that it was only two years ago
that the heroic people of Mozambique, under the able
leadership of FRELIMO, regained their sovereignty and
independence, after many years of bloody armed struggle.
That struggle caused Mozambique a lot of material and
human loss, and Rhodesia has not given it a chance to
recuperate and to develop economically and socially. Ian
Stiith, unable to suppress the liberation war that is being
waged within Zimbabwe
by the Zimbabwe freedom
fighters, has resorted to this systematic action of violation,
provocation and armed aggression against Mozambique. The
people and Government of Mozambique have not shirked
their responsibility nor wavered from their commitment to
help free their brothers in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa. The decision of the Mozambique Governemt to
close its border with Rhodesia following the adoption of
United Nations sanctions against the Smith regime and the
present acts of aggression by the forces of Smith constitutes
a heavy burden on and sacrifice by Mozambique and the
whole of Africa. It is therefore right and proper for the
Council and the world community to provide prompt and
effective assistance to the people of Mozambique to enable
them to strengthen their defence capabilities as well as to
overcome the tremendous material loss incurred as a result
of this aggression. We, on our part, have assisted the people
of Mozambique in our own little way, we reaffirm our
continuing solidarity with them and we say that, despite
our difficulties, we shall continue to be with them.

37. \vith
all due respect, I beg representatives to bear with
me if 1 state what is common knowledge to them. It is,
hweve r, important
to set the record straight and to show
that even
the international
law formulated during the
colonial
days does not and cannot justify the acts of Ian
%nith or what he stands for.
38. For the sake of argument, let us assume that Rhodesia
is a State
according
to international law, with all concmitarlt
rights and obligations, The so-called principle of
pre-eniptive self-defence does not form part of present-day
international
law. It does not have the support of wellknown
international
law publicists or jurists of repute, nor
Car1 it be said to form part of the practice of States. To the
best of c>ur knowledge,
only one or two States have
otternpted to invoke this so-called principle and in vain.
39. ‘I’he
so-called
principle of pre-emptive self-defence
IlCgLites tile Vera basic elements of the principle of
self-&fence,
clearly
enunciated in the well-known and
celebrated
cases
of the Caroline and the Corfu Channel;
indcccl, this right has been further clarified by the Charter
in hrticie
51, wllich recognizes the right of self.defence.
‘That Article
clearly limits its use to instances where there is
an ;1rlned
attack-again
within the confines of classical
intcrnatiorzal
law. No one-not even Smith himself-can say
that Mozambique
has attacked or attempted to attack
So even the principle of self-defence cannot
Rhodcsin.
apply to the facts before us.

43. The people of Mozambique are not asking the Council
to go and defend them against Smith, nor are they asking
the Council to wage war against Smith on behalf of the
people of Zimbabwe. All that Mozambique is asking is that
the Council and the world community support it as it
builds its own defensive capabilities. Mozambique wants to
stop Smith from making further incursions into its terrim
tory. In order to do this, it must have the necessary’military
equipment. It needs material and financial resources to
rebuild schools, hospitals, roads and bridges that were
destroyed by the forces of Ian Smith.

JO. lt is ‘a right of every State to provide refuge to people
~110 flee their country of origin because of oppression or
persecution
on grounds of their colour, religion or race. If
thcsc people
are pursued from their country of origin and
they enter
the territory
of the State of refuge, or a third
State, su&
pursuit must cease. Even in the law of the sea,
the priIloiple
of hot pursuit forbids the pursuing State to
continue
the pursuit once the pursued enters the territorial
ivaters of its own or a third State. This principle has been
~~11 enutlciated
in classical law of the sea, in cases that have
been decided
and in conventions at present in force. The
principle
is very inappropriate to, and cannot be used in
rcsi,cct
of pursuit
of fugitives on land. A State which
pursues its fugitive
citizens into the territory of another
State, for any crime whatsoever, is guilty of violating the
sovereigrlty
and the territorial integrity of that State. We
lrust alld holIe eat the present law of the sea will not
,amper
with
the. principle of hot pursuit. Rhodesia is

44. The problem of Mozambique cannot be taken in
isolation, because it is not only Ian Smith who is defying
the Charter of the United Nations and the Security Council
resolutions. It is common knowledge that Smith is what he
is today because of the material, political, economic and
military support from South Africa. The Salisbury and
Pretoria rlSgimes pursue one and the same, policy of
colonialism, apartheid and racism. It is unfortunate that
these regimes directly or indirectly enjoy the support of
some Members of the Organization. Ian Smith has survived
5

enough to bear with me and stand by for a few more
minutes I shall be most grateful and shall be able to consult
with them.

international isolation and economic sanctions because of
the reluctance of some States to implement fully all the
measures stipulated by the Council. We hail the new Carter
Administration,
which spearheaded the repeal of the
so&Bed Byrd Amendment. However, we know that South
Africa remains the biggest and main sanctions buster. It is
South Africa, through subsidiary companies from United
Kingdom, the United States and so on, which is supplying
oil, armaments and other materials to Rhodesia. It is
through South Africa that Rhodesian goods and raw
materials find their way to the international markets. It is
South Africa which is the brain and the centre of the entire
inhumane, debasing and dehumanizing oppressive practice
-of colonialism, apartheid and racism, It is the existence of
the Pretoria regime which gives moral and actual support
and encouragement to Ian Smith, so that he can engage in
aggressive and barbaric attacks and massacres against the
innocent inhabitants of neighbouring African States, such
as Mozambique. It is high time the Council took appropriate and effective measures to ensure compliance with its
decisions.

50. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): We are very grateful indeed to learn that the representative of Mauritius is
going to consult with us. We are anxious indeed, and
waiting to consult with him. We should be grateful,
however, if, before he consults with US on a draft
resolution, we might have the opportunity of seeing it. May
I take it, therefore, that that piece of paper will now be
distributed?
51. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): I wish to assure the
representative of the United Kingdom that if he stands by
and if he will be good enough to co-operate with me, this
paper will be in his hands this afternoon, as soon as
possible.
52. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I spend half my
life standing by for the representative of Mauritius and his
papers. If we can have the paper soon, I am sure the
consultations will proceed effectively, expeditiously and
successfully. If we do not have it soon, it is obviously going
to cause difficulty for a number of members of the Council,
including myself.

45. So long as the hot beds of colonialism, upartheid and
racism exist in southern Africa and so long as the white
minority racist regimes in that region continue to get the
support of Members of the Organization, peace and security
cannot prevail. We need action now to deter future
aggression against Mozambique and other States in the
region. We call upon the Western Powers to stop mercenary
recruitment in their countries; we appeal to them to
provide material and fimancial assistance to Mozambique;
we call for stronger and effective application of sanctions
and hope that pressure will be exerted on South Africa to
stop violating sanctions imposed on Rhodesia.

53. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
from
French): On behalf of the revolutionary people of the
People’s Republic of Benin, my delegation addresses warm
and militant greetings to the delegation of Mozambique led
by our esteemed Comrade Marcelino dos Santos, Minister
for Development and Planning of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique.

46. In conclusion, I should like to add my voice to that of
the Vice-President of Mozambique, Mr. Marcelino dos
Santos, who so eloquently appealed for assistance not only
from Member States of the Organization but from the
United Nations and its agencies [2014th meeting].

54. The question before the Council-the armed incursions
and repeated aggressions of the racist white rebels of the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia-is of the utmost
gravity. The recent armed attacks and the systematic
invasion of the territory of Mozambique represent a
decisive and dangerous escalation of the activities of the Ian
Smith clique which, since 1965, has deliberately continued
to commit aggression against neighbouring countriesZambia and Botswana-allegedly in defence of the ideals of
the sqcalled Western free world, so as to bar the road to
communism.

47. Time is running out for a peaceful solution to
southern African problems. It is for the Council and its
members to avert the impending racial holocaust.
48. The PRESIDENT: At this point, with the agreement
of the Council members whose names are inscribed on my
list, I call on the representative of Mauritius, who wishes to
make a brief statement.

5.5. AS was stated this morning by Comrade dos Santos
[201&h meeting], in the recent series of armed aggressions
49. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I apologize for interagainst the people of Mozambique, highly sophisticated
rupting the proceedings of the Council at this stage, but I
weaponry and war nlat&iel have been employed, Clearly,
feel I should inform you, Mr. President, and, through you,
Mr. Smith, who does not manufacture his war machines,
the membersof the Council, that I proposeright away to
has had to obtain them from somewhere, that is, from
start consultations with the non-alignedand other members outside the territory of Rhodesia. Thus, behind Smith and
of the Council on a working paper which hasbeenprepared his clique, we inevitably perceive the grave responsibility of
by the African membersof the Council with the help of
some States Members of the Organization, some of which,
their colleagues. I say this becausethere are only two
and. not the least, are seated around this table, Those
speakersleft on the list. Immediately after I have consulted countries, which have lately stepped up their diplomatic
with the non-al@ed and other members,1 propose to
activity and sought to mystify the African peoples on the
consult all the other membersof the Council, By the time
problems of the liberation of southern Africa, hiding
we return, the two other speakerswhose names are
behind the attractive and seductive mask of humanistic
inscribedon the list may have finished their statements,and
imperialism-which,
by the way, is something that does not
members may have departed. So if they will be good
exist-are the true aggressors against the people of Mozam6

bique. Those countries bear prime responsibility for the
thousands of victims among the innocent Mozambican
civilian population and for the large-scale material destruction described by Comrade dos Santos. The cynical
hypocrisy of those countries of the imperialist West which
stop at nothing to ensure their positions is shameful to all
mankind and a catastrophe for the Security Council, which
is responsible for the maintenance of internationa‘l peace
and security.

62. My delegation calls on all Western countries, and
particularly the United Kingdom, the administering Power,
fully to assume their responsibilities in the tragic Rhodesian
affair.
63. We salute the exemplary revolutionary courage and
determination of the people of Mozambique, which will
ensure the liberation of Zimbabwe.
64. Mr. President, my delegation relies much on your great
skill as an honest diplomat known to us all to bring this
debate to a satisfactory conclusion. The struggle continues.

56. This is not the first time the Council has been seized
of the record of repeated unprovoked aggressions of the
Rhodesian rebels against neighbouring countries. Each time,
the Council, manipulated by the disastrous influence of
those same Western imperialist countries, has been content
with ineffective half-measures which fall far short of the
provisions of the Charter for such circumstances. But this is
the first time the Council has had before it so detailed and
overwhelming a record of an attack, that is to say, the
record of an unprovoked war which the racist white rebels
and settlers of Southern Rhodesia have unleashed against the
peaceful people of Mozambique, unjustly subjecting it to a
new and hard trial.

65. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
66. Mr. ABDEL MECUID (Egypt): Mr. President, I should
like, first of all, to associate myself with preceding speakers
in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and in expressing
happiness at seeing you preside over the deliberations of the
Council on an issue vital for Africa and the third world. I
should also like to express my delegation’s gratitude to you
and to the other members of the Council for having given
us the opportunity to participate in the. debate on this
important matter.

57. What will the Council do this time? The request of
Mozambique, which we heard presented this morning by
Comrade dos Santos, is legitimate. It is unanimously
supported by all Africa and by all the peoples of the
world. There is no legal contradiction between that request
and the measures provided for in the Clyarter to put an end
to a war such as this which Southern Rhodesia is waging
against the people of Mozambique. Furthermore, we have
proof that all Africa supports Mozambique’s request.

67. The complaint before the Council is clear and has been
amply substantiated by the Vice-President of FRELIMO 1
and Minister for Development and Economic Planning of
Mozambique [2014th meeting]. Once again the illegal
racist minority regime of Ian Smith has resorted to its usual
practice of international terrorism and has invaded the
territory of an independent African State. The invading
Rhodesian troops have massacred peaceful populations,
burned towns and villages, destroyed factories and killed
livestock.

58. That is why the People’s Republic of Benin, through
me, energetically condemns in advance any manoeuvres or
subterfuges intended to deprive that request of any real
effect. The People’s Republic of Mozambique has not come
here to beg. It wishes effective and sufficient means to be
provided by the international community, through the
Council, to permit it legitimately to ensure its defence and
adequately protect the civilian population, which has
already suffered so much from Portuguese colonialism.

68. We have been following with great concern and
indignation the news of the intensified attacks of the
Rhodesian army against the sister African State of Mozambique. Our Foreign Minister, Mr. Ismail Fahmy, has voiced
Egypt’s concern over the criminal invasion perpetrated by
the racist troops of Ian Smith against the People’s Republic
of Mozambique. He declared on 2 June last:

59. Mozambique’s request offers an unexpected opportunity for the Council to apply all the measures provided
for in the Charter to put an end to a regime abhorrent to
mankind. The Council must unanimously broaden the
sanctions under the terms of Article 41. That would be an
honest way sincerely to manifest our complete and unswerving solidarity with the Mozambican people now
subjected to organized crime and mass killings.

“The Arab Republic of Egypt is gravely concerned over
the latest acts of aggression committed by the illegal
racist regime of Rhodesia against Mozambique.
“The acts of aggression committed by the illegal racist
regimes in southern Africa are taking dangerously increasing dimensions to which we cannot be indifferent.

60. The very existence of the racist white minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia becomes daily more dramatic as a
result of its desperate attempt to internationalize a local
conflict. The people of Zimbabwe, who are their own
liberators, are striking hard and will continue to strike hard
against the Smith clique.

“The latest aggression committed by the racist regime
in Rhodesia against the sister Republic of Mozambique
went as far as invading in depth the territory of that State
and occupying a part of its territory. It constitutes a
further escalation in the dangerous situation and will
entail extremely dangerous consequences.

61. My delegation energetically denounces and condemns
the illegal, racist minority r6gimc of Vorster, which openly
serves as a means of transferring economic and military aid
to the Smith clique.

“We should like to declare anew that we stand firmly
side by side with the sister African State of Mozambique
7

and the other front-line States to put an end to that
aggression and prevent its recurrence in the future.”
69. The latest aggression against Mozambique is not an
isolated act. It constitutes an aspect of a protracted policy
practised by the racist minority regimes in southern Africa
and aimed at intimidating independent African States and
at trying, though in vain, to sow the seeds of disunity
between them and the freedom fighters.
70. In fact, the whole world knows that since Mozambique courageously took the decision to close its borders
with the rebels of Rhodesia, it has been subjected to
repeated military incursions by the Rhodesian army. The
whole world has followed for a long time the courageous
struggle waged by the valiant armed forces of Mozambique
in defending their country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity against the repeated incursions of Ian Smith’s
troops. The whole world is also aware that, in closing its
borders with the rebel regime of Ian Smith, Mozambique
was not only implementing the sanctions imposed by the
international community against the illegal regime of Ian
Smith but was also setting the example for other members
of the international community of strict compliance with
international norms, regardless of the sacrifices entailed in
discharging those obligations. The sacrifices made by a
small peace-loving country like Mozambique, with exem-.
plary patience, cause it to bear a tremendous burden. Of
that we are all aware.
71. There is no doubt in our minds that the international
community in general and the supporters of those racist
regimes in particular bear a grave responsibility for the
racial war now raging in southern Africa.
72. So far, the international community has failed to
crush the rebellion in Rhodesia and end the illegal racist
minority regime of Ian Smith. It has failed to end the illegal
occupation of Namibia by the racist r&me of Pretoria and
it has failed to end the most inhuman regime of apartheid
in South Africa. The international community has also
failed to thwart the unholy alliance between those racist
minority regimes and their supporters. Every failure on the
part of the international community constitutes a victory
for those racist regimes and a gain for their supporters,
73. The racist minority regimes, encouraged by the failure
of the international community, have felt free to add to
their oppression of the black majority the claim of the right
to pursue those who succeed in fleeing to neighbouring
independent African States and the claim of the right to
violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of those
independent States.

74. Egypt has on numerous occasions, along with other
African States, drawn the attention of the international
community to the dangerous result to be expected from the
passive attitude towards those racist regimes. We served
warning that, unless the aggressors realized that the world’s
denunciation of their aggression would be translated into
active political and military measures, the aggressors would
escalate their defiance of the international community.
75. That is exactly what is taking place today in southern
Africa. An extremely critical situation has materialized,
fraught with danger to peace and security not only in
Africa but in the world at large. We earnestly hope that the
Security Council will forthwith
assume its full responsibility by adopting concrete measures against the illegal
regime in Rhodesia and its allies in South Africa.
76. The President of Mozambique, His Excellency
Mr. Samora Machel, in his statement at Maputo on 18 June
1977 [S/12350, amex /Ij, addressed a solemn appeal to
the international community to demonstrate its solidarity
with the People’slRepublic of Mozambique, the victim ofa
heinous criminal aggression by the illegal regime of Ian
Smith. The least that the international community can do is
to respond swiftly and effectively to that appeal, by helping
Mozambique to increase its defensive capacity and reconstruct the areas devastated by the racist military
incursions,
77. I should like to conclude by expressing to cur brothers
in Mozambique and the other front-line States our firm
support in all fields. In this context, I should like to quote
from the message addressed by President Sadat to the
peoples and leaders of Africa on the occasion of Africa
Liberation Day. He said:
“I should like to reiterate on behalf of the people and
Government of Egypt, our full and unrestricted support
to the valiant freedom fighters in Africa and to the
African peoples in their endeavour to rid themselves of
colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid, as well as
any other form of oppression.
“We pledge once again that they may always be assured
of our staunch support until final victory is attained and
until each and every part of our continent is liberated,
and every people achieves the freedom, dignity and
justice it longs for,
“African unity and the African peoples’ struggle shall
ultimately triumph.”
The meeting rose at 5.20 p. m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
msy be obtained
from
bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Safes
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositsires
du mondc cntier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire on adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Se&ion des ventes, New York on Geneve.
KAK

IIOXVfHTb

COMO

CONSEGFJIR

KBAAHHR

OETAHMSAIUXN

I’UBLICACIONES

DE LAS

HAqZiR

OGTSAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas e&in en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebrs.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

l.Ob (of equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1978-2,200
