3. Invites the Special Committee to examine,
in the spirit of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 1
and of Article 55 of the Charter, the summaries
and analyses of information transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter on the economic, social
and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, irtcluding any papers prepared
by the speciali1t!d agencies and any reports or
information o~-fneasures taken in pursuance of the
resolutions adopted. by the General Assembly concerning economic, social and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Considers that the Special Committee should
meet in 1950, 1951 and 1952 before the opening
of the regular sessions of the General Assembly,
at places and dates to be determined by the
Secretary-General, in order that it should conclude its work not later than one week before the
opening of each session ;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit to
the regular sessions of the General Assembly in
1950, 1951 and 1952 reports containing such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem
desirable relating to functional fields generally but
not with respect to individual Territories;
6. Decides that at its regular sessions in 1950
and 1951 the General Assembly will proceed to
any new elections for the Special Committee that
may be necessary, and examine in 1952 the question whether the Special Committee should be
renewed for a further period, together with the
questions of the composition and terms of reference of any such future Special Committee.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.
*

*

the UNION OF Sov1ET SocIALIST REPUBLICS;
For a term of two y,·ars: MExtco, the PHILIPPINES;

For a term of one year: VENEZUELA, SWEDEN.
The General Assembly, informed of these elections through document A/1214, took note of them
at its 274th plenary meeting on 9 December 1949.
The Special Committee is therefore composed of
the above-mc11tioncd ciglit Members. and of the follm»ing l\Icmbcrs transmilting information under
Article 73 c of the Chartrr ·
AUSTRALIA,
BEI.GllJM, DF.:-!MARK, FRANCE, the
NETHERLANDS, Nnv ZEALAND, the U:-irTED KINGOF GREAT BRITAIN A"!D NoRTIIERN
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

333

2. Invites members of the Special Committee
to make special preparations in this field for the
1950 session, with a view to facilitating the constructive interchange of ideas and experience on
such educational problems;

3. Invites the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies in order to secure their collaboration in the
study of these problems.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

*

In accordance with the terms of the abo,•e resolution, the Fourth Committee, at its 142nd meeting
on 5 December 1949, elected eight members to the
Special Committee. Thr f olloiving M embrrs of the
United Nations were elected:
For a term of three ymrs: BRAZIL, EGYPT, INDIA,

DOM

Considering that the value of the work of the
Committee would be enhanced if, without prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the
Charter, special attention were given to one field
each year,
Noting that the Special Committee will have
before it at its 1950 session a considerable volume
of documentation on the subject of education including various reports from the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Considering that information on the development of facilities for the training of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories deserves
particular attention at a time when programmes
of economic and social development are being extended or initiated,
l. Invites the Special Committee at its 1950
session, without prejudice to the consideration of
the other two functional fields, to give special
attention to the problems of education in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, with particular
attention to development of training in the economic and social fields;

]REI.AND,

nv). Work of the Sprria! Committee on Information transmiUetl
under Artide ·,;i c of 1)u'. Clrnrh'r

The c;cneral ,·lssnnl,/y,
N otinr; that resoiut ion 3J2 ( IV ) ado1,tccl hv the
General Assembly on 2 I kccml )('f l CJ.+') provided
for the estalili.,lm1enc of a Special Committee on
Information transmitted undn Article 73 e of the
,Charter for a three-year periorl without pn·judice
as to the future,

43

334 (IV). Territories lo which Chapter
XI of the Charter applies
The General Assembly,

H ai>ing regard to the obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter accepted by the Members which have or assume
responsibilities for the administration of territorif's whose peoples have not yet attained a full
measurl' of self-government,

Ii aving regard to resolution 66 (I) 15 adopted
by the (ieneral Assembly on 14 December 1946 in
which seventy-four territories were enumerated,
in accordance with the declarations of the responsible Governments, as falling within the scope of
Article 73 e,
H aviny uotcd the information supplied by
certain l\Iembers concerning the constitutional
chauges which have led to the cessation of the
transmission of information under Article 73 e
in respect of certain territories which were e11t1111eratl'd in resolution (>CJ (I),

l. Collsidcrs that it is within the responsibility
of the ( ;eneral A~scmbly to express its opinion
on the principles which have guided or which
may in future guide· Lhc l\lernhers concerned in
enunH·rating the terriluries for \Yhich the obligation exists to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter;
5
'
See Hcsolulions adopted /,y the General Assembly
dnring tlw second part of its first session, page 124.

2. Invites any special committee which the
General Assembly may appoint on information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to
examine the factors which should be taken into
account in deciding whether any territory is or is
not a territory whose people have not yet attained
a full measure of self-government.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

335 (IV). Publication of information
relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having noted the summaries and analyses prepared by the Secretary-General e,f the information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that the information contained
therein on conditions existing in Non-Self-Governing Territories has considerable value and that
very abundant supplemental information has been
placed at the disposal of the Secretary-General by
the Members concerned,
Considering that resolution 218 (III), rn
adopted by the General Assembly on 3 November
1948, invites the Secretary-General to prepare
full summaries and analyses at three-year intervals and annual supplements in the intervening
years,
1. Notes that, in future, the complete summaries and analyses, as well as the annual supplements, are required to be published in the three
working languages ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to complement
the summaries and analyses, as well as the annual
supplements, by the periodical publication of data
on special aspects of the progress achieved in
Non-Self-Governing Territories as contained in
the information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter and in the supplemental information.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

336 (IV). Information on technical
assistance accorded to Non-SelfGoverning Territories
The General Assembly,
Noting the special interest which the members
of the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter have in
measures adopted by the Governments responsible
for Non-Self-Governing Territories concerning the
economic and social welfare of the inhabitants of
such Territories,
Noting the decision of the General Assembly to
establish an expanded programme of technical
assistance for economic development through the
United Nations and certain specialized agencies,
and
Noting the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to authorize the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the specialized agencies con-

cerned, to enter into negotiations with appropriate
officers of inter-governmental regional organizations engaged in the development of technical
assistance programmes, with a view to ensuring
the desirable co-ordination for the carrying out of
technical assistance activities,
l? equests the Secretary-General to keep the
Special Committee informed of the nature of the
technical assistance which is accorded from time
to time to N on-Self-(;oyerning Territories by specialized international bodies.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 Decemblr 1949.

33 7

(IV). Question of South West
Africa: reiteration of prel--ious
resolutions and submission of reports

Whereas the General Assembly noted, in resolution 141 (II) 17 of 1 November 1947, that the
Covernment of the Union of South Africa had
undertaken to submit reports on its administration of the Territory of South West Africa for
the information of the United Nations,
Whereas, in resolution 227 (III) 18 of 26 November 1948, the l;eneral Assembly recommended
that the Government of the Union of South
Africa continue to supply annually information on
the administration of the Territory of South West
Africa,
W'hereas the Government of the Union of
South Africa in a letter 19 to the Secretary-General of 11 July 1949, which was transmitted to the
:Viember States, stated that no further reports
would be forwarded,
~Vhereas the Trusteeship Council, in resolution 111 ( V) 20 of 21 July 1949, has called to the
attention of the Ceneral Assembly the decision
of the Government 0f the Union of South Africa
not to transmit further reports and has informed
1he General Assembly that this decision precludes the Trusteeship Council from exercising
further the functions envisaged for it in resolution 227 (III) of 26 November 1948,
The General Assembly
L Expresses regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa has withdrawn its previous undertaking, referred to in resolution 141
(ll) of 1 November 1947, to submit reports on
its administration of the Territory of South West
Africa for the iniormation of the United Nations;
2. Reiterates in their entirety General Assembly
resolutions 65 ( I )~ 1 of 14 December 1946, 141
(l[) of 1 November 1947 and 227 (III) of 26
November 1948;
3. Invites the Government of the Union of
~outh Africa to resume the submission of such
reports to the (;eneral Assembly and to comply
with the decisions of the General Assembly contained in the resolutions enumerated in the preceding paragraph.
269th plenary meeting,
6 Decenr/Jer 1949.
rn See Official Rcrords of the fourth session of the
General Asscm/>ly, Annex to the Fourth Committee,
document A/929.
"" See Official Rcrords of the fifth session of the Trust,·eship Council, Rrsc1i•:lio11s. page 19.
21 See ResolHlions adopted /,y the General Assembly
during the secm1<1 part of its first session, page 123.

Official Raords of the third session of the General Assembly, Part l, Resolutions, page 80.
17 See Official Recurds of the .scrnnd session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 47.
18 See Official Records of the third session of the Gen
era! Assembly, Part I, Resolutions. page 89.
16 See

44
