UNITED NA i’+IONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORIk

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

UN~~~~~Y

NEW YORK
.i/

CONTENTS
- Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l871)
Adoption of the agenda ..............

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
.‘I ................................

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question ................

1
I
1

S/PV. 1871

NOTE’
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppltwcnts
of the Officitrl R~wmls cfl the Setwity Comcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance/with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions cd
Decisions c.$the Sccwity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

1871st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 13 January
Pr~~sidrwt:

(United

3. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Allow me first of
all to congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption
of the post of President of the Security Council. You
have assumed the presidency at a most important and
indeed at a very delicate time. The burden you carry
is by no means a light one. However, your exceptional
personal and diplomatic qualities and skills are well
known to us and we are confident that you will wisely
and successfully guide the deliberations of the Council.

Mr. Salim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

Prcsrut:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

4. It is indeed a pleasure for me to pay a tribute to
your great African country, the United Republic of
Tanzania, with which Egypt enjoys the most cordial
and excellent relationship and which has always.pfayed
a positive role in international relations.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l871)

I.

Adoption

2.

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question

1976, at 3 p.m.

of the agenda

5. It is a matter of great satisfaction and pleasure to
see among us once again the delegation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) participating fully in
the debate. The historic and wise decision of the
Security Council last month to invite the PLO to take
part in its debate was in fact a matter long overdue,
since it is the sole representative of the Palestinian
people, one of the main parties to the problem.

Adoption of the agenda

The Middle East problem including the
Palestinian Question

6. I should like also to thank the members of the
Council and congratulate the new members, who saw
to it that this important debate should take place today,
in their conviction that such a pressing and important
problem must not be ignored any more by the intemational community represented by this august body.

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council yesterday [/870th nwdng),
I
now invite the representatives of Egypt, Jordan,
Qatar. the Syrian Arab Republic and the United
Arab Emirates, in conformity with the usual practice
and the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. In accordance
with the arrangements also decided on yesterday, I
invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in the discussion.

7. The Security Council and the United Nations
since its creation have been discussing the different
aspects of the Middle East problem and have adopted
numerous resolutions. Nevertheless the problem has
persisted till now in its twin aspects: Israel’s occupation
of Arab land and its denial to the Palestinian people
of their inalienable national right to self-determination
as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
II. I should like to express our regret that the party
responsible for the perpetration of those deeds found
it fitting to declare publicly and defiantly its contempt
of the Council and the international community. Such
actions on the part of Israel are not new to us, as has
already been demonstrated
in previous Council
meetings. Israel’s decision not to take part in the
debate could only drive it into further isolation, and
should stimulate the trend in the world community
to take corrective action against its intransigence and
defiance.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Sedurity Council will now
continue its examination of the question on its agenda.
The first speaker is the representative of Egypt, on
whom I now call.
1

9. This decision by Israel is a further ,example of
the obvious unwillingness of the Israeli leadership to
avail itself of the various opportunities
that could,
once and for all, lead us nearer to a just settlement
of the Middle East problem. Its perpetual deviousness
in trying to shun such opportunities goes back a long,
long way.,
10. The Nrrcq Y& Tirti~s of 2 December 1975
described this Israeli decision in the following words:
“Israel’s
announced intention to boycott the
Security Council’s debate while the PLO participates
in any capacity is short-sighted and contrary to
Israel’s longer-term interests in establishing a framework for conciliation.”
It continued that “a growing number of prominent
Israelis are... questioning the wisdom of the Govemment’s long-standing refusal to meet the PLO in any
forum.”
I.
11. Many serious opportunities have, so far, been
missed, with the most tragic of consequences. What is
really required at present is a change of heart on the
part of Israel. Let us hope that steps towards peace,
and ultimately peace itself, will no longer be as elusive
as they have been.
12. The fact that Israel’s negative attitude with regard
to any step that would lead to peace in the Middle
East is drawing it into greater isolation has been
openly admitted and criticized by major political
Israeli figures. Mr. Abba Eban wrote in The Jcwr.wle~~~
Post of 21 November 1975: “In spite of my basically
optimistic temperament,
I cannot believe that 1977
will be better than 1976.” He then advised his Govemment that: “We need movement, because time is not
working in our favour. Developments
during 1975
have clearly proved that.”
13. What movement has the Israeli. Government
made, so far, regarding the core of the problem? None
at all, except to declare its contempt of the international community because the Council has once again
invited the PLO to participate in a debate concerning
the basic national rights of the Palestinian people.
In this respect what is ironic indeed is that many
Israelis, including Mr. Eban, consider that one of the
main disadvantages for Israel in 1975 was that the
PLO achieved broader international legitimacy.

of such deeds. We accepted Mr. Gunnar Jarring’s
aide-m&moire of 197i [S/1040.3, ~IIIICS I], as well as
the United States Rogers plan of 1970. The Organization of African Unity aiso took a positive initiative by
setting up a special mission of inquiry, consisting of
heads of State under-the chairmanship of President
Senghor of Senegal, which endeavoured during 1971
to break the stalemate. This was faced with Israeli
intransigence. President ,Sadat *himself proposed an
initiative in 1971 in order to break the deadlock.
16. All these efforts, and many, many others, were
met by refusal, defiance and contempt on the part of
Israel. Although the United States of America had
formally repeated several times, in declarations by
successive Presidents; that it guaranteed the territorial
integrity of all States in the region, the Security Council, during the summer of 1973. was not able to take
effective measures to terminate the illegal .consequences of the aggression committed against the Arab
States.
17. Egypt has been, and still is, firmly committed to
grasping every opportunity
to achieve a just settlement in our region. But Israel’s intransigence and
desire for expansion were-and
still are-the
only
obstacle on the path of achieving a just and lasting
peace. The world at large understood and sympathized
with the joint Egyptian and Syrian action in October
1973 with a view to liberating their occupied land and
breaking the unacceptable political stalemate. The war
of liberation of October 1973 was a necessary shock,
not only to Israel but to many who believed that the
Arabs would in the end accept the fait accompli and
that Israel could then get away with its aggression and
expansion.
lg. None has portrayed this situation more vividly
than Mr. Christopher
Mayhew. a former British
Minister of State, in his most recent book, Publish It
Not-Thu
Middle Ernst Coaxer-Up. when he wrote:

14. I am confident that the Council still recalls what
happened in its debate in the summer of 1973, when
the efforts to push matters-forward towards a just and
peaceful solution failed. Before the Security Council
at that time was Egyptys record of the peace efforts
and numerous initiatives
it had undertaken
and
accepted in the cause of peace and justice in the Middle
East.
.‘.

“It was a miscalculation
of epic proportions, as
we were all made suddenly aware when war broke
out in October 1973 and we discovered that the
Arabs realized what power they had in their hands
and knew how to use it. It was such a tremendous
miscalculation, with consequences whose full extent
is still difficult to predict. that the questions need to
be asked: How and why did the Governments of
the West show such bad judgement? Did they not
realize the price they would have to pay for conniving
at the injustice in the Middle East? Why did they
tolerate on the part of Israel behaviour which so
openly, even defiantly, ran counter to all the rules
of international
behaviour? What prevented them
from seeing that Israel’s behaviour would make a
renewal of war certain and that this would threaten
the vital interests’of all of us in the West?”
:

14. My Government has not spared any effort in
its search for peace. Let me give here some samples

19. Whereas the whole -world drew the salient con:
elusions from the historic event of October 1973,

Israel, unfortunately, refuses to face reality, preferring
to indulge in its own make-believe dreams-that
the
October war of 1973 was simply a passing event that
could not deter it from returning to its pre-October
1973 policy of defying all and everyone: world public
opinion, the United Nations, the Arabs.

the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy and entitled,
Towards Project Interdependence:
Energy in the
Corning Decade, by Mr. Herman T. Franssen. The
author stressed that peace in the Middle East is a
necessary prerequisite for the creation of a favourable political climate in the world.

20. The President of the World Jewish Congress,
Mr. Nahum Goldman, was quoted in June 1974..as
saying that “by blindly supporting the mistaken course
of Israeli policy and by telling the Israelis only what
they wanted to hear, Diaspora Jews had done Israel
a disservice.”
l’
21. The value of the October war of liberation
resides in the fact that it shattered certain Israeli
illusions, such as its belief in its military invincibility,
which would have allowed it to retain the occupied
Arab territories forever. Another such shattered myth
was Israel’s insistence, that only expansion could
provide it with security. The call for one-sided security
cannot be viewed as a significant contribution towards
a less turbulent and more peaceful future. On the
contrary, if Israel’s claim for security is to have any
validity, it must be viewed within the broader framework of Arab security, including security for the
Palestinian people.
.,
22. Moreover, as Mr. ‘Anthony Lewis pointed out in
an article in The N~~II* York Tinles of 27 March 1975,

24. Israel is still playing a dangerous game in defiance
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949, as weil as United
Nations resolutions, by establishing settlements and
colonies that to date number 59 in Sinai, the Golan
and the West Bank. One of these settlements is called
Yamit, is conceived as ‘a city and is situated inside
Egyptian territory to the south of the Gaza Strip. It
is incredible that Israeli leaders still believe that by
such settlements they can consititute established facts
in the occupied territories and encourage more immigration from abroad. The reality is that they are failing
in both aims, for the settlements are doomed to failure
and the immigration policy is an exodus in reverse.
25. Let me state in no uncertain terms that we will
not surrender our rights nor will we be intimidated
into succumbing to faits accomplis. No new Israeli
settlements will deter us from liberating our homeland by all means at our disposal. President Sadat
made that quite clear when he declared before the
General Assembly on 29 October 1975 that
“Our first objective, which influences all our
Arab or international actions, is the liberation of all
occupied Arab territories and the restoration of the
rights of the Palestinian people so that they can
exercise their responsibilities and their right to selfdetermination.
In this respect we do not hold any
part of Arab territory to be less dear to us than
occupied Egyptian territory. Jerusalem, Nablus,
Al-Khalil, Jebel El-Sheikh, Gaza are no less dear to
me than Egyptian Kantara or Al-Arish. With this
understanding, our policy therefore is a positive
one, as well as a flexible one, but one which
holds the final objective to be unchangeable. Therefore, our policy is not to let go of any opportunity
to liberate any part of Arab territory, wherever it
may be”.

“First. the land occupied in 1967 is less and less
significant in terms of physical security. New
weapons will cover the distance involved and more.
The next war will be more destructive than the
others, whatever the particular boundaries. And.
militarily, time is running against Israel...
“Second, retention of the occupied territories is
sapping the already diminished reservoir of good
will toward Israel in the world. Professor Stanley
Hoffmann of Harvard, one of the wisest foreign
affairs specialists in this country, has written of the
danger of Israel’s isolation. physical and mental.
from its neighbours and indeed from much of the
outside world. The United States is almost the only
pipeline to the world...

26. It would be far wiser for Israel to conclude that
it cannot continue its policy of defiance and intimidal
tion towards both the Arabs and the international
community.
If it so concludes. then it becomes imperative upon Israel to abandon its grandiose dreams
of expansion and domination and to desist forthwith
from establishing settlements in the occupied territories. The policy of establishing settlements is totally
-condemned; and rejected in all its aspects. Being
null and void,.it cannot create any rights whatsoever.
i
27. In very simple t&ms..Israel must withdraw from
all the occupied territories, including Arab Jerusalm,
and recognize the legitimate rights of the PaleStinian
people. not only for-the sake ofabiding by the numerous

“Third. it is a delusion to think that Israel can
ever get true nonbelligerency from her neighbours
unless and until she returns the occupied territories.”
23. One of the major results of the Octobei war of
liberation was the conviction that stability and justice
must prevail in the Middle East if stability and prosperity are to prevail in the rest of the world. Many
statesmen in Europe have recognized that the security
of Europe depends on stability in the Middle East.
This awareness is manifest also in the rest df the
industrialized world. I should like here to single out a
recent important study published in December 1975
by the ninety-fourth American Congress for the lise of
3

United Nations resolutions
in the Middle East.

but to win acceptance

port among peace-loving nations. This recognition was
further enhanced when the General Assembly during
its twenty-ninth session granted the PLO observer
status2

28. The tragedy that befell the Palestinian people has
no equal in modern times. That a whole people was
“wished away” from the political theatre for so long
and had to endure so much simply to survive and to
re-emerge is an epic event in itself.

34. I must state here that last year, during the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly, the international
community was most responsive to the cause of peace
when it adopted its historic resolution 3375 (XXX),
in which it declared that the PLO must take part in
the Peace Conference on the Middle East. That is
proof of the world’s conviction that no peace can
be achieved without the full participation of the representatives of the main party to the conflict. So Egypt,
in asking that the Peace Conference be reconvened, as
it must be, in the near future in order to reach a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the problem,
once the Security Council has recognized the national
rights of the Palestinian people, believes that the PLO
must be invited to the Conference on an equal footing
with the other parties. We feel that the Council should
follow the example of the General Assembly in this
respect, to show to the world that the organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security is convinced that the Peace Conference must
be reconvened on the aforementioned basis with the
participation of the PLO. Indeed, that cannot but be
so, since the Peace Conference is under the auspices
of the United Nations, which is the source and the
origin of the Conference. Hence it is inevitable that we
should resort to you if the Peace Conference should
fail or meet with obstructions.

29. Hugo Bergman, a Jewish philosopher and writer,
said more than 30 years ago, speaking about Jewish
settlements in Palestine, that
“Any agreement with the inhabitants of the land
is much more important to us than declarations of
all the Governments in the world could be. Unfortunately,
Zionist public opinion has not yet
become conscious of it. What happened in Palestine
before the [First World War] was almost totally
of a kind to turn Arabs into our enemies”.
30. What happened before the war is still being
implemented
today by the Israeli military establishment-launching
massive aerial bombardments
and
ground raids at refugee camps, thereby causing the
death of thousands of innocent human beings and
untold sorrow. But how futile such a monstrous
policy is. For in spite of everything that has been
brought to bear on them the Palestinians have withstood it all, by the sheer force of their own determination and zeal, and have finally imposed their imprint,
not simply on the conscience of humanity at large but
on world political realities.

35. President
sembly that:

3 1. The world at large has recognized these realities.
That trend has been on the increase, and there have
been some shifts among those in the United States
who previously supported the Israeli point of view.
Just recently--on 12 November 1975-Mr. Saunders,
the United States Assistant Under-Secretary of State,
declared before the Special Sub-Committee
on
Investigations
of the House Committee on International Relations that “the Palestinian dimension of
the Arab-Israeli conflict is the heart of that conflict’*.

Sadat stated before the General As-

“Therefore,
you should closely follow the
proceedings at Geneva, and the ‘Security Council
and the General Assembly should shoulder their
responsibilities either in relation to the momentum
towards peace or with regard to the clear expression of your commitment
to the Charter and its
provisions. Other expressions of your responsibility
are the constant participation of the United Nations
through the Secretary-General
or his representatives, or through the United Nations forces or
through international
guarantees of the peaceful
settlement”.’

32. Furthermore, 250 clergymen from 17 states of the
United States, who form a group called “Search for
Justice and Equality in Palestine”, issued a statement
on 4 January 1976 urging Israel to recognize “the
right of displaced Palestinian Christians and Moslems
to return to their homeland”.
They further asserted
that “the right to leave a country-as
invoked by
Israel for Jews against the Soviet Union-applies
equally as a right for displaced Palestinians to return
to their homeland”.

36. Thus Egypt is striving for the reconvening of
Peace Conference in the very near future. There is
now a favourable atmosphere and support for the
participation
of the PLO in that Conference on an
equal footing with the other parties, and this should not
be hindered by Israeli intransigence and efforts to postpone the Conference.

33. We note with great satisfaction that His Holiness
Pope Paul VI, in his New Year’s message, called upon
Israel to recognize the rights and legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinians. The PLO has been the embodiment of the Palestinian people throughout many years.
It has been recognized by and has found great sup-

37. Mr. Ismail Fahmy, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs, in his major foreign
policy speech on 5 January before the Egyptian Parliament declared that:
4

“We will be undertaking in the next few months
intensive efforts in this direction, especially with
the Soviet Union and th,e United States as CoChairmen of the Conference. it is Egypt’s belief that
the Conference has not been able to discuss the twin
aspects of the Middle East problem in a constructive
and serious manner. It was never given the opportunity to do so, whether in its present composition
or after the addition of new elements to its membership, which would be welcomed by Egypt at the
appropriate time, if the work of the Conference were
hindered for one reason or another.”
38. In’ this connexion, it is gratifying to note that
Mr. Andrei Gromyko, the Foreign Minister of the
Soviet Union, one of the Co-Chairmen of the Peace
Conference, also took the initiative and on 9 November 1975 sent a letter to the Secretary’of State of the
United States, the other Co-Chairman, calling for the
reconvening of the Conference with the participation
of the PLO on an equal footing with other participants.
39. The decision by the Security Council to invite
the PLO last month and at these meetings to take part
in its deliberation was wise and in conformity with this
trend. The General Assembly in its resolution 3236
(XXIX) defined the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people; it went a step further during its last
session by establishing in its resolution 3376 (XXX)
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People composed of 20 Member States to study how to implement the provisions
of its resolution 3236 (XXIX).
In fact, the Security
Council now has before it a historic opportunity,
in
this connexion, 9s this Committee has to report to
it by I June of this year. Should the Council rise to
its duty and seize this opportunity to help this courageous and proud people to regain their rights, then
the question of the Middle East conflict could be
peacefully solved, for it is the conviction of.all now
that without a solution of the Palestinian question
there will be no peace or justice in the region. The
international
community
is being asked to make
amends to the Palestinian people for a quarter of a
century of needless suffering and neglect. Strong
action is demanded now by all peace-loving peoples
in the world.
40. The situation is fraught with danger, unless we
all endeavour to find a prompt, just and durable solution. Peace must reign in the Middle East, but not any
peace. It must be a peace based on justice in order
for it to be durable. The Arab nation will not accept
any stalemate or the return to the situation of “no
war, no peace”.
41. It was to be hoped that Israel would at teast
heed the advice given by one of its declared friends,
Mr. Joseph Alsop, who, writing in The NW York
Tinws Mqwzjne
of 14 December 1975 under the title
“Open letter to an Israeli friend”, said that “I’m
afraid the time has come for you Israelis to tackle the

hardest problem that has ever faced you-the problem
of genuine Middle Eastern peacemaking, with Israel
participating in a positive way”,
42. Friendly advice, warnings and the lessons of
past history that go unheeded, however unfortunate
that may be, are one thing. But such unveiled threats
as those that are being uttered by major Israeli policy
makers are a totally different matter. Just nine days
ago none other than the Prime Minister of Israel
stated the following in a speech to the World Zionist
General Council quoted in Thp NPIC~ Yor-k Times of
5 January 1975:
“ ‘Serious developments might result’ from the
[Security Council] debate, Mr. Rabin said, adding
that Israel had ‘sufficient military strength to provide
it with room for political manceuver, but possibly
we will have to give expression to this sooner than
many think’ “.
No threat could be more blunt, or clearer or .more
revealing of the Israeli attitude.
43. Before concluding I would like to emphasize
the following six basic elements. First, Egypt, in
participating
in the debate of the Security Council,
believes that that debate should be focused primarily
on the political aspects of the Palestine question. We
are fully convinced that the Council could add a
positive contribution
by agreeing unanimously to a
resolution to the effect that a permanent and just
peace in the Middle East must be based on the
achievement by the Palestinian people of their national
rights.
44. Secondly, Egypt calls equally for the establishment of an independent Palestinian entity, by the
recognition of the inalienable national right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination,
in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and resolutions. All this constitutes a basic necessity and a
prerequisite for peace in the area.
45: Thirdly, Egypt is looking to the establishment
of peace in the Middle East by the withdrawal of
Israel from the occupied Arab territories. I should
like to make it quite clear that it should be a total
and complete withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 5’June 1967, and this in implementation of the provisions of resolution 242 (1967), which
is in conformity with the principles of sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by force. The world community
represented in the Security Council cannot accept any
other interpretation
of this resolution under any
circumstances. The rules of international law and the
principles of the Charter are most clear on that.
46. Fourthly, it is my Government’s belief that the
Peace Conference-which
is within the framework
of the United Nations-has
not yet been given the

chance to deal with the situation in the Middle East
in a comprehensive, serious and constructive way.
47. Fifthly, my Government, by participating in the
debate, considers it not an alternative but rather a
prerequisite to the Peace Conference. Therefore I
repeat that Egypt calls for the reconvening of this
Conference with the participation of all parties concerned, including the PLO, on an equal footing with
other participants
in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX) in order to deal with
the problem in all its different aspects, on the aforementioned basis.
48. Sixthly, thus the Security Council, in our view,
should support the call for the reconvening in the near
future of the Peace Conference, on the previous basis,
and request the Secretary General, the Soviet Union
and the United States in their respective capacities
to forward such invitations.
49. Let me conculde by stating that, together with
the aforementioned
six points, the political
and
diplomatic
momentum created during the last year
towards peace must be kept. The World should avoid
misconstruing
stability
as meaning
immobility.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
50. The only viable alternative to the continuation
of the tragedies of the last 30 years in the Middle
East is the achievement of a just and durable settlement that takes into account the core of the problem
-and peace cannot be durable if it is not just. Therefore, if we are to prevent history from repeating
itself, it becomes imperative for the international community, as represented by the Security Council, and
for all the parties to the problem, especially Israel,
to avoid at all costs the old mistakes of negativism,
intransigence and foot-dragging. It becomes essential,
then, that there be a movement towards a new order
of things based on positive attitudes and positive
actions. Let the Council prove to the world at large
that it is capable of safeguarding peace and justice.
Let us make peace prevail in our area and in the
world.
51. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I wish to inform the Council that I have just
received a letter from the representative of Yugoslavia
containing a request to be invited, in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. I propose, if there is no objection, to invite
the representative of Yugoslavia to participate in the
discussion in conformity with the usual practice and
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure. There being no objection,
1 invite the representative to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber/on
the
usual understanding that he will be invited to take a
place,at the Council table when he wishes to address
the Council.

Si. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, on whom
I now call.
53. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, permit me first of all to say how happy and
honoured I feel at delivering the opening statement
of my country in this historic debate at a Council
meeting presided over by you, an eminent son of the
third world, a tireless fighter for the cause of freedom
,and self-determination
and a brilliant representative
of a brotherly African country with which my country
has always had the closest ties of friendship and
co-operation. It is especially significant and gratifying
to my country that you are presiding over the meetings
of the Security Council in this debate, a debate for
the realization of which you personally played a leading
role last November as a representative of your country
as welt as a spokesman for the group of non-aligned
countries in the Council. As a matter of fact resolution 381 (‘1975) of 30 November 1975. on the basis of
which this debate is taking place here, was drafted.
negotiated and carried through thanks to the dynamic
and wonderful efforts of your good self and of all
your non-aligned brothers. Some of those non-aligned
colleagues have left the Security Council now,’ and
to them personally, as well as to their brother countries, Iraq. Mauritania and the United Republic of
Cameroon, we wish to express the warmest sentiments
of gratitude and appreciation.
54. I should like to take this opportunity also to
express my delegation’s sincere welcome and congratulations to the five new members of the Security
Council: namely, Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic.
Pakistan, Panama and Romania. We are confident
that they will contribute in the most effective and
constructive way to carrying out the work of the
Council. They have already proved their attachment
and devotion to the cause of peace and justice by the
aftirmative votes they all cast yesterday in favour of
the legitimate right of the PLO to participate in the
debate of the Council on ,an equal footing while the
case of its own people is under consideration.
55. In this connexion. we share entirely the view of
the representatives of the Soviet Union and Romania
expressed during the previous meeting that the question of invitmg the PLO to the present debate was
already settled on 30 November, when the Security
Council adopted its resolution 381 (1975). In addition
to the statement of the President of the Council on
that date, which was closely connected with resoiution 381 .( 1975). which formed a part of the official
records and which reflected the favourable, opinion
of the majority of the members of the Council to that
effect. subparagraph ((I) of resolution 381 (1975) was

sufficient by itself, in our opinion, to ensure the
participation of the PLO in the present debate.

Middle East problem and the Palestine question,
taking into account all relevant United Nations resolutions. This constitutes an explicit recognition by the
Council of all relevant United Nations resolutions
adopted during the period from 1947 to 1975, including
of course all the resolutions that affirm the rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination;
sovereignty and repatriation to their homeland and their
right to establish in it an independent State, as well
as the right of the Arab States to liberate all the territories occupied by Israel through force and aggression.

56. The Security Council decided in that subparagraph to continue the debate on the Middle East
problem including the Palestinian question “taking
into account all relevant United Nations resolutions”.
General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX), adopted
on ’ IO November 1975, is undoubtedly one of those
relevant United Nations resolutions which the Council has decided to take into account. In paragraph 2
of that resolution, the Council states very clearly
the following:

62. In addition, the statement made by the Council’s
President in conjunction with resolution 381 (1975)
inviting the PLO to participate in the Council’s
debate constituted an acknowledgement
by the overwhelming majority of the members of the Council of
a logical and obvious fact, namely, that it would be
futile to try to seek any settlement to the Palestine
question and the Middle East conflict resulting there-,
from in the absence of the Palestinian people, the main
party directly concerned. By taking those positive
steps, the Council has justified the confidence put in
it by Member States and has faithfully carried out the
responsibility vested in it through the will of those
States and on their behalf.

“Cdls
for the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, to participate in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East”.

57. Anyway the overwhelming
majority. of the
Security Council, by a vote of I I to 1, yesterday
t187Ofh m~rfirrg] confirmed the fact that a very small
minority of Council members has tried to distort.
The important thing now is that the PLO will never
be absent from a discussion that affects the future of
its people.
58. Permit me also to fulfil one sad duty, namely,
to present the sincere condolences of my delegation
to the representative of China on the painful occasion
of the passing away of the late Premier Chou En-lai.
‘That great leader and statesman will long be remembered for all the services that he has rendered,
not only to his great country, China, but also to the
whole world.

63. By considering the substance of the Palestine
question, recognizing all the relevant General Assembly resolutions and inviting the representatives of
the Palestinian people to participate in the debate
concerning their future, the Council is joining the
General Assembly and the consensus of the intemational community in proclaiming that nojust and lasting
peace can be achieved in the absence of the Palestinian
people and without their participation.

59. In accordance with its resolution 381’(1975), the
Security Council is meeting today to debate the Middle
East problem including the Palestinian question. In so
doing. the Council is marking the beginning of a new
and important phase on the way towards estabfishing
a just and lasting peace in a region which has suffered
from injustice and aggression for as many years as
the United Nations has been in existence..

64. The Syrian Arab Republic, which first insisted
on the participation of the PLO in the present debate
as a prerequisite for the application of resolution 381
(1975), is deeply gratified to see the representatives of
the PLO take their seats at the Council table today.on
an equal footing with the representatives of other
parties concerned. This will enable them to exercise
their natural rights by taking part in what affects their
future. The Syrian Arab Republic is fully confident
that their participation
in the Council’s debate .will
serve to demonstrate the great qualities of. their
heroic people and its attachment to the principles of
justice, freedom,and peace.

60. That historic resolution, adopted by the Council
on the initiative and urging of the Syrian Arab Republic
on the occasion of the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in
occupied Golan, reflects a positive and conscious
exercise by the Security Council of its grave responsibilities under the Charter as the main organ ,for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world. This
is particularly true as the Council has, for the first
time in its history, decided to discuss the Palestine
question, the very core of the Middle East problem
and its main cause, in a practical and substantive
manner, rather than confining itse!f, as in the past,
merely to discussing the repercussions of that tragedy
and its side issues.,

65.: One of those parties directly concerned has
chosen, however. not to show up, and one does not
need to wonder very long to guess the reasons. It is
true that a criminal would not feel very much at ease
in the courtroom where his crimes were being considered and judged. Yet, we do not think that is the
only reason why the Zionist aggressor has preferred to
stay away. As a matter of fact, at the very moment
when the important discussion on the question of
Palestine and the Middle East started yesterday, the
representative of the Zionist entity, instead of being

61. Furthermore, the Council has realized another
significant achievement in deciding to discuss the
7
,

here at this table at least to try to defend or justify
the crimes and the wrongdoings of his racist regime,
was right across the street, outside the United Nations,
where he should really be permanently, attacking the
United Nations and the Security Council, asserting
that Syria and the PLO are preparing the stage for a
new round of lighting just because they have asked the
Security Council to discuss the Middle East and the
Palestinian question, and reaffirming the treatment that
his racist regime usually reserves for all United Nations
resolutions by declaring that “any Council resolution
regarded as inimical to Israel’s interests will join
hundreds of other United
Nations resolutions”
-where?-“in
the waste-paper basket.”

own to him who does not deserve”-Arab
Palestine
was chosen to become the prey of covetous world
Zionism, the most fanatic and discriminatory
movement in modem history.
70,. During the 30 years that followed the Balfour
Declaration, forces of colonialism joined with those
of world Zionism to carry out the conspiracy in
successive stages and through deliberate and carefully
studied steps. In collusion with the British Mandatory
authorities, the Zionists began flooding the Palestinian
homeland. overtly and covertly, with hundreds of
thousands of invading immigrants. They expropriated
lands from their rightful Arab owners through deception and temptation, or by terrorism and threats, and
the uprisings and revolts of the heroic Palestinian
people between the two World Wars could not stop
the waves of the Zionist, colonialist and racist invasion, which was clearly aimed at Judaizing Palestine
and usurping it from its lawful owners.

66. Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
imposes on Members the following: “The Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council in accordance
with the present Charter.” But Israel has only the
waste-basket for these and other United Nations
resolutions. It is quite interesting that the Zionist
racist regime extends now to the Security Council the
same treatment of disrespect, insult and defiance that
had been, until a short time ago, characteristic of
Israel’s attitude only towards the General Assembly.

71. In continuation
of the conspiracy. the British
Government brought the Palestine question before the
newly born United Nations in 1947. At that time the
percentage of the Jewish population in Palestine had
increased, through frantic illegal immigration,
from
1 I per cent in 1922, based on the first offtcial census
organized by the Mandatory Government, to about
32 per cent in 1947, when the partition resolution was
passed. while the Arab citizens continue to own more
than 90 per cent of the lands of Palestine, in spite
of the organized Zionist campaigns of acquisition.

67. The plain truth is that the Zionist regime is
absent from this debate only because it has no real
desire for peace. The. Zionists are afraid of peace
because peace can only be based on justice, and the
racist Zionist regime could not survive if justice were
to prevail.

72. The partition resolution was adopted by the
General Assembly on 29 November 1947 by a majority
of 33 votes to 13. with IO abstentions.” The adoption
of this resolution was clearly in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and its purposes, as well as
of the principles of human rights, self-determination
and territorial integrity. By this resolution the United
Nations tore apart the Palestinian homeland, in the
absence of its indigenous people, despite the vigorous
protests of the overwhelming majority of that people.

68. Last November,
in answer to resolution 381
(1975), which merely calls for a debate on the question
of Palestine and the Middle East, Israel carried out
barbarous air raids against Lebanon and the camps of
the Palestinian refugees. The Zionist racist entity
used that resolution also to carry out further steps in
its policy of expansion and usurpation of Arab land by
permitting the establishment of four new settlements
in the occupied Golan. The number of such illegal
Zionist settlements on occupied Syrian territory has
now reached 24. This is how the racists respond to
any international
call for peace and discussion: by
more raids, by more attacks, and by further consolidation of their racist expansion and their usurpation
of Arab territory.

73. Yet, despite the injustice of the Partition Plan,
the Zionist-racist aggression went far beyond the limits
of that Plan. The Zionist terrorist gangs resorted to
a series of massacres and slaughters to terrorize the
Palestinian Arab population in order to displace them
and force them to leave their homes and villages and
to make room for the new successive waves of invading
Zionist settlers coming from all parts of the world.
The forces of the then newly independent neighbouring
Arab countries that hurried to defend the unarmed
Palestinian people in May I948 were unable to stop
the Zionist invaders, supported as they were by the
colonialist forces, from usurping additional parts of
what had remained of the Palestinian homeland. This
resulted in the usurpation by the Zionists of much
greater areas than those allotted by the Partition Plan
to the Jewish State that was implanted in the heart
of the Arab homeland.

69. But the absence of a guilty criminal will not
save him from the judgement of the world community,
nor can he defy indefinitely the overwhelming will
of the international
family. The tragedy that has
befallen the Palestinian people is the source of the
present conflict in the Middle East. It was the cause
of four bloody wars that flared up in the region during
a period of less than 30 years. As a result of the
colonialist-racist
conspiracy, originally plotted at the
first Zionist Congress at Base1 in- 1898 and further
elaborated in the Balfour Declaration of 19l7-J so
aptly described as “a promise by him who does not
8

74. During the 20 years that folIowed, the Zionistracist cancer kept spreading and expanding into other
parts of the land of Palestine and the Arab nation. In
1956 Israel unsuccessfully attempted to swallow up
the remaining parts of Palestine, as well as the Sinai
Peninsula, during the tripartite aggression against
Egypt. It repeated the same attempt in its treacherous
aggression of June 1967, and was able this time, with
the support of the colonialist countries, to occupy not
only the whole of Palestinian territory, but also large
parts of the territories of Egypt and the Syrian Arab
Republic.

the recognition of thecinalienable national rights of the
Palestin&
people, including
the right- to selfdetermination,
independence,
sovereignty and the
right to establish its own independent State in its
homeland and without Israel’s complete withdrawal
from all the Arab territories occupied. by force and
aggression.
80. The international community has at last realized
the basic truth in the Middle East conflict, namely,
that no settlement of this conflict can be achieved
without solving first the main issue lying at its roots,
which is the Palestine question. Racist Zionist propaganda has for years been representing the Middle
East problem as a direct conflict between the Arab
States and Israel bearing no relationship whatsoever
to the Palestinian people. The Zionist leaders claim
that there is no such thing as Palestine or the Palestinian
people.

75. After more than six years of futile efforts by
the international
community
to force the Zionist
aggressor to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories and to recognize the national rights of the
Palestinian people, the Syrian and Egyptian forces
had no alternative but to act in order to liberate the
occupied Arab land. The October war of liberation
of 1973 provided unmistakable
conclusive evidence
that the Arab people would not allow one inch of their
territories to remain under occupation, and would not
remain silent over the slightest violation of any of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people.

81. However, the world community can no longer be
deceived by the lies of world Zionism. The world
community has come to realize that the Arab-Israeli
conflict did not start in 1967, as claimed by Israel.
It started, in fact, the very moment Israel was implanted in the heart of the Arab homeland. The Arab
States remained, as they still are, in a state of war
with Israel throughout the 20 years from 1948 to 1967,
though not a single inch of their land was under
occupation during that period. The main cause of
the conflict has always been-and still is-the Zionist
aggression against the land of Palestine and its people.

76. However, the Zionist-racist entity soon forgot the
lessons of the October war of liberation. In fact, shortly
after that war, Israel resumed its arrogance and
intransigence, and persisted in its expansionist and
racist policy and in its rejection of peace. It continues
to refuse to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. It ignores totally not only the rights of the
Palestinian people, but also their very existence as
a people.

82. Inasmuch as the Zionist aggression against the
Arab people did not start on 5 June 1967, the solution
of the Middle East conflict cannot be based on resolutions or solutions that take into account only what has
happened since that date. This explains the inadequacy of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) for
securing the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, even if the Israeli aggressors were
to implement the said resolution, although this has
by no means happened. Resolution 242 (1967) was
adopted under the impact of the treacherous Israeli
aggression of June 1967 and was intended to deal
with the immediate consequences of that aggression.
It cannot replace, nor can it claim to replace, previous
United Nations resolutions relating to the Palestine
question or the Middle East problem. It cannot
supersede those resolutions. If resolution 242 (1967)
could cancel previous United Nations resolutions,
such as, for instance, General Assembly resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947 providing for the establishment in Palestine of an Arab State and a similar
State for the Zionists. then it would mean that the
resolution under which, according to the United
Nations, the State of Israel was established, had
become null and void.

77. Thus the Zionist entity continues in its occupation
of Arab territories and its oppression of the Arab
population of the occupied territories. The Zionists
continue their expansionist design by establishing
more settlements in those territories, in an attempt to
Judaize them and to alter their cultural and demographic character. All these acts reveal the racist and
expansionist nature of Israel and prove that it has no
real interest in or desire for peace.
78. The Zionist aggressors, in order to carry out their
colonialist expansionist designs, are exploiting the socalled policy of partial steps and individual solutions
in an attempt to gain time, impose a fait accompli,
perpetuate the occupation and deceive world public
opinion, which is showing growing impatience over
Israel’s procrastination
and refusal to implement
United Nations resolutions.
79. However,
international
public
opinion
is
increasingly convinced of the futility of any attempt to
fragment the cause of peace in the Middle East or
to substitute partial steps for a comprehensive and
substantive settlement. The international community
has become increasingly convinced that no just and
lasting peace can be established in the region without

83. If resolution 242 (1967) does not and cannot
supersede previous United Nations resolutions, it can
hardly supersede subsequent United Nations resolu9

tions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.‘Consequently,
it may be stated without any doubt
that Council resolution 242 (1967) does not supersede Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX), 3375 (XXX),
3376 (XXX) and 3414 (XXX). It cannot likewise supersede or affect the validity of Security Council resolutions 338 (1973) and 381 (1975). 1 . ~

Council and the General Assembly-as
if they were
organs belonging to two separate organizations, with
differing memberships and contradictory
aims. The
authority and the responsibilities
of these two main
organs of the United Nations stem ,from the same
Charter. The General,:Assembly is the main and most
representative organ of ‘the United Nations. The
Security Council derives its authority (explicitly from
the responsibilities vested in it by the Member States
themselves by virtue of Article 24 of the Charter.
The Council is also duty-bound to act in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
under paragraph 2 of that same Article. All this makes
it incumbent upon the Security Council to align its
actions aiming at the maintenance of internationaj
peace and security with the decisions and wishes of
the whole membership, as reflected in the resolutions
of the General Assembly. It is for that reason that we
warmly welcomed Council resolution 38 1(1975), which
takes into consideration all those relevant resolutions
.* .‘,
of the United Nations.

84. Security Council resolution 338 (1973), adopted
immediately
after the’ October war of 1973, itself
demonstrates the inadequacy of resolution 242 (1967)
for establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. As is well known, resolution 338 (1973) consists
of three points: first, a cease-fire between the be!:
ligerents; secondly, a call to both parties to start
immediately on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts; and, thirdly,
the beginning
of negotiations,
immediately
and
concurrently with the cease-fire, to establish-I
stress
“to establish” -a just and lasting peace in the Middle
’
East.
85. So the question ‘is:. If Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is adequate for establishing a just and
lasting peace in the,Middle East, then why does resolution 338 (1973) provide in its paragraph 3 for an
immediate
start to negotiations
under appropriate
auspices, after having called in paragraph 2 for the
immediate implementation
of resolution 242 (1967)?
Is it not because the Security Council realized in
1973 that its previous resolution of 1967-resolution
242 (1967)-was insufficient by itself for the establishment of the desired just and lasting peace?
86:. Even without this tacit admission in resolution
338 (1973) of the limitations of resolution 242 (1967).
this last resolution, by totally ignoring the Palestine
question and the Palestinian
people, and merely
referring in anambiguous
manner to the necessity of
finding a ‘just solution of the problem of refugees,
obviously cannot be suitable for ensuring conditions
for a just and lasting peace in. the region, ‘since it
makes no mention of the root of the conflict, namely,
the Palestine question.
87. This brings us to the most recent resolution of
the Security Council-resolution
381, (1975) of 30 November 1975-which
brought in the basic element
that in our opinion is missing in resolution 242 (1967)
by stating in its subparagraph ((I) that.the consideration of the Middle East problem, including the Palestine
question, shall take into account all relevant United
Nations resolutions,
that .is, both of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. By adopting
this resolution the Council took an important step
towards fulfilling the responsibilities conferred upon
it under the Charter.
88. In that connexion, it is high time to refute the
false theory which tends to erect a.wall, with regard
to authority and responsibility
and applicability
of
their respective decisions; between the Security
, 10
-.

89: For years the Middle East has been the.scene’of
repeated violations of the Charter and the principles
of international
law. Arab territories
have been
occupied by force. The Palestinian people have been
constantly denied their basic rights. The Arab populations, in the occupied territories have been subjected
to the worst forms of oppression and discrimination.
Israel continues to undertake repeated raids and acts
of aggression against neighbouring Arab countries and
Palestinian
refugee camps. Scores of resolutions
adopted by the various organs of the United Nations
have condemned and denounced these continuous
acts of aggression to which the Arab people are subjected inside and outside the occupied territories. The
Israeli aggressor has been condemned countless times
and been asked to put an end to its aggression, to
withdraw from the occupied territories and to respect
the rights of the Palestinian people.
.
90. The Charter imposes upon Member States respect
for its principles and provisions-Article
2. Member
States have undertaken to accept and carry out the
decisions of .the Security Council in accordance with
the Charter-Article
25. The racist Zionist entity has
undertaken,, in addition to those general commitments
under the -Charter, ‘to abide by previous ‘General
Assembly resolutions concerning the question of
Palestine, resolutions adopted before Israel’s admission to the United Nations-namely,
resolutions
181 (II) and 194 (III), relating respectively to the partition of Palestine and the .retum of the Palestinian
refugees to their homes. That undertaking
was
explicitly stated in the preamble to resolution 273 (III),
under which Israel was admitted to membership in the
United Nations. Needless to say, Israel has never
carried out either of those ,two resolutions of’ the
General Assembly, or in fact any of the resolutions
adopted subsequently by the Assembly or the Security
Council on the Palestine question and the Middle
East problem. That deplorable fact makes it incumbent

.

upon the Security Council to take the necessary
measures under the Charter to enforce the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
91. The Council has before it clear guidelines embodied in a series of resolutions adopted by it and by
the General Assembly on the Middle East problem and
the Palestine question since the beginning of the
Palestine tragedy. These resolutions include complementary and essential eIements for the establishment of a just and lasting peace’in the region, despite
the fact that they were adopted at different periods.
92. The Palestine question .and the ,Middle East
conflict resulting therefrom’ have been in one way or
another before, the United Nations since its inception. The Organization has dealt with both questions
in detail, although not always in a fair manner. However, the set of relevant resolutions-and
unfortunately
they remain unimplemented-may,
despite some of
their shortcomings, constitute today a valid basis for
ending the tragic situation which has been afflicting
the region for over 30 years. The resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council may guide
the way towards the desired peace. Each of them
may contribute to the fuhiIment of the desired solution
to the Palestine question and the Middle East problem,
according to its tenor and aim. ‘All of these resolutions
are of equal validity, and no party should be allowed
to follow a selective approach, to select some of them
while rejecting the others.
93. If it is true that there is a genuine desire on the
part of all concerned to establish a just and lasting
peace, it should not be impossible to attain such a
peace through respect for the Charter and impiementation of United Nations resolutions. A just and lasting
peace cannot be attained before the elimination of the
two main causes of conflict and tension in the area
-namely,
the occupation of the Arab territories by
force and the violation of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people.
94. ’ Under the Charter and the principles of international law, Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories
constitutes a continuing act of aggression. In defining
aggression in its resolution 3314 (XXIX) the General
Assembly affirmed that “any military occupation,
however temporary,
resulting from... invasion or
attack,” is an act of aggression. Hence, how could
there be talk about peace and the establishment of
peace while such an act of aggression still continues
against the Arab States?
95. Apart from the occupation of their land and their
displacement, the Palestinian people are subjected also
to the constant denial of their national rights to
existence, repatriation and self-determination.
Again,
how can peace be established when there is such
constant Zionist disregard for the rights of t-he suffering
Palestinian people? It is .imperative, therefore, to
eliminate these two situations of open and flagrant

aggression-occupation
and violation of rights-before
one can expect a new era of peace in the area to
dawn. For it is necessary to make a distinction between
ensuring the prerequisites for peace and the obvious
consequences of the fulfilment of those prerequisites.
Complete withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories and the achievement of the rights of the Palestinian people are two indispensable prior conditions
which must be secured beforehand, since under the
Charter, the principles of international law and United
Nations resolutions, they constitute the necessary
termination of continuing acts of aggression. The fulfilment of those’two conditions would then constitute
the necessary preparation for the establishment of a
situation of lasting peace in the region. In putting an
end to the occupation of Arab territories and to the
denial of the rights of the Palestinian people, the two
main causes of conflict and tension would be eliminated
and the road towards the establishment of a just and
lasting peace would be tleared.
96. Those who are stipulating the termination of the
state of belligerency in the area prior to the complete
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories or
prior to the ending of the violation of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people are in fact
putting the cart before the horse; they are beginning
to read the book from its last page. Even those who,
with the best intentions, are advocating an end to the
state of belligerency and some other characteristic
conditions of peace at the same time and on the same
level as they advocate withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories and recognition of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people-even
they are confusing the
causes and the consequences, are mixing up the preconditions for peace with peace itself.
97. The Security Council must avoid falling again-as
it did in its resolution 242 (1967~into
this vicious
circle resulting from the confusion between the causes
and the effects, between the requirements and the
consequences; While the state of peace is ‘the result,
the end towards which one must strive, the elimination of obstacles and hindrances on the road to peace,
such as foreign occupation and the denial of rights, is
the indispensable prerequisite
without which that
noble goal cannot be attained.
98. The Arab side does not fear talking ‘about peace
and its necessary requirements and guarantees simultaneously with the consideration of steps for ehmi:
nating the hindrances to peace. On the contrary,
talk about the goal may facilitate in our view talk
about the means to reach that goal. Consequently,
there is no objection, whatsoever to the Security
Council’s starting consideration
of peace requirements and guarantees as soon as the two necessary
pre-conditions for peace-namely,
total Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories and recognition of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people-are put into implementation.
The requirements for peace in the region may be determined

and agreed upon, together with the necessary guarantees for their respect and implementation.
They
could be put into effect immediately after the completion of Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab
territories and the restoration of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people. The Security
Council must remain ready to be reconvened within
a specified period of time in order to follow up the
implementation
of any resolutions or measures it has
adopted and to take the necessary steps in the case of
any obstruction.
It should request the SecretaryGeneral to undertake the necessary preparations for
ensuring such implementation
within the periods fixed
by the Council.
99. The Arab people are sincere in their desire for
peace and. are determined to reach that goal. They are
resorting to the principal organ of the United Nations
for the maintenance and preservation of peace. Will
the Security Council be up to the level of its responsibilities under the Charter? Will the Council take
advantage of this historic opportunity afforded to it
under resolution 3g1 (1975) to deal with the very
roots of this disease instead of being satisfied with
prescribing temporary remedies and tranquillizers?
100. The cause of peace is indivisible.
Just and
lasting peace can be realized only through a comprehensive settlement within the framework of the United
.Nations, taking into account ail the elements and
causes of the Middle East conflict-particularly
the
injustice, the grievances and the loss which have
befallen the Palestinian people.
101. If the Arab nation is seeking peace based on
justice. it is because peace without justice is capitulation. As long as any part of the Arab territories
remains under occupation and as long as any of the
rights of the Palestinian people are still violated, there
can be no justice, and hence there can be no peace.
102. We urge the Security Council, and particularly
its permanent members who assume special responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and security,
to allow the present meeting of the Security Council
to become a historic occasion on which the Organization may begin to fulfil the hopes placed in it by
the peoples of the world. This is a valuable aspiration
which the Council is capable of fulfilling, not only for
the sake of the peoples and countries of the region,
but also for the sake of all peace-loving peoples and
countries throughout the world.
103. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Jordan.

I call now on the representa-

104. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, may I
extend to you my warm congratulations and sincere
greetings on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. You have personally demonstrated in the past your vigour and your competence,

and your dedication to the struggle for justice and
freedom for all peoples and nations. Your country,
the United Republic of Tanzania, is pivotal in this
struggle and has an honourable record in this field.
105. I also wish to extend my delegation’s congratulations to the new members of the Council on their
election to membership.
May their efforts and
endeavours meet with success and bear fruitful results.
106. We have started this important debate with a
paradox. One of the main parties to the dispute is
absent. The absence of this party is not accidental.
It is wilful and deliberate. What adds to the paradox
is that the absent party, Israel, is the party which
has always proclaimed its desire for peace with its
neighbours, its belief in dialogue and its interest in
every avenue of communication.
Not this time. Not on
this occasion, when the Arab side, in all its branches,
is present and ready for constructive action and for a
just peace in the Middle East. Syria is here. Egypt is
here. Jordan is here. The Palestinians are here. A
rare and precious moment exists but is about to be
lost. How far this situation is from the claim heard
over the years from Israel and its spokesmen that
Israel was always ready and eager for peace and for
dialogue on the issues of peace and war in the Middle
East, and that it was the Arabs who were closed and
negative. The present situation proves the contrary.
Not only the Arab States but also the Palestinian
people, the victims of the conflict and of Israel, are
here in the Security Council, confident ‘and positive,
advancing their case and seeking a just settlement.
107. But if Israel is not here, the Security Council
is here. The whole international community is here.
And the Middle East problems and agonies belong
to the world. The problem of the Middle East is a
world problem, its consequences are world-wide,
and its solution is the responsibility of the United
Nations. The corrosive effects of the Middle East
conflict have been felt in international relations, and
therefore the corrective action must come from here.
The Council has this primary responsibility. For international indifference, neglect -or ineffective action in
the past has compounded the problem of the Middle
East and made it more destructive. In the past, international insensitivity to what is right and what is wrong
in the Palestine dispute during the late 1940s led to the
Palestinian holocaust and the chain- reaction which
followed and reached vast proportions in the whole
Middle East. The failure of the Security Council in
1967. after the war and resulting occupation, to correct
the wrongs and push effectively towards the establishment of a just peace led to the war of October 1973
and the resulting dangerous international confrontation, together with the profound economic shock
which the whole world experienced. So the internationai community must now come to grips with the
fundamental elements of the Middle East conflict. It
cannot neglect it or postpone its concern with it.

.

108. What constitutes the present conflict in the
Middle East? Let us start from the present. First,
since June 1967 a Member of the United Nations
-Israel-has,
as a result of an offensive against three
of its Arab neighbours, occupied an area three times
the size of Israel before the attack and inhabited by
over a million Arabs. Israel now occupies most of
Egypt’s Sinai, Syria’s Golan Heights and the whole of
Gaza and the West Bank, including Arab Jerusalem.
Israel is openly opposed to evacuating these territories
under any conditions. Initially it claimed it was only
seeking guarantees for future peace after their evacuation. When the Security Council in November 1967, in
spite of Israel’s military success, attempted to meet
this “concern” by adopting a clear resolution to this
effect, containing guarantees for future peace, and
some Arab parties involved gave their assent, Israel
reserved its position and spoke categorically
of
retaining the occupied Arab territories, in part or in
totality, under one guise or another. Whether in the
name of “security” or under the banner of wild and
fanatical slogans derived from its official mythology.
its leaders spoke loudly and clearly of their determination to stay in and absorb this piece or that piece in
what amounts to the whole of the occupied territories.
Israel’s diplomatic
agents have recorded with the
United Nations and with its instrumentalities
their
Government’s
official policy of expansion at the
expense of the occupied territories.

1 IO. I come now to the most important component
of the Middle East conflict. It is known to all the
members of the Council and is the basis of the whole
canflict in the area. It is the root and the essence.
It is the Palestinian question. It is Palestinian uprooting and displacement and the continuing pain and
suffering of the Palestinian people in their diaspora
-for it was the Palestinian holocaust which started
it all and led to the expanding and bitter conflict. The
ramifications of the Arab-Israeli conflict may be many
and complex, but its essence is simple. The Arabs did
not create the Arab-Israeli problem; it was imposed on
them. It started when a peaceful and prosperous land
inhabited and owned by its own people. Palestine. was
forcibly emptied and taken over by the fanatical and
exclusivist Zionist movement and military machinery.
The Arab neighbours immediately shared the grievance
of their uprooted and displaced brothers and sensed
the danger inherent in the hostile and expanding force
in their midst. Instead of acting to redress the wrong
done to the Palestinian people and to allay the fears of
the Arabs, Israel pursued the logic of force and completely rejected the course of peaceful redress vis-a-vis
the Palestinian people. including the appeals and
demands of the United Nations that the displaced
Palestinians be allowed repatriation to their homes and
compensation for their losses.
1 I I. While Israel stubbornly denied justice to the
Palestinians whose problem it had caused, it was
inviting Jews from all over the world. on the sheer
basis of their religion, to emigrate to and settle in the
homes of the Palestinian Arabs. But the Palestinian
people did not wither away. They lived and they grew.
It followed that the Arab States withheld their recognition of this unjust situation. It also followed that
Israel. a captive of its own logic of force and militarism, found it necessary to pursue this logic to its
inevitable conclusion. Hence, the recurring military
confrontations and major was with the Arabs. The
Palestinian issue remains at the root of the conflict.
The denial of Palestinian rights, both human and
national. remains the fundamental issue in the Middle
East problem. Arab commitment
to these rights
remains firm and irreversible.

109. The second component of the Middle East
problem derives from the first, that is, the occupation.
The actions of Israel in the occupied areas have
spoken louder than its leaders. The occupation
authorities are feverishly engaged in consolidating the
occupation
and absorbing physically,
piecemeal,
an increasing area of the occupied territories. All the
occupied areas are witnessing the imminent danger
of loss of national character. Settlements are being
planted in the various parts of the occupied territories.
Israeli sources tell us that dozens of these settlements
have already been established in these Arab areas-in
Golan and the West Bank, in Gaza and in Sinai. It
is a process of national replacement, much more fearful and radical than the traditionally known violations
of the human rights of people under conventional
occupation.
Nowhere is this fearful operation of
national and cultural replacement more direct and
immediate than in the heart of the occupied territories.
in Jerusalem. Inside and outside the walls of the Old
City in Arab Jerusalm large-scale confiscation of land
is coupled with the physical elimination
of ancient
inhabited quarters for the erection, on their ruins,
of structures and dwellings inhabited by Israelis. This
takes place within the framework of Israel’s offtcial.
if arbitrary, annexation of occupied, Jerusalem in
1967. The limits of Jerusalem are enlarged to include
an increasing number of villages and surrounding
areas making the area officially annexed 30 per cent
of the West Bank. If these measures taken by the
occupying Power continue, they could destroy the
basis of any future peace.

112. The fourth component
of the Middle East
problem is more abstract but no less real and immediate. It is the reality of stalemate. The stalemate
should not be mistaken for stagnation, for there is
nothing farther from stagnation than the environment of the Middle East and the dynamics of the
conflict. There is stalemate because there are at the
moment no ,active and credible efforts aimed at the
achievement of a comprehensive settlement and a just
and lasting peace. But there is no stagnation. This is
what makes the stalemate so dangerous and so
-explosive. There is no stagnant situation, because
there is inherent explosiveness in the situation and
because the aggrieved parties ‘are determined
to
change the unjust strrtrls clrro and to regain their rights,
In the absence of a peaceful alternative to justice.
13

the aggrieved parties cannot be expected to acquiesce
indefinitely.
Nor can the consequences of explosion,
if it occurs, be confined to*the area and be isolated
from the rest of the world.
113. Those are the components of the issue we are
dealing with. That is what the Security Council is
dealing with today, seeking an urgent solution. What
is the starting point for a solution? The starting point
is a correct diagnosis by the Security Council of the
causes and realities of the present conflict in the
Middle East and a correct evaluation of the claims.
114. The first distinction between the Arab claims and
the Israeli claims derives from the cause of the conflict.
As 1 said earlier, the Arabs did not create the ArabIsraeli problem; it was imposed on them. The Palestinian people did not persecute the Jews or displace
them from their homeland; the Zionists, later the
Israelis, displaced the Palestinians and denied them
return to their homeland. Likewise, the Arabs do not
occupy Israeli territory; Israel occupies the national
territory of Arab States and subjects. over 1 million
Palestinian Arabs to its occupying rule. The Arabs
ask that the occupation end; the Israelis want the
occupation to last. The Arabs ask that the Palestinians
exercise the inalienable right to return to their homes
and homeland; the Israelis categorically reject this
right. The Arabs ask that the Palestinian people,
like other people, exercise the right of self-determination; the Israelis deny the Palestinian people this right
and offer no alternative.
115. After the initial onslaught against the Palestinian
Arabs, Israel foll.owed the impulse of force and militarism in its approach to the problem it created with
its neighbours. Behind the shield of its own or imported force it resisted any just solution to the
Palestinian tragedy for two decades. It then sought to
silence the protests of the Palestinian people.and the
protests of their Arab brothers and neighbours by
successive attacks culminating in the military conquest
of 1967, believing that force was the way to break the
back of the complex political,
human, ethical,
emotional and geo-political problems it had created
with its own neighbours. The war and the occupation
brought nothing to Israel. Yet not one single idea or
proposal or formula for a constructive solution was
offered by Israel. Until this moment it refuses to deal
with the Palestinian reality..
116. In the meantime Israel hid behind the claim
that it was defending its “security” and its “survival”.
The worst crimes can be committed and the most
extreme and destructive policies.can be pursued in
the name of “survival”
and “security”.
In some
powerful international circles-mainly
in the Westthis myth was believed and aggression and violence
committed
in its name overlooked.. The victims
struggling for their rights were depicted as terrorists;
the violent aggressor was depicted as the innocent
target of hostility and. threat. But Israel has no

immunity from international judgement and conviction for its actions of ,aggressi,on and usurpation of
others’ rights. The survival of Israel is not at stake.
The survival of the ,Palestinian people as a national
entity and the territorial integrity of the Arab States
victim of the occupation or-threat thereof are now the.
issues.
‘,,,.,
‘I
117. I said that the first distinction between the Arab
claims and the Israeli claims derives from the cause
of the conflict. The second distinction between .the
two claims can be understood from the actual record
of peace-making efforts during the last eight’years.
118. It started when the’ Security Council adopted
resolution 242 (1967) in November 1967. Although
the Arab countries had expected a decision by ‘the
United Nations demanding the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the forces which were occupying
the Arab national territories, some Arab countries
directly involved accepted that resolution
which
provided for withdrawal but contained other provisions and guarantees for peace. In that framework
the two Arab countries which accepted the resolution then, Jordan and Egypt, co-operated fully with
international
efforts ‘aimed at implementing
the
‘resolution.
119. The factual and objective reports of the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
entrusted
with contacting the parties for the implementation
of the resolution are a chronicle of Israeli obstructionism.
Every time the Arab parties responded
positively to the initiatives of the Special Representative, Mr. Jarring, the Security Council or the General
Assembly, Israel met those initiatives negatively.
120. Two years passed after the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), with Israel refusing to accept explicitly
the resolution. Three years passed with Israel refusing
to accept or mention the word “withdrawal”.
Not
only did Israel consistently avoid the principle of
“withdrawal”;
it even refused to give the Special
Representative its definition of the extent of its socalled “secure boundaries”. It only made it clear that
“secure”
borders meant “expanded”
bordersborders based on the absorption of some or all of the
occupied territories. Until this moment, Israel remains
adamant in refusing to define what it considers its
borders, having .rejected the only borders that had
ever been defined by the United Nations, the borders
of the partition of 1947, Israel’s birth certificate.
121. While the Arab side in the peace efforts was
giving positive replies and assurances to the Special
Representative,
Israel remained negative towards
those efforts. It even objected to the consultations
among the permanent members of the Sedurity Council aimed at assisting the Special Representative. Wh,en
in June 1970 the United States of America undertook
a unilateral initiative to reactivate the peace efforts in
the context of a renewed cease-fire, Israel expressed

anger and found a quick pretext to suspend its cooperation. When the Special Representative, in the
course of his normal efforts, made an ordinary ‘and
logical proposal in February 1971 involving the principle of withdrawal, Israel virtually boycotted the
Jarring mission, which it stiil’does. Nor was this the
experience of Mr. Jarring alone. Several.distinguished
.African heads of State, some of them quite friendly
to Israel, undertook a mission of peace-making in 1970
which resulted in a major change in their attitudes
towards Israel and its claims and policies. Since then
they -have had no questions in their minds about
Israel’s expansionist designs and intransigent attitudes.

125. The Se&&y
Council has a duty and a role in
the affairs and future of the Middle East. It has to
break the stalemate. it has to open the way to a just
and lasting peace. This debate must end in a constructive programme. The programme must be clear and
concrete; Its main elements have crystallized as a
result of the experience of the last few years and the
new realities of the Middle East. The Arab parties
have made-it clear that they are interested in a just
peace in the area. Their present struggle is waged
in defense of their rights, and not for its own sake.
So peace is achievable. The Security Council can
build such a peace if its programme involves a timetable for Israeli withdrawal from the territories
occupied in 1967 and an endorsement of the Palestinian
right to national self-determination.
The Palestinian
reality, ignored in earlier resolutions of the Council,
must now be recognized as an essential component
of such peace. A just settlement must include national
self-determination
for the Palestinian people, their
ingathering and the right of return for those who
had been expelled from their homes. None of the
earlier resolutions of the Security Council has dealt
with Palestinian rights and the future of the Palestinian
people. This situation must be corrected.

122. The last effort of the Security Council to revive
international activity and induce Israel to change its
policy took place in ‘the summer of 1973 and was
blocked by a veto. The war of October 1973 was an
inevitable result. Since then the United States became
engaged in efforts to fill the’diplomatic
vacuum,:but
Israel has yet to state and show that it is ready for
a just peace based on withdrawal from the occupied
territories and respect for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. That is why the Syrian initiative
in calling the.Council to review the whole situation
and draw up a plan of constructive action is a positive
and sincere initiative.

126. When the guidelines are clear and the basic
components of a just settlement are clearly defined by
the Security Council, the methods and means of
bringing about the settlement can take a variety of
forms. The forum and the modalities of the implementation are secondary to the substance of a just settlement, once it is established that all the parties should
participate in the process, including the legitimate
representatives of the Palestinian people.

123. We in Jordan are intimately familiar with these
developments
since June 1967. Jordan participated
actively and positively in all these efforts aimed at
a just settlement and a lasting peace. The obstacle
has been Israel’s insistence on having the cake and
eating it; on the one hand, keeping the occupied territories and denying Palestinian rights, and, on the other
hand, securing recognition
for what it does and
perpetual security and tranquillity.
Those goals are
mutually exclusive. We in Jordan have continuously
pointed out the road to a just peace during the last
eight years. Our basic views and principles have not
changed and cannot change, although our role has
recentiy’been, with our agreement, altered. The change
in our role and position has come about as a result
of our concurrence with the unanimous decision of
the Arab summit conference at Rabat of October
1974.

127. Therefore, the starting point is positive and
concrete action by the Security Council at its current
meetings. This could open the road to a:just settlement. It could open the road to a lasting peace. The
international community, represented in the Security
Council, has a duty and a role in the establishment
of peace in the ‘Middle East. For, as I said at the
outset, the international community cannot neglect or
postpone its concern with .the Middle East problem,
because, the corrosive impact of this problem is
affecting the international situation directly and deeply.
If Israel is too much in the captivity of its destructive
and self-destructive impulse, the international
com,munity must step in and assert its will and collective
interests. The world cannot sustain morally and
physically the continuation of the present situation
in the Middle East. It is too dangerous, too explosive
and too unjust. It is all the more so because a just
settlement is within reach and because .peace is
achievable.-

124: In accordance with that decision, Jordan
recognized the PLO as the legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people carrying the international
responsibilities entailed inthis capacity.‘But while our
definition of our diplomatic role has changed, our basic
diagnosis of the problem of Palestine and the Middle
East and the road to a just settlement has not changed.
Israel has to deal with the Palestinian reality. Israel
has to come to terms with the Palestinian national
rights and inevitability ,of Palestinian self-determination.. Israel has to reaiize the fact that territorial
expansion is the opposite of peace. It must make the
agonizing reappraisal required by its failure so far to
accommodate to its environment and the moral imperatives of the situation,
thereby forfeiting the
chances of a lasting peace.

128. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the United Arab Emirates. As there
is no empty place at the Council table, I propose
that each of the four representatives invited to be
seated at the Council table in order to participate in
15

a recognition of its unanswerability.
It wanted this
sort of recognition in order to have licence for its
aggression, expansion, discriminatory
practices and
persistent violations of the national, legal and historical
rights of the Palestinian people. The world community,
however, was unwilling to give Israel a free hand so
that it could seek to accomplish its Zionist objectives.
In the wake of the Second World War, when the
dimensions of the persecution against people of the
Jewish faith shocked our consciences, the Zionists
and their supporters exploited the suffering and
anxieties of the Jews in order to co-opt them into the
framework of their exclusivist, racist and mediaeval
ideology. The West, in general, found in the Zionist
colonization scheme a means of purging its conscience
of the guilt it genuinely felt. What emerged is a fearful
arrangement whereby the Zionists will absolve the
West from what it did to, the Jews in the past in
return for the West’s absolving beforehand what
Israel and the Zionists are, unfortunately, doing and
plan to do to the Palestinians in the present and in
the future.

the discussion be asked in turn, following English
alphabetical order, to yield his place temporariiy to
another invited representative when the latter is called
upon to address the Council. In accordance with that
arrangement, I have requested the representative of
Egypt to withdraw temporarily from the Council table
in order that his place may be taken by the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I now invite that
representative to be seated at the Council table and
to make his statement.
129. Mr. GHOBASH (United Arab Emirates): Before
I proceed with my statement, I should like to express
the grief and sorrow experienced by my Government
and people at the passing away of Mr. Chou En-lai,
Premier of the People’s Republic of China, and one of
the most. outstanding and distinguished figures of the
century.
130. Sir. in congratulating
you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month,
we are in fact welcoming an ardent spokesman of the
emerging nations, whose country has been in the
vanguard of mankind’s struggle for justice, development and human dignity. Your presidency comes at a
crucial time, when the Palestinian cause is being put
forward for the first time by the representatives of the
Palestinian people.

134. What I called the fearful arrangement transformed many of the persecuted into persecutors and
many of the discriminated
against into addicts of
discrimination.
This was an affront and a betrayal
of all that is humane and noble in the tragic experience
of European Jewry. It was no less an aberration and
an abuse of the good intentions of many a Westerner.
Those in the West who agreed to having part of their
resources diverted to rehabilitate the Jew in atonement of the wrongs done to him by their own social
and military establishment were prevented from seeing
that those resources were once more being spent
not on butter but, rather, on cannon.

131. The PLO. which sits for the first time in the
Security Council, is a movement of national liberation,
as well as the framework of the Palestinian national
identity. Like all national movements, it faces the
obstacles that have obstructed, but never arrested,
the process of decolonization.
The PLO is today the
vehicle for combating one of the last vestiges of
colonial and racist structures and seeking the implementation of Palestinian national and basic rights. The
Zionist settlers. who conquered parts of Palestine,
under the British Mandate, found it possible. later on,
to pursue their expansionist aim, in defiance of growing
international opinion condemning their behaviour and
their exclusivist ideology.

135. It is this situation that has led the world community to perceive the fundamental causes that lie at
the roots of Israeli behaviour and Israel’s contempt
for all. United Nations resolutions.
The General
Assembly. in resolution 3379 (XXX) of IO November
1975, considered Zionism as a form of racism and
racial discrimination,
thus paving the way to putting
Israel’s behaviour, non-compliance,
violations and
practices under scrutiny and vigilant monitoring by
the international community.

132. The consequences
of Zionist
settlement,
expansion, and colonization led to the displacement
of a large portion of the Palestinian people from their
homeland and homes. It is not my intentiqn to go
through the details of the Palestinian tragedy; nor shall
I undertake to present a history of the Palestine question in the United Nations. This has already been
done thoroughly and adequately by the PLO delegation
itself. What I should like to underline, however. is
that the Zionist State of Israel has behaved consistently
and continuously in a manner showing that it wanted
to be treated as if it were unaccountable to the international will, unresponsive to the moral and political
implications oi the Charter of the United Nations and
resolutions, and the requirements
of international
law.

136. Perhaps that is why Israel chose to boycott the
deliberations of the Council, thinking, as it is its habit,
that it can by its defamation campaign against the
United Nations and all its agencies obstruct the
processes and the responsibilities of this august body.
137. The Security Council is meeting at a time when
the world has become more and more aware of the
centrality of the Palestine question in any serious
and purposeful attempt to resolve the Middle East
crisis. The Council is meeting at a time when the world
community
is becoming more convinced that the
threat to peace in the whole of the Middle East will
remain for as long as justice to the Palestinians is

133. Israel has throughout the last quarter of a
century sought to ext,ract from the world community
16

not realized, In other words, peace in the Middle
East is predicated upon justice to the Palestinians, It
cannot be otherwise.
138, This awareness must be translated into concrete
forms and expressions, The General Assembly resolutions of the last two sessions pertaining to the inalienable national rights of the Palestinians in their
homeland and to the fulfilment of their rights to selfdetermination and to a return to their homes constitute
the basis for a commitment to and a resolution on these
basic rights on the part of the Security Council.
Without such recognition of these basic Palestinian
rights on the part of the Council there can be no
substantial movement towards a lasting peace in the
Middle East.
139, More than eight years have elapsed since this
body adopted the now famous resolution 242 (1967).
Despite many reservations and misgivings concerning
the inadequacy of that resolution, several Arab States
whose lands had been occupied by Israel accepted
it as a basis for a peaceful settlement. However,
those Arab States considered that a speedy implementation of the resolution would follow and did not
anticipate the delaying tactics utilized by Israel in
order to escape the implementation of its operative
part.
140. Let me state that here is still a consensus that
considers resolution 242 (1967) an adequate basis for
a discussion of the Middle East crisis. But let me also
state that the passageof time has eroded much of the
credibility of that resolution. Israel’s delaying tactics
and non-compliance, in addition to its persistent violation of and aggression against Palestinian camps and
Lebanese towns, have all contributed to the increased
tension in the area. In the meantime, Israel, in defiance
of the articles of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,” has also established new colonies
and settlements in the occupied territories and even
now plans to build new settlements in various parts of
the occupied territories.
141. What does this mean? Does it mean that Israel
plans to withdraw from the occupied territories? Do
not these settlements create new facts and, therefore,
new obstacles to making the withdrawal operative?
Does this not prepare the ground for Israel to make
use of the time to consolidate its hold on the occupied
territories, while the world community expects it to
expedite its withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories’? Was not Jerusalem part of the occupied territories? Has not Israel annexed it and started a process
of Judaization in violation of a near-unanimous resolution of the General Assembly?

142. This whole pattern of behaviour on the part of
Israel is intended to confront the world with what Israel
considers to be new facts, so that it can project
minimal compliance with any United Nations resolution as a major concession on its part, In other words,
what the world considers to be the duty of Israel is
projected as a “sacrifice” on its part. Israel behaves
as if the world owes it everything and it owes nothing
to the world,
143. When the patience of the Arabs was exhausted,
the October conflict took place, We all know the
consequencesof that war. Some movement took place,
but it was slow, costly, inadequate and insufficient.
144, In the meantime, since resolution 242 (1967)
was adopted by the Council, the struggle of the Palestinian people has introduced new dimensions into the
Middle East crisis. The PLO has achieved Arab and
international recognition as the sole representative
of the Palestinian people, and the rights of the Palestinians to national self-determination and sovereign
existence have been clearly spelled out and underlined, The Rabat summit conference unequivocally
named and recognized the PLO as the sole representative of the Palestinian people, to which matters and issues pertaining to the Palestinians should be
addressed. And let me, in my capacity as representative of the United Arab Emirates and President of the
Council of the League of Arab States, state in the most
emphatic and categorical terms that there cannot be
any change, modification or alteration of the Rabat
summit conference resolution pertaining to the representative character of the PLO;
145. Those new facts and changes have warranted
the present meetings of the Se&ity Council. It is
now self-evident that at the core of the Middle East
crisis lies the Palestine question and that there cannot
be any hope that peace will prevail if these national
rights are not fully implemented. The Security Council
is called upon to render its resolutions credible and to
see to it that the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people are safeguarded and exercised and
that the Council’s search for peace will not be
interrupted.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATTONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences dbpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen+ve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las puhlicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estSn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00400

83-hO8Ol-May

1984-2.200
