A/RES/67/244 B

United Nations

Distr.: General
21 May 2013

General Assembly
Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 144

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 12 April 2013
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/676/Add.1)]

67/244. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
B

1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/240 B of 21 June 2012 and 67/244 A of
24 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the construction of a
new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
Arusha branch, 2 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 3
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the construction of a
new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
Arusha branch;2
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania in facilitating the construction project;
4.
Welcomes the progress made in the implementation of the mandates
related to the construction of the facility;
5.
facility;

Authorizes the activities related to all phases of the construction of the

_______________
1
Resolution 67/244, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 49 (A/67/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 67/244 A.
2
A/67/696.
3
A/67/768.

13-29896

*1329896*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/244 B

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

6.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a multi-year special
account to record income and expenditures for the construction of the facility;
7.
Welcomes the use of local knowledge in the design stage, and in this
regard encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in including local
knowledge and capacity in the implementation of the project;
Commends the Secretary-General for the savings achieved by using
8.
in-house capacity for developing the conceptual design, and encourages him to
continue to find further savings where possible during the implementation of the
project;
Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this
9.
regard requests the Secretary-General to apply the flexible use of office space in the
Arusha branch project, upon the approval by the General Assembly of flexible
workspace arrangements in the Secretariat;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight
Services of the Secretariat with ensuring effective oversight of the implementation
of the construction of the facility and with submitting to the General Assembly
information on key findings in the context of its annual reports;
11. Recalls the mandate that the Mechanism should be a small, temporary
and efficient structure, whose functions and size will diminish over time, with a
small number of staff commensurate with its reduced functions;
12. Also recalls paragraph 36 of the report of the Secretary-General, and
encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that the required
courtroom space is completed in a cost-effective manner, keeping in mind the
varying judicial requirements of the Mechanism, and to continue to report thereon in
the context of the performance reports;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make further efforts to shorten the
duration of the construction project, to allocate the resources provided in the most
effective and efficient manner and to submit a progress report no later than at the
first part of the resumed sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, through the Office of Central
Support Services of the Department of Management of the Secretariat, to update
Member States regularly on the progress of the construction project;
15. Emphasizes the importance of guidance, interaction and coordination
between the Secretariat in New York, including the Office of Central Support
Services, on the one hand, and the Mechanism, Arusha branch, on the other hand,
with clear reporting lines during the implementation of the project;
16. Stresses the importance of the leadership and guidance of the SecretaryGeneral and senior management, as well as of a commitment to the construction
project by all parties concerned during the execution and completion of the project;
17. Takes note of paragraphs 21 and 22 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
procurement of goods and services for the construction project is carried out in strict
compliance with the existing regulations, rules and relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolutions governing procurement in the United Nations;
18.

2/3

Recalls paragraph 33 of its resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008;

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

A/RES/67/244 B

19. Also recalls paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue bilateral exchanges with
judicial institutions such as the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights to
discuss issues of mutual interest, including exploring the possibility of sharing
facilities, particularly a courtroom, in the future and to report on the outcome of the
exchanges in the context of the progress reports;
20. Notes that additional requirements for the project will be included in the
proposed budget for the Mechanism for the biennium 2014–2015.
73rd plenary meeting
12 April 2013

3/3
