UNITED NATIONS

/

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUK

RECORDS

FIFTH
YEAR
464th MEETING : 8 FEBRUARY 1950
CINQUIEME
ANNEE
464eme SEANCE : 8 FEVRIER 1950

C O N S E I L DE

No. 6

SECURITE

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
LAKE

SUCCESS,

NEW

YORK

TABLE QF C O N T E N T S
Page

1. Provisional agenda

1

2. Adoption of the agenda

1

3. The India-Pakistan question (continued)

1

TABLE DES M A T I E R E S

1. Ordre du jour provisoire

1

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1

3. La question Inde-Pakistan (suite)

1

( hk p . )
S/PV.464

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e.. capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le texte
des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels
aux Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York, on Wednesday, 8 February 1950, at 3 p.m.

QUATRE CENT SOIXANTE-QUATRIEME SEANCE
Tenue a Lake Success, New-York, le mercredi 8 fevrier 1950 a 15 heures.

President: Mr. C. BLANCO (Cuba).

President:

M. C.

BLANCO

(Cuba).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France, India,
Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants: Chine,
Cuba, Equateur, Egypte, France, Inde, Norvege,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du
Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Yougoslavie.

1. Provisional agenda ( S / A g e n d a 4 6 4 )

1. Ordre dn jour provisoire ( S / A g e n d a 4 6 4 )

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The India-Pakistan question:
(a) Letter dated 5 December 1949 from the Chairman of the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations introducing the
Commission's third interim report (S/1430,
S/1430/Add.l, S/1430/Add.2, and S/1430/
Add.3);
(b) Letter dated 3 February 1950 from General
McNaughton, Permanent Representative of
Canada to the United Nations, addressed to the
President of the Security Council communicating his report on the India-Pakistan Question
(S/1453).

2. La question Inde-Pakistan:
a) Lettre, en date du 5 decembre 1949, adressee
au Secretaire general des Nations Unies par
le President de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'lnde et le Pakistan pour lui presenter le
troisieme rapport provisoire de la Commission
(S/1430, S/1430/Add.l, S/1430/Add.2 et S/
1430/Add.3) ;
b) Lettre, en date du 3 fevrier 1950, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le general
McNaughton, representant permanent du Canada aupres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
pour accompagner son rapport sur la question
Inde-Pakistan (S/1453).

2 . Adoption of the agenda

2 . Adoption de l'ordre d u jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.
3 . The India-Pakistan question

(continued)

3 . La question Inde-Pakistan

(suite)

On the invitation of the President, Sir Mohammad
Zafrulla Khan, representative of Pakistan, Mr. C. A.
Leguizamon, Chairman of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, and other members of
the Commission took their places at the Security Council
table.

Sur Vinvitation du President, Sir Mohammad Zafrulla Khan, representant du Pakistan, M.C. A. Leguizamon, President de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'lnde et le Pakistan, et d'autres membres de la
commission, prennent place a la table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As at
yesterday's [463rd] meeting, we shall adopt simultaneous interpretation for the statements made by the
interested parties on the question under consideration.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'espagnol) : Comme a la
seance d'hier [463erne], nous aurons recours a l'interpretation simultanee pour traduire les declarations
des parties en cause concernant la question a l'examen.

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA K H A N (Pakistan): I con:luded yesterday afternoon my submission on the prin:iples that emerged from the stand taken by India on
:he question of the accession of Indian States to one
dominion or the other. These principles were that, so

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan) (traduit de Vanglais) : J'ai termine hier apres-midi l'expose
des principes qui se degagent de la position prise par
l'lnde sur la question du rattachement des Etats indiens
a l'un ou l'autre des Dominions. Ces principes sont

/
far as Lord Mountbatten, the then Viceroy and Governor-General of India, was concerned, he advised the
States to base their decision on factors of geographical
compulsion and strategic and economic importance.
The attitude of the Government of India was that the
States were to decide the question of accession in accordance with the principle upon which the partition of
India was agreed to and was effected: that is to say,
the majority non-Muslim States should accede to India
and the majority Muslim should accede to Pakistan.
But if it so happened that a Ruler who did not belong
to the community to which the majority of his people
belonged was not prepared to accede to the Dominion
to which the majority of his people belonged, the decision must be left to the people. It was clearly enunciated
by Sir Sardar Vallabhai Patel, the Deputy Prime Minister of India, that on the lapse of British suzerainty, sovereignty in the States lapsed to the people, and that the
decision was the decision of the people. If the Ruler took
a decision in which the people did not concur, then the
Dominion against which a decision was taken would
not be prepared to recognize the act of accession. Any
consequences that might flow from that would rest
squarely upon the shoulders of the Dominion which
had encouraged accession to it.

Let us first take the criteria laid down or suggested
by Lord Mountbatten, apply them to Kashmir, and
see what the situation was with reference to Kashmir;
that is to say, the geographical situation, and economic
and strategic factors.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir, as the Council is
aware, was acquired by the great-grandfather of the
present Maharaja by treat from the British in 1846, a
treaty known as the Treaty of Amritsar, by an act of
purchase in return for 75 lacs1 of rupees, which roughly
amounts to a couple of million dollars. It has an area
of 84,471 square mites, mainly mountainous but with
only two plains, the Valley of Kashmir, which is girded
around by mountains, and the Jammu plains. It is
situated in the extreme northwestern corner of the
undivided sub-continent of India. To appreciate its
geographical position and certain other factors that
arise from that position I have taken the liberty of
supplying the Secretariat of the Council, for the use
of the members of the Council, with copies of a map
entitled "West Pakistan and Jammu and Kashmir
State". If those maps are distributed and if the members
of the Council will be pleased to look at them, certain
factors will become perfectly clear.

A look at the map will show that the boundary between the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Dominion of India bisects the mountainous range practically
throughout its whole length. I should explain that near
Pathankot, which is a railway terminus near that boundary on the Indian side, there is a gap of about twenty
to thirty miles which is plainland. Then the mountains
1

A lac is 100,000 rupees.

ceux qu'a enonces Lord Mountbatten lorsqi
raison de l'interet qu'il portait a la question
qualite de Vice-Roi et de Gouverneur de l'lnd
conseille aux Etats de prendre leur decision
fondant sur les necessites geographiques et s
facteurs d'ordre strategique et economique.
La position prise par le Gouvernement de
est que les Etats doivent trancher la question d
rattachement en s'inspirant du principe sur 1;
duquel le partage de l'lnde a ete convenu et i
a savoir que les Etats dont la majorite de la p
tion n'est pas musulmane seraient rattaches a l'l
ceux qui ont une population en majeure partie i
mane seraient rattaches au Pakistan. Mais, dans
ou le souverain d'un Etat n'appartenant pas
meme communaute que la majeure partie de son
refuserait de rattacher son Etat au Dominion d
majorite de la population correspond a la majoi
son peuple, c'est au peuple meme qu'il appartie
de trancher la question. Sardar Vallabhai Patel,
Premier Ministre de l'lnde, a declare nettemen
lorsque la suzerainete britannique a pris fin, C'I
peuple qu'est echue la souverainete dans les Et
c'est a lui qu'il appartient de prendre une de
Si le souverain prend une decision que son ]
n'approuve pas, le Dominion a l'encontre duq
decision a ete prise peut ne pas reconnaitre la v
de l'acte de rattachement. Toutes les conseqi
pouvant resulter de ce refus sont imputables au 1
nion qui a pousse a ce rattachement.
Examinons tout d'abord les criteres enono
suggeres par Lord Mountbatten; appliquons-L
Cachemire et voyons la situation qui en resulte
cette region; en d'autres termes, examinons la
tion geographique et les facteurs economiques et 5
giques.
L'Etat de Jamu et Cachemire, comme le s
Conseil, a ete acquis par l'arriere-grand-pere du I
radjah actuel, en vertu d'un traite conclu a\
Grande-Bretagne en 1846 et connu sous le no
Traite d'Amritsar, pour une somme de 75 lac
roupies, c'est-a-dire 2 millions de dollars en
Cet Etat a une superficie de 218.780 kilometres c
il consiste principalement en une region montag
et ne comprend que deux plaines: la vallee du C
mire qui est entouree de montagnes, et les plain
Jammu. L'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire est si
l'extremite nord-ouest de la peninsule unifiee de 1
Pour permettre de juger de sa situation geograf
et de certains autres facteurs qui decoulent de
situation, je me suis permis de remettre au !
tariat, a l'intention des membres du Conseil, qui
exemplaires d'une carte representant le Pakistan
dental et l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. Si les me
du Conseil veulent bien examiner cette carte, ce
facteurs leur apparaitront d'une faqon parfait
claire.
II suffit de jeter un coup d'ceil sur la carte
constater que la frontiere entre l'Etat de Jami
Cachemire et le Dominion de l'lnde coupe la i
de montagnes pour ainsi dire dans toute sa lon|
Je dois faire remarquer toutefois, que, pres de P;
kot, terminus de chemin de fer proche de cette
tiere et situe en territoire indien, il y a une
'Un lac vaut 100.000 roupies.

begin and the whole of the common boundary from that
point between India and Kashmir is mountainous.
Most of the mountains are high and inaccessible. The
only contact with India which can be used for purposes of normal communication with this State is
through that gap of about twenty to thirty miles in
width. The importance of that factor is that India, as
I shall explain when I come to the strategic aspect of
the matter, has nothing to fear from the side of Kashmir,
inasmuch as there is scarcely any possibility of direct
communication between Kashmir and India.

With regard to the boundary between Kashmir and
Pakistan, it will be seen that the greater part of the
boundary runs along the plains and cuts across three
of the main rivers that flow through Pakistan. Then next
comes the question of communications, which, of course,
is one of the corollaries of the geographical situation.
Before the partition, all three roads that led into, and
of course out of, Kashmir passed through Pakistan.
One started with Srinagar and went in the direction of
Rawalpindi, but bifurcated at Domel; the other branch
of that road went down to Abbottabad. The one from
Srinagar to Rawalpindi is quite clear and near the
boundary of the Kashmir State; as can be seen, it
bifurcates into another one which joins the railway
line at Hassan Abdal, but passes through Abbottabad.
: The other one travels from Srinagar to Jammu and from
: Jammu to Sialkot into West Pakistan, although with
: regard to this latter road it is necessary to submit that
it crosses two very high ranges, the Banihal, which is
: certainly over 8,000 feet, and may possibly be near
9,000 feet. That road is snowed up four to five months
Jn the year and cannot be used for ordinary traffic, so
that all year-round communications between the State
and the outside world ran through Pakistan and still
:
, run through Pakistan now.

£ Since the partition, and after the Indian forces were
Amoved into the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Pathankot
vhas been linked by road with Jammu, so that India,
stoo, now has a direct road communication with the
itState, but again from Jammu onwards to Srinagar
iftinto Kashmir itself, the same road goes over this Banihal
[fjPass, and it is snowed up from four to five months
:;:in the year. Thus, the geographical position and comstimunications both indicate the natural integration of
"iShe State of Jammu and Kashmir with Pakistan, and
ilnot with India. The State has a very short railway line
/.running from Jammu in the direction of Sialkot, and
<hat obviously again runs from the State into Pakistan.
k

:

*' As I have already indicated, three Kashmir rivers —
#ill the rivers that take their origin in or pass through
^Cashmir — flow into Pakistan, so that from the geographical position and the position of communications,
khs integration is with Pakistan, and the only rail link
i"i with Pakistan.

d'une ^quarantaine de kilometres environ constitute
par uno. plaine. Ensuite commencent les montagnes et
toute la\ frontiere entre l'lnde et le Cachemire se
trouve, a\f>artir de cet endroit, en territoire montagneux. II s%git, prcsque partout, de hautes montagnes
infranchissables. Le seul point de contact qui permettrait des communications normales entre l'lnde et
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire se trouve a l'endroit
de ladite trouee, large d'une quarantaine de kilometres. L'importance de ce facteur reside dans le fait
que l'lnde, comme je l'exposerai lorsque j'en arriverai
a Taspect strategique de la question, n'a rien a craindre de la part du Cachemire, puisqu'il n'y a presque
aucune possibilite de communication directe entre le
Cachemire et l'lnde.
En ce qui concerne la frontiere entre le Cachemire
et le Pakistan, on voit qu'elle est situee en majeure
partie en plaine et qu'elle coupe trois des principaux
fteuves ou autres cours d'eau qui arrosent le Pakistan.
Vient ensuite la question des communications, qui est
naturellement un des corollaires de la situation geographique. Avant le partage, les trois routes qui permettent d'entrer au Cachemire et d'en sortir passaient
par le Pakistan. L'une d'elles partait de Srinagar en
direction de Rawalpindi, mais bifurquait a Domel;
l'autre branche de cette route descendait jusqu'a
Abbottabad. Le trace de la route de Srinagar a Rawalpindi est tres net et proche de la frontiere de l'Etat
de Cachemire; comme on peut le constater, elle se
ramifie et la seconde route re joint la ligne du chemin
de fer a Hassan Abdal apres avoir passe par Abbottabad. La troisieme route va de Srinagar a Jammu et de
Jammu a Sialkot dans le Pakistan occidental, bien
qu'il faille, pour ce qui est de cette derniere, faire
observer qu'elle traverse les deux tres hautes chaines
de montagnes du Banihal, qui depassent certainement
2.400 metres et atteignent peut-etre meme tout pres
de 2.700 metres. Cette route est enneigee pendant quatre
a cinq mois de l'annee et ne peut done etre utilisee
pour la circulation normale pendant ce laps de temps;
il en resulte que toutes les communications permanentes
entre l'Etat et le monde exterieur devaient et doivent
toujours s'effectuer a travers le Pakistan.
Depuis le partage et apres l'entree des forces de
l'lnde dans l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, Pathankot a ete reliee a Jammu par une route, de sorte que
l'lnde, elle aussi, a maintenant une communication
routiere directe avec l'Etat; cependant, pour alter de
Jammu jusqu'a Srinagar, au cceur du Cachemire, la
route en question passe par le col de Banihal et elle
est enneigee pendant quatre ou cinq mois de l'annee.
Ainsi, la situation geographique de meme que les
communications demontrent que l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire se rattache naturellement au Pakistan, et
non a l'lnde. Le Cachemire possede, d'autre part, une
tres courte ligne de chemin de fer, qui va de Jammu
vers Sialkot et qui mene done, elle aussi, de l'Etat vers
le Pakistan.
Comme je l'ai deja indique, trois rivieres du Cachemire — toutes les rivieres qui prennent leur source
dans le Cachemire ou le traversent — baignent ensuite
le Pakistan, de sorte que, par sa situation geographique
et la disposition des voies de communications, l'Etat se
rattache au Pakistan et qu'il n'est relie par voie ferree
qu'au Pakistan.

Let us now take the economic factors. Yestferday
[463rd meeting] the representative of India stated that
the greater part of the trade of Kashmir, so fgr as its
destination was concerned, was with India before partition: that is, with India as it is defined today. I join
issue with him over that statement. To start with, the
one single article which is outstanding with regard to
Kashmir's resources and trade is timber. The timber is
cut down in the mountains. It is dragged down to the
rivers and streams and floated down the rivers and
streams into Pakistan; and the two markets for Kashmir timber have always been Wazirabad, which, it will be
seen, is next to Sialkot on the map, and Jhelum, which
is on the Jhelum River, where the river intersects the
road and the railway between Wazirabad and Rawalpindi. Thus the whole of the timber produce of the
State passed through and was marketed and sold in
Pakistan. There was no other means; there is no other
means of conveying that timber out of Kashmir. The
natural means is by way of the rivers.

The Security Council can judge the volume of this
trade from the fact that 20 to 25 per cent, not of the
trade of Kashmir, but of the revenue of the Kashmir
Government, was derived from the sale of this timber.
The next item with regard to the trade of Kashmir
is fresh fruits and vegetables. Again, as the Council will
appreciate, the fruit starts from Srinagar. Whichever
way it goes out, whether by the Banihal route or whether
along the Jhelum Valley route to Rawalpindi, it has to
travel 200 miles by road before it becomes available
to the nearest markets, which are at Rawalpindi and
Sialkot, both markets being in Pakistan. Obviously,
fresh fruit in the condition in which it has to travel
over those roads, where there is no arrangement for
refrigeration and so on, could scarcely be kept for any
longer period after its arrival in Pakistan. The same
applies to fresh vegetables, so that these three large
items of export from Kashmir — timber, fresh fruits
and vegetables — obviously went to Pakistan and could
not go elsewhere.

As regards woollens and carpets also, the largest
sale of these was in the West Pakistan area. With regard to other goods, such as the products of cottage
industries and silk work, no doubt they sold farther
afield, but nevertheless their transit, that of those that
sold in Pakistan and of those that sold outside, was all
through Pakistan, so that again from the point of view
of its economy, Kashmir was integrated naturally with
Pakistan and is integrated naturally with Pakistan. In
return, such commodities as Kashmir needed were all
obtained from Pakistan, s6 that the economy is interdependent with the economy of Pakistan. It is true, of
course, that, like every other trade, both on the subcontinent of India and Pakistan and elsewhere in the
world, there is a certain amount of trade with the outside world, but that really does not affect the question
with which of the two Dominions the economy of
Kashmir is integrated. But again with regard to its
exports abroad, the greater part of the export took

Passons maintenant a l'examen des facteurs
nomiques. Hier [463eme seance], le represents
l'lnde a declare qu'avant le partage la majeure
des echanges du Cachemire, en ce qui concern*
destination, s'effectuait avec l'lnde, c'est-a-dire
l'lnde telle qu'elle se presente aujourd'hui. Je d
contredire sur ce point. Tout d'abord, le seul a
parmi les ressources du Cachemire, qui presen
1'importance du point de vue commercial est le
d'ceuvre. Ce bois est coupe dans les montagnes.
traine jusqu'aux rivieres et aux fleuves et parvie
Pakistan par flottage; d'ailleurs, les deux ma
pour le bois du Cachemire ont ete de tout t
Wazirabad, qui, comme on le verra, se trouve, s
carte, a proximite de Sialkot, et Jhelum situe, s
riviere du meme nom, a l'endroit ou ladite riviere <
la route et la voie de chemin de fer qui relient W;
bad a Rawalpindi. La totalite du bois produit
l'Etat passait done par le Pakistan, oil elle etait
sur le marche et vendue. II n'y avait pas d'autre i
bilite; il n'existe aucun autre moyen de sortir ce
du Cachemire. Les rivieres constituent le moye
transport naturel a cet effet.
Le Conseil de securite peut juger du volume d
echanges par le fait que 20 a 25 pour 100, nor
du commerce du Cachemire, mais des ressource
Gouvernement de l'Etat, provenaient de la vent
ce bois.
Le deuxieme produit du Cachemire, par ordre <
portance commerciale, est constitue par les frui
les legumes frais. La encore, comme le Conseil
s'en rendre compte, les fruits partent de Srin
Quelle que soit la route qu'ils empruntent pour s
du pays, qu'il s'agisse de la route qui passe p;
col de Banihal ou de celle qui suit la vallee e
Jhelum vers Rawalpindi, ils voyagent par route
dant 320 kilometres avant de parvenir aux mai
les plus proches, qui sont Rawalpindi et Sialkot,
trouvent done tous deux dans le Pakistan. II est
dent que les fruits frais, etant donne les conditions
lesquelles ils voyagent sur ces routes ou il n'existi
cune installation frigorifique, ne pouvaient pas,
fois arrives au Pakistan, se conserver longtemps
peut en dire autant des legumes frais; done, ces
produits principaux export.es du Cachemire: bois, i
et legumes frais, s'ecoulaient fatalement vers le P
tan et ne pouvaient s'ecouler ailleurs.
Les lainages et les tapis, eux aussi, se vend
surtout dans le Pakistan occidental. Quant aux a
produits, tels que les produits des industries artisa
et les soieries, ils se vendaient sans doute dans
regions plus eloignees; cependant, ils transit
tous par le Pakistan, qu'ils fussent ecoules su
marches de ce pays meme ou exportes au-del
ses frontieres; c'est une nouvelle preuve du fait
l'economie du Cachemire etait naturellement inti
a celle du Pakistan, et cette situation ne s'est |
modifiee. En contrepartie, les produits dont le C
mire avait besoin etaient tous fournis par le Pak
ce qui prouve l'interdependance existant entre
deux economies. II est sans doute exact que, da
cas de la peninsule constitute par l'lnde et le Pal
(comme partout ailleurs dans le monde), il y ava
certain commerce avec l'exterieur; cependant, c<
ne change rien a la question de savoir quel est
des deux Dominions auquel l'economie du Cachi

place through the port of Karachi, which again, as the
Council will observe, is its natural port. Once these
exports have arrived in Rawalpindi or Sialkot, the nearest seaport by rail is Karachi, and therefore these
articles took that natural route.

So far as Kashmir's imports are concerned, Pakistan
used to supply to Kashmir all its official civil supplies,
at any rate, soap, rock salt, grain, pulses, cotton and
petrol, but there is another and an almost overwhelming
economic factor that must be taken into account. It is
this. The three rivers — beginning at the top of the
map, the Indus, the Jhelum and the Chenab — which
flow from Kashmir into Pakistan, control to a very
large extent the agricultural economy of Pakistan itself.
The economy of the whole of West Pakistan is based
almost entirely upon its irrigation system, that is to say,
upon the application of scientific methods to make the
water of these rivers available for purposes of agriculture through irrigation works and irrigation channels.
As much as 19 million acres of land is irrigated in West
Pakistan from the waters of these rivers. There is a
system of carrier channels by which, in the end, effectively to pool the water of these rivers and then to
distribute it through these irrigation channels.

If Kashmir were to accede to India, this supply
would be cut off altogether. This is not an idle apprehension on the part of West Pakistan. I am aware that
every one of the members of the Security Council must
think, "Oh, but that is preposterous. How could that
happen? These are international rivers and the systems that are based on them would continue in operation. It does not matter to which State Kashmir accedes." But that this apprehension is not idle, I shall
be able to indicate in one moment.
If members of the Council will now kindly turn to the
map again, they will see that the boundary between
West Pakistan and India itself cuts across three rivers.
Starting from the Indian side, the first is the Sutlej;
the second is the Beas — which is actually cut by the
boundary near Amritsar, although there is a mistake in
this map; and the third, the Ravi, which is cut near
Pathankot. The Sutlej, the Beas and the Ravi have
been cut across by this boundary. I will not go into
the question of the fairness or the justice of the methods
by which the boundary was drawn, but the fact is that
it stands there. A good deal of the irrigation system of
West Punjab is dependent upon these rivers also. As
I have said, we obtain our supply of water from all
these six rivers.
On 1 April 1948, that is, in the April following partition, India took up the position that, being the upper
riparian State in respect of these rivers, inasmuch as
they flow from the mountainous ranges into India and
then on into Pakistan, India is the owner of every drop
of water in them and is entitled, if it so chooses, to cut
off the entire supply which flows down into Pakistan.
On the basis of that claim India actually cut off the
supply on 1 April 1948, and it was not restored until

est integree. D'ailleurs, en ce qui concerne les exportations vers les contrees d'outre-mer, elles etaient
effectuees surtout par l'intermediaire du port de Karachi, qui est le port naturel du Cachemire comme le
Conseil ne l'ignore pas. Une fois que les produits exported du Cachemire etaient arrives a Rawalpindi ou
Sialkot, ils etaient envoyes par chemin de fer au port
le plus proche, c'est-a-dire Karachi, qui etait la voie
naturelle pour les exportations.
En ce qui concerne les importations du Cachemire,
le Pakistan lui fournissait tous ses approvisionnements
civils officiels, c'est-a-dire tout au moins le savon, le
sel gemme, les cereales, les feculents, le coton et le
petrole. II faut tenir compte egalement d'un autre
facteur economique dont l'importance est encore — et
de beaucoup — plus considerable. Ce facteur est le
suivant: les trois rivieres qui figurent sur la carte:
l'lndus, la Jhelum et le Chenab, qui coulent du Cachemire vers le Pakistan, exercent une influence dominante
sur l'economie agricole d'une grande partie du Pakistan. En effet, l'economie du Pakistan occidental est
fondee presque entierement sur son systeme d'irrigation, c'est-a-dire sur l'application des methodes scientifiques d'utilisation de l'eau des rivieres a des fins
agricoles par l'intermediaire d'ouvrages et de canaux
d'irrigation. Les eaux de ces rivieres permettent I r r i gation de terrains d'une superficie de quelque 7 millions
et demi d'hectares dans le Pakistan occidental. II existe
un systeme de canaux d'adduction conqu pour permettre une centralisation efficace des eaux de ces
rivieres et leur repartition a travers les canaux d'irrigation.
Si le Cachemire se rattachait a l'lnde, la fourniture
d'eau serait coupee. Ce n'est pas la une crainte vaine
de la part du Pakistan occidental. Je n'ignore pas ce que
tous les membres du Conseil de securite doivent penser:
"C'est insense! cela ne peut pas arriver. II s'agit de
fleuves internationaux et le fonctionnement des systemes d'irrigation qu'ils alimentent sera maintenu
quel que soit l'Etat auquel le Cachemire se rattachera!"
Cependant, comme je vais le demontrer dans un instant, ce n'est pas la une crainte vaine.
Si les membres du Conseil veulent bien maintenant
regarder de nouveau la carte, ils verront que la frontiere qui separe le Pakistan occidental de l'lnde coupe
trois cours d'eau. En partant de l'lnde, ces trois cours
d'eau sont: le Sutlej, le Beas — que la frontiere coupe,
en fait, pres d'Amritsar car la carte comporte une
erreur — et enfin le Ravi, que la frontiere coupe pres
de Pathankot. Cette frontiere coupe done le Sutlej, le
Beas et le Ravi. Je n'examinerai pas si les modalites
de delimitation de cette frontiere ont ete justes et equitables; le fait est que c'est a ces endroits qu'elle passe.
Le systeme d'irrigation du Pendjab occidental utilise
egalement, dans une large mesure, l'eau de ces rivieres. Comme je l'ai dit, notre approvisionnement en eau
nous est fourni par ces six cours d'eau.
Le ler avril 1948, c'est-a-dire au mois d'avril qui
suivit le partage, l'lnde adopta la position suivante:
elle pretendit qu'etant un Etat riverain place en amont
de ces rivieres qui, venant des chaines montagneuses,
coulent dans l'lnde puis dans le Pakistan, l'lnde etait
proprietaire des eaux desdites rivieres jusqu'a la derniere goutte et avait le droit, si elle le desirait, de
detourner les eaux des rivieres qui coulent vers le
Pakistan. Se fondant sur cette revendication, l'lnde

six weeks later when, at the point of the pistol, India
had obtained an agreement from Pakistan that Pakistan would not only go on paying, as it was paying and
was prepared to pay, its proportionate expenses in respect of the running of these systems and the interest
charges on the capital involved, but also seigniorage,
that is to say, the price of the water supplied. But,
obviously, Pakistan could not accept the claim of India
and was not willing to pay the price of the water in the
shape of seigniorage, but the agreement arrived at was
that Pakistan should deposit this amount of seigniorage
in escrow pending the settlement of the dispute. Each
side, of course, reserved its legal rights, and so on,
but for the moment water is being supplied to us from
these rivers on payment not only of the legitimate
charges which we have never disputed and have gone
on paying, but on the deposit also of what India claims
as the price of the water to be supplied from these
rivers.

One interesting factor in that connexion is that after
the partition it was claimed that the whole of this irrigation system which operates in West Punjab had been
a joint asset of the whole Province before the Punjab
was divided into East Punjab and West Punjab, and
that, therefore, it ought to be valued. It was valued.
India insisted that it ought to be valued at a figure
higher than the original cost, inasmuch as it was a
very profitable investment. The arbitral tribunal which
was dealing with these matters decided that it ought to
be valued at twice its original cost. It was so valued.
West Punjab was debited with the value of its proportional excess of share of this irrigation, India
was credited with it, and, as soon as India obtained that
credit, it thereupon shut off the water. I know that the
Security Council is not yet seized of that dispute, but
it shows that whether India is right or wrong — I am
not, for the moment wanting anyone to decide who, in
that dispute, is right or wrong — India does claim
that, as the upper riparian State, it is entitled to cut off
the whole of the water flowing into Pakistan from those
rivers. Assume, for one moment, that Kashmir were
to accede to India. The same would apply to the other
three rivers, and not only the water of the three rivers
which flow from India into Pakistan, but that of the
three rivers which flow from Kashmir into Pakistan,
would also be denied to Pakistan, which would be left
completely high and dry. Nineteen million acres would
be turned into a waste, and millions of people would
be faced with starvation and extinction. That is an
economic factor the like of which cannot be produced
in a comparable case anywhere else.

So much for the geographical and economic factors.
What about the strategic factors affecting the situation ?
Again, I would beg the Council to pay attention to the
matter. As I have already indicated, India's security
would not be affected one ounce by the accession of
Kashmir to Pakistan. There is nothing that would be
placed in jeopardy if that should happen. The barrier

coupa notre approvisionnement en eau le ler avril
et ne leva cette mesure que six semaines plus
lorsqu'elle obtint du Pakistan, et cela par la fore
accord aux termes duquel, non seulement le Pal
continuerait a payer, comme il le faisait et etait di
a le faire, sa part des depenses afferentes au foncti
ment du systeme d'adduction d'eau et sa part des
rets du capital investi, mais egalement un droit d
gneuriage, c'est-a-dire le prix de l'eau fournie.
manifeste que le Pakistan ne pouvait accepter la r
dication de l'lnde et n'etait pas dispose a pay
prix de l'eau sous la forme d'un droit de seigneui
Taccord auquel on arriva tendait a ce que le Pal
depose le montant du droit de seigneuriage aux i
d'un fideicommissaire jusqu'au reglement du diffe
Chacune des parties, evidemment, reservait ses <
juridiques, mais, pour le moment, l'eau nous est
nie de ces rivieres non seulement contre paiemen
depenses legitimes que nous n'avons jamais conte
et que nous avons toujours payees, mais encore c
depot de la somme que l'lnde exigeait pour pri
l'eau fournie par ces rivieres.
A ce propos, il convient de noter un facteur
ressant: apres le partage, on declara que l'ensemb
systeme d'irrigation qui fonctionne dans le Pet
occidental constituait, pour l'ensemble de la pro
et avant la division du Pendjab en Pendjab orieni
Pendjab occidental, un avoir commun et que, par
sequent, il convenait d'estimer cet avoir. Cette es
tion eut lieu. L'lnde soutint qu'il convenait d'esi
le systeme d'irrigation a un prix superieur au pri
revient initial, car il constituait un investissement
avantageux. Le tribunal arbitral, charge de traiter
question, decida qu'il fallait evaluer le systeme d
gation a un prix double de son prix de revient.
fut ainsi fait. De plus, la part qui revenait au Per
occidental ayant ete considered comme excedentaii
valeur de l'excedent fut portee au debit du Pendj;
au credit de l'lnde; des que l'lnde eut obtenu ce
dit, elle coupa l'eau. Je sais que le Conseil de sec
n'est pas encore saisi de ce differend; toutefois,
l'lnde ait tort ou raison (et pour le moment je ne d
nullement qu'on determine la partie qui, dans ce <
rend, a tort ou raison), le differend montre com
l'lnde, en tant qu'Etat riverain situe en amont de
cours d'eau, s'arroge le droit absolu de couper 1'eat
ces rivieres amenent dans le Pakistan. Supposons
un instant que le Cachemire soit rattache a l'l
Cette meme pretention serait appliquee aux trois a
rivieres et le Pakistan se verrait denier, non s;
ment l'eau des trois cours d'eau qui viennent de 1'!
mais encore celle des trois cours d'eau qui vienner
Cachemire, ce qui le laisserait dans un etat de s<
resse absolue. Sept millions et demi d'hectares ser
ainsi rendus inutilisables et des millions d'etres hun
auraient a faire face a la famine et a la mort. Ce
un facteur auquel on ne saurait trouver de par;
dans la situation economique d'aucune autre parti
monde.
Tels sont les facteurs geographiques et economi
Voyons maintenant quels sont les facteurs strateg
qui peuvent influer sur la situation. Une fois de
je demande au Conseil d'etudier cette question
la plus grande attention. Comme je l'ai deja d:
securite de l'lnde ne serait nullement affectee p
rattachement du Cachemire au Pakistan. Si ce i

between Kashmir and India, except for those twenty
miles, is all mountainous, and the addition of those
twenty miles to the rest of the very long frontier between Pakistan and India — from Karachi right up
to Lahore, and then through Sialkot towards Jammu —
would make no difference to the security of India, to its
strategy or to its defence arrangements. Twenty miles
added to, say, 1,000 mites, makes no difference whatsoever. In any case, if there were friendship between
Pakistan and India, the question would not arise. But
supposing there were not. Then the measures that India
would have to take with regard to the 1,000 miles
would obviously cover these additional twenty miles
also.

On the other hand, look at the question from the
point of view of Pakistan. Take the main railway line,
running, as can be seen from the map, from Lahore
through Wazirabad to Rawalpindi and on to Peshawar.
It has a road running parallel to it throughout. These
are the two main strategic road and railway systems of
West Pakistan. The whole of the defence of that area,
which once included the defence of India also, and
would still affect the defence of India, is based upon the
fact that this line would not be threatened from the
flank. If Kashmir acceded to India, the whole of that
flank would be threatened and broken. The border of
Kashmir for quite a long distance, more than 150 miles
of this railway and road, runs parallel to the railway
and road within a few miles. Now, what would happen ?
Pakistan might as well throw in its hand so far as making
any preparations for defence is concerned. India would
obtain direct access to the tribal areas and, through the
tribal areas, on to Afghanistan. Pakistan's position
would become absolutely untenable. Not only that, but
even India's own defence would to that extent be
threatened, because the defence of the Pakistan frontier,
and consequently of India also, from any threat to it
from the northwest, has to be built up along the River
Indus and then, beyond the River Indus, between that
river and the international boundary known in that
area as the Durand Line. If we were threatened on this
line, if we were always threatened on our flanks, what
attention could we pay to the building up and the
maintenance of our defence arrangements along the
frontier? It would lay a burden on Pakistan which
Pakistan could not possibly undertake to bear.

Again from the point of view of defence, quite as many
as 10,000 Pakistan soldiers are drawn from certain
areas of the Kashmir State, mainly Poonch. They have
their homes there — we shall have to make reference to
them later on, in the course of the consideration of other
factors — and that fact would give rise to a problem for
Pakistan which, in itself, would be of great magnitude.
Look at it, then, from any point of view one may
choose: India is under no necessity nor compulsion
to require or to need the accession of Kashmir to
itself. India has merely entered upon a gamble. If it

chement avait lieu, il ne comporterait aucun danger.
La frontiere qui separe le Cachemire de l'lnde est entierement montagneuse, sauf en ce qui concerne quelque
trente kilometres, et si la tres longue frontiere qui
separe l'lnde du Pakistan — de Karachi jusqu'a
Lahore et de la jusqu'a Jammu en passant par Sialkot
— etait augmentee de ces trente kilometres, cela ne
modifierait en rien la situation actuelle en ce qui concerne la securite de l'lnde, sa strategic ou les dispositions qu'elle a prises pour sa defense. En ajoutant
trente kilometres a 1.600 kilometres, on ne saurait
modifier en rien la situation. De toutes faqons, si des
relations amicales existaient entre l'lnde et le Pakistan,
cette question ne se poserait pas. Mais supposons qu'il
en soit autrement. Dans ce cas, les mesures que l'lnde
devrait prendre en ce qui concerne les 1.600 kilometres
s'appliqueraient egalement a ces trente kilometres supplementaires.
Par contre, examinons le probleme du point de vue
du Pakistan. Examinons par exemple la question de la
voie ferree principale qui va, comme on le voit sur
la carte, de Lahore a Rawalpindi et a Peshawar en
passant par Wazirabad. Une route parallele s'etend
tout le long de cette voie ferree. Cette route et ce chemin de fer sont, du point de vue strategique, essentiels
au Pakistan occidental. Toute la defense de cette region
qui, jadis, comprenait egalement la defense de l'lnde
et qui, aujourd'hui encore, influerait sur la defense de
l'lnde, est fondee sur le fait que cette ligne ne serait
pas menacee sur son flanc. Mais si le Cachemire se
rattachait a l'lnde, l'ensemble de ce flanc serait menace
et brise. Sur une assez longue distance — plus de 230
kilometres de cette voie ferree et de cette route — la
frontiere du Cachemire est, en effet, parallele a la voie
ferree et a la route dont elle n'est separee que par quelques kilometres. Qu'arriverait-il alors? Le Pakistan
ferait aussi bien d'abandonner tout espoir de preparer
sa defense. L'lnde aurait directement acces aux regions
des tribus et, a travers elles, a 1'Afghanistan. La position du Pakistan deviendrait absolument intenable. Bien
plus, la defense de l'lnde elle-meme serait, dans une
certaine mesure, menacee, etant donne que la defense
de la frontiere du Pakistan, et par consequent de celle
de l'lnde, contre toute menace venue du nord-ouest,
doit etre etablie le long de l'lndus et, au-dela de ce
fleuve, dans la region qui separe l'lndus de la frontiere
internationale connue sous le nom de Ligne Durand.
Si nous etions menaces sur cette ligne et si nous etions
constamment menaces sur ce flanc, quels soins pourrions-nous apporter a l'etablissement et au maintien de
nos dispositions de defense le long de la frontiere ? Cela
imposerait au Pakistan une charge qu'il ne serait pas
en mesure de supporter.
En outre et toujours du point de vue de la defense,
10.000 hommes au moins de l'armee pakistanaise sont
recrutes dans certaines regions de l'Etat de Cachemire,
particulierement dans le Panch. Ces soldats ont leurs
foyers dans cette region — nous en reparlerons d'ailleurs ulterieurement lorsque nous examinerons d'autres facteurs — et ce fait poserait un probleme qui
presenterait en soi, pour le Pakistan, une importance
considerable.
Ainsi done, qu'on se place a n'importe quel point de
vue, il est evident que l'lnde ne se trouve ni dans la
necessite ni dans l'obligation d'exiger que le Cachemire
lui soit rattache. II s'agit pour l'lnde d'une simple

succeeds in that gamble, it can crush and break Pakistan
— and that is the object of that gamble. India does
not need Kashmir from the point of view of any of
its necessities. The possession of Kashmir can add
nothing to the economy of India or to the strategic
security of India. On the other hand, it is vital for
Pakistan. If Kashmir should accede to India, Pakistan
might as well, from both the economic and the strategic points view, become a feudatory of India or cease
to exist as an independent sovereign State. That is
the stake of the two sides; these are the considerations.

speculation. Si cette speculation reussit, l'lnde
ecraser le Pakistan et c'est la le but qu'elle se pro
La possession du Cachemire ne repond a aucune
necessites de l'lnde. Elle ne peut rien ajouter a 1
nomie de l'lnde ou a sa securite strategique. Par cc
la possession du Cachemire est vitale pour le Paki
Si le Cachemire est rattache a l'lnde, autant vau
que le Pakistan devienne un Etat satellite de l'lnd
cesse d'exister en tant qu'Etat souverain et inde
dant, tant du point de vue economique que du \
de vue strategique. Tel est l'enjeu pour les deux
ties, telles sont les considerations que je voulais
muter.
Aucune de ces considerations ne s'est appliquee
une telle force, ni a un tel degre, a aucun des ai
Etats indiens et particulierement aux Etats a pr
desquels l'lnde avait decide que, s'ils n'acceptaienl
d'etre rattaches a l'lnde, l'lnde les occuperait
tairement. Et l'lnde les a occupes militairement.
Hier, le representant de l'lnde, parlant de la s
tion au point de vue constitutionnel, a dit que les I
indiens sont libres (meme apres l'etablissement i
mise en vigueur de la Constitution de l'lnde qu:
entree en vigueur le 26 Janvier dernier) de dema
ou non leur rattachement. Mais le degre de cette lil
ressort clairement de l'histoire du Junagadh el
Haiderabad, que j'ai brievement presentee hier au I
seil. Selon le representant de l'lnde, le Haiderab;
encore la liberte de demander ou non son rattachei
a l'lnde. Toutefois, on ne le laissa pas libre de rei
ce rattachement avant que la Constitution ne fut
boree.
Toutefois, nous ne nous interessons pas directe!
a ce probleme. Ce qui nous interesse, c'est la quei
suivante: le rattachement du Cachemire a l'lnde
signifie pratiquement rien pour l'lnde, etant di
les facteurs dont j'ai fait etat, mais il est d'une
portance vitale pour le Pakistan.
Tels sont les facteurs sur lesquels Lord Mountb;
a suggere, ou recommande, aux souverains de fo
leur decision en ce qui concerne l'accession. L'
repond par un "non"
En dehors de ces facteurs, dont il importe
qu'ils existent ou qu'ils n'existent pas, la deci
devrait se fonder sur les principes au nom desque
partage de l'lnde a ete accepte et effectue, c'est-asur des considerations touchant a la popula
Voyons done comment se presente la situation e
qui concerne la population. L'Etat de Jammu et Ca
mire est un Etat double, en quelque sorte, puis
comprend deux provinces, la province de Cache
et celle de Jammu. La population totale de l'Etat s'e
a environ 4 millions d'ames. Les chiffres que je
citer ont ete etablis par le recensement de 1941, le
fournit les indications les plus recentes dont on dis
a ce sujet. Selon ces chiffres, dans la seule pro\
de Cachemire, la province de Jammu etant exclue
Musulmans representent 93 pour 100 de la popul;
totale; dans la province de Jammu, les Musulr
representent 61 pour 100 de la population. Je voui
insister sur ces chiffres parce que certaines depe
de presse ont laisse entendre que dans la provinc
Jammu, les Musulmans n'etaient pas en majorite.
n'est pas le cas. Les Musulmans ont la majorite
chacune des deux provinces. Dans l'ensemble de 1
de Jammu et Cachemire, les Musulmans repress

None of those considerations, in that degree or intensity, applied to any other of the Indian States, particularly with regard to the States as to which India's
attitude was that, if they did not agree to accede to
India, India would take military possession of them.
And India did take military possession of them.
Yesterday, the representative of India, when talking
about the constitutional position, said that the Indian
States are free — even after the framing and the coming into force of the Indian Constitution, which
came into force on 26 January last — to accede or not
to accede. But the extent to which they are free to
accede or not to accede became quite apparent from
the history of Junagadh and Hyderabad, which, in brief,
I submitted to the Council yesterday. According to the
representative of India, Hyderabad is still free to accede or not to accede to India. Yet, it was not allowed
to make the choice not to accede before the Constitution itself was framed.
However, we are not concerned directly with that
one point. What we are concerned with is this: that
the accession of Kashmir to India means practically
nothing to India on the basis of these factors that I
have been discussing, but is of absolutely vital importance to Pakistan.
Those are the factors which Lord Mountbatten suggested or recommended to the Rulers as the basis upon
which their decision with regard to acccession should
be made. India says "no"
Apart from these — it does not matter whether they
exist or do not exist — the decision should be based
upon the principles upon which the partition of India
was agreed to and was effected, that is to say, upon
the basis of the population. Well, let us see what the
case is with regard to population. The State of Jammu
and Kashmir is a composite State in the sense that it
has two provinces, one being the Province of Kashmir
and the other being the Province of Jammu. The total
population of the State is approximately 4 million. The
figures that I am about to cite are based upon the
1941 census, which provides the latest available figures.
On the basis of those figures, in the Province of Kashmir, taken by itself, and apart from Jammu, the Muslim
proportion of the population was over 93 per cent;
in the Province of Jammu, the Muslim proportion of
the population was 61 per cent. I wish to emphasize
that because, in some of the Press reports, it has been
suggested that in the province of Jammu, taken by
itself, the Muslims were not in the majority. That is
not the case. The Muslims were in the majority in each
Province. In the whole of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, taking into consideration the two Provinces,
the Muslim proportion of the population is over 77
8

per cent. Those are the facts as far as population is
concerned.
Let one look at it from whatever point of view he
likes. If one takes the factors that were stressed by Lord
Mountbatten, Kashmir ought to have acceded, and
ought to accede, to Pakistan. If one takes the factors
upon which India has insisted throughout, Kashmir
ought to have acceded, and ought to accede, to Pakistan.
But, in addition to the population factors, there are
all the cultural ties, all the ties that religious brotherhood has created; there is inter-marriage and there
are inter-relationships between the people of West
Pakistan and the people of Kashmir, and all the other
things that bind any two communities together. Pakistan has always been the natural outlet for the people
of Kashmir, both from the tyranny of their Ruler and
for the development of their culture and their talents.
I doubt whether a dozen Muslims of Kashmir could
be named who, living under the Maharaja during the
last 100 years, have attained to any position of eminence in any walks of life. I challenge anybody to name
one dozen who are well known. On the other hand, people from Kashmir, once they have arrived in Pakistan,
have always risen to the highest positions. The late
Sir Mohammad Iqbal, the very founder and originator
of the idea of Pakistan, was a Kashmiri. He resided,
of course, in Pakistan itself; he would not have been
tolerated in Kashmir. The present Governor-General
of Pakistan is a Kashmiri. The present Governor of
Sind, in West Pakistan, is a Kashmiri. The present
Minister of the Interior in the central Government
of Pakistan is a Kashmiri. It seems that the moment
a Muslim Kashmiri leaves Kashmir and comes to Pakistan he receives the fullest scope for his cultural and
intellectual development, for which there is no room in
Kashmir itself. That speaks volumes for the conditions
that exist.

Pakistan may be called the Beast of Belsen, as
Sheikh Abdullah has called it; it may be so described
in photographs to which the Kashmir Government has
had recourse as a means of propaganda against Pakistan. But how is it that the Muslims of Kashmir have
no scope, and have had no scope for more than a century, for any development in Kashmir itself, whereas,
the moment they set foot in Pakistan, they have every
scope and have always risen to positions of eminence
and to the highest intellectual development? That in
itself is the best answer to such posters. This word in
the middle, in Urdu, means Pakistan. This is what the
Government of India is teaching its people about
Pakistan.
How then did the dispute arise? When all these
factors were in favour of the accession of Kashmir to
Pakistan, how did the dispute arise? There again, I
join issue with the representative of India in regard to
the statement he made yesterday, that up to 22 October 1947 there was no trouble whatever and that it
was only the incursion of the tribesmen on that date
that created the whole trouble and necessitated the

plus de 77 pour 100 de la population. Voila comment
se repartit la population.
Que chacun examine la question du point de vue qui
lui paraitra preferable. Si Ton considere les facteurs
dont Lord Mountbatten a souligne l'importance, Ton
voit que le Cachemire aurait du, et devrait, acceder au
Pakistan; si Ton considere les facteurs auxquels l'lnde
a toujours attache beaucoup d'importance, il apparait
egalement que le Cachemire aurait du, et devrait, se
rattacher au Pakistan.
Mais outre le facteur population, il faut tenir compte
des liens culturels, de tous les liens qui resultent de la
communaute des croyances religieuses; les habitants du
Pakistan occidental et du Cachemire se marient entre
eux, entretiennent des relations de famille, sont lies
par tout ce qui peut unir deux communautes. Le Pakistan a toujours constitue un debouche naturel pour les
habitants du Cachemire, qu'il s'agisse pour eux d'echapper a la tyrannie de leur souverain ou de developper
leur culture ou leurs aptitudes. Je doute que Ton puisse
trouver douze Musulmans originaires du Cachemire
qui, ayant vecu sous l'autorite du Maharadjah au
cours des cent dernieres annees, aient occupe des positions de premier plan dans n'importe quelle sphere de
l'activite humaine; je mets quiconque au defi de trouver
douze Musulmans qui se soient fait un nom. Par contre,
les personnes qui, originaires du Cachemire, se sont
installees au Pakistan, ont toujours reussi a s'elever
jusqu'aux positions les plus hautes. Le regrette Sir
Mohammad Iqbal, le premier qui ait congu l'idee de la
creation d'un Etat de Pakistan, etait originaire du
Cachemire; bien entendu, il residait au Pakistan, car
sa presence n'aurait pas ete toleree au Cachemire. L'actuel Gouverneur general du Pakistan est egalement
originaire du Cachemire. II en est de meme de l'actuel
Gouverneur du Sind, dans le Pakistan occidental, et
du Ministre de Tinterieur du Gouvernement central
pakistanais. II semblerait que, des qu'un Musulman
quitte le Cachemire pour le Pakistan, il voit s'ouvrir
devant lui d'immenses possibilites de developpement
culturel et intellectuel, qu'il ne saurait trouver au Cachemire meme. Cela est assez revelateur des conditions
qui existent dans ce pays.
On peut bien traiter le Pakistan de "bete de Belsen",
comme l'a fait le cheik Abdullah; on peut bien le decrire
sous ce jour dans les photographies que le Gouvernement du Cachemire utilise a des fins de propagande
contre le Pakistan. Mais comment se fait-il que les
Musulmans du Cachemire n'aient pas, et cela depuis
des siecles, la possibilite de se developper pleinement au
Cachemire, alors que, des qu'ils penetrent au Pakistan,
ils trouvent cette possibilite, ils parviennent a de
hautes situations et leur developpement intellectuel
atteint le niveau le plus eleve? Cela constitue la meilleure reponse a cette affiche de propagande au milieu
de laquelle on lit le mot qui, en ourdou, signifie Pakistan. C'est la ce que le Gouvernement de l'lnde enseigne
a son peuple au sujet du Pakistan.
D'ou a done surgi le differend? Alors que tous les
facteurs etaient favorables au rattachement du Cachemire au Pakistan, d'ou a done surgi le differend? La
encore, je dois me separer du representant de l'lnde
lorsqu'il dit, comme il l'a fait hier, que jusqu'au 22
octobre 1947 tout etait calme, que seule l'incursion des
membres des tribus a cette date a suscite toutes les
difficultes et necessite l'entree des troupes indiennes

marching of Indian troops into Kashmir, and that those
troops did not go in to combat the freedom movement
— according to him, there was no freedom movement —
but only to deal with the tribal incursion. Very well;
let the Security Council judge, after it has heard all
the facts, what the actual situation was.

au Cachemire, enfin, que ces troupes ne sont pas i
venues pour lutter contre le mouvement de liben
— dont il nie, du reste, l'existence — mais seulei
pour mettre fin a l'incursion des membres des tr
Tres bien; que le Conseil de securite juge du veri
caractere de la situation apres avoir pris connaiss
de tous les faits.
Lors de la creation de l'Etat de Pakistan, c
a-dire lorsque le plan de partage de l'lnde est entr
vigueur le 15 aout 1947, il y a eu un grand mo
ment de joie dans tout l'Etat de Cachemire, nol
ment parmi les Musulmans, qui croyaient qui
moment etait venu ou ils allaient etre liberes d
tyrannie detestable des suzerains dogra, contre laqi
ils luttaient depuis cent ans. Le "jour du Pakistan'
celebre avec enthousiasme par les Musulmans d'un 1
a l'autre de l'Etat, y compris dans les villes de Si
gar et de Jammu. La Conference musulmane, princi
organisation politique de l'Etat, se declara sans e
voque pour le rattachement au Pakistan et nous s
mes persuades que bien des membres de la Confen
nationale elle-meme, a la tete de laquelle se trouv
cheik Abdullah, se prononceraient pour le rattai
ment au Pakistan, s'ils etaient libres de le faire.
Gouvernement du Maharadjah a signe un accord
statu quo avec le Gouvernement du Pakistan a la i
du 15 aout 1947 et, conformement a cet accord
Gouvernement du Pakistan a continue d'assurei
gestion de la ligne de chemins de fer appartenant
Gouvernement de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, a
que celle des services postaux et telegraphiques et
douanes. Je suis persuade que le Maharadjah a
cette decision pour faire croire aux Musulmans
Cachemire qu'il comptait un jour se rattacher au Pa
tan; il apparait clairement maintenant que le Mahai
jah n'avait jamais envisage pareille solution, mais c
voulait simplement se servir de ce moyen pour dor
a la population une fausse impression de securite
l'amener a penser que Taccord de statu quo mene
en temps voulu au rattachement au Pakistan. En mi
temps, le Maharadjah cherchait naturellement a o
nir que les services en question continuent de fonct
ner avec autant d'efficacite que dans le passe.
Presque aussitot, le Maharadjah s'est mis en de
d'attirer systematiquement des Hindous et des Si
originaires du Pendjab oriental, afin de contrair
par la terreur les Musulmans de son Etat a adme
le rattachement a TInde. Le Maharadjah a egalerr
commence a faire usage de ses troupes. Toute la qi
tion est de savoir a quel moment a commence le rr
vement populaire et a quelle date le Maharadjah 5
mis en devoir de le reprimer. Selon le representanl
TInde, rien ne se serait passe avant le 22 octobre, da
laquelle se serait produit une incursion des meml
des tribus sur le territoire d'un Etat pacifique. 1
jours selon le meme representant, ce serait cette ini
sion qui serait a Torigine de toutes les difficultes
s'agit la d'un point fondamental. Cet argument a
presente devant le Conseil de securite par M. Setal
lorsqu'il a pris la parole devant cet organe en jan
1948 [234erne seance]; il a ete repris par le repre
tant de TInde, ce qui signifie, soit que TInde ne '
pas admettre des faits irrefutables, soit qu'elle les igi
encore, ce qui est incroyable. Hier, le representan
TInde a demande au representant du Pakistan el
Conseil de securite en general de se souvenir d

On the establishment of Pakistan, that is to say on
the partition becoming effective on 15 August 1947,
there was great jubilation all through the State of
Kashmir, particularly among the Muslims, that the
time had now come for their liberation from the unspeakable tyranny of the Dogra Raj, against which
they had struggled for a hundred years. "Pakistan
Day" was celebrated with great enthusiasm by the
Muslims throughout the State, including the towns of
Srinagar and Jammu. The principal political organization of the State, namely the Muslim Conference,
declared unequivocally in favour of accession to Pakistan. We believe that a good proportion of the membership even of the National Conference, of which Sheikh
Abdullah is the head, if left to itself would favour accession to Pakistan. The Maharaja's Government entered into a stand-still agreement with the Government
of Pakistan on 15 August 1947 and, in pursuance of
that agreement, the management of the line of railway
owned by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and
of the postal and the telegraphic services and customs
in the State continued to vest in the Government of
Pakistan. While this, I believe, was done in order to
create an impression among the Muslim sections of
the population that the Maharaja intended to accede
to Pakistan, it now appears that that was not the intention of the Maharaja, but that it was merely a device to
lull the population into a sense of security and to cause
them to believe that the stand-still agreement would
ripen into accession to Pakistan. Also, of course, the
object was that those services should continue to run as
efficiently as they had done hitherto.

The Maharaja almost immediately thereafter embarked upon a systematic plan to import Hindus and
Sikhs from East Punjab to overawe his Muslim subjects into admitting accession to India. He also began
to use his troops. Now the whole question is, when
did this movement on behalf of the people and this
repression on the part of the Maharaja start? According to the representative of India, nothing had happened
until 22 October, and what then happened was an incursion of tribesmen into a peaceful State. That, according to him, was what started the whole trouble. That
is a crucial point. It was asserted before the Security
Council by Mr. Setalvad when he addressed the Council in January 1948 [234th meeting] and it has been
reasserted again by the repfesentative of India, which
means either that India itself is not willing to admit the
undisputed facts of the situation or, which is unbelievable, that India is still ignorant of them. The representative of India appealed yesterday to me and to the
Security Council to remember that date, 22 October
1947. He said he hoped that this would not be denied.
We do not deny that the tribal incursion took place
on 22 October 1947, but what we do deny is that there
10

had not been a vigorous freedom movement already
started within the State by the people of the State
which was in progress weeks before this tribal incursion took place. As a matter of fact, the tribal incursion took place as a direct consequence of that movement, when it began to be suppressed with all sorts of
brutalities and atrocities by the troops of the Maharaja,
with the Maharaja himself sometimes at their head.
Then the people both from Pakistan and from the tribal
areas, unable to stand by and witness the further sufferings of their co-religionists in the State, did come in,
and the trouble assumed the shape to which the representative of India has referred.

date du 22 octobre 1947. II a exprime Tespoir que les
faits ne seraient pas nies. Nous ne nions pas qu'il se
soit produit une incursion des tribus le 22 octobre
1947, mais nous affirmons qu'un vigoureux mouvement de liberation avait deja pris naissance dans la
population de TEtat, et que ce mouvement s'etait developpe bien des semaines avant toute incursion de tribus.
En fait, Tincursion du 22 octobre a ete la consequence
directe de ce mouvement de liberation, lorsque les troupes du Maharadjah, conduites par le Maharadjah luimeme, ont cherche a Tetouffer par des violences et
des atrocites. A cette epoque, les populations du Pakistan et des regions habitees par les tribus, ne pouvant
supporter plus longtemps le spectacle des souffrances
infligees a leurs coreligionnaires de TEtat, entrerent
en action et c'est alors que les troubles ont pris Taspect
qu'a mentionne le representant de TInde.
Examinons maintenant les faits qui corroborent mes
affirmations. J'attirerai tout d'abord l'attention du Conseil de securite sur un communique de presse publie le
12 septembre par le Gouvernement du Maharadjah,
et dont j'extrais ce qui suit:
"Le 24 aout . . . — je demande au Conseil de securite de prendre bien note de cette date — . . . des foules nombreuses et tres excitees se sont reunies dans
Touest du Bagh Tehsil et, le 25 aout, malgre tous les
efforts tentes pour les amener a se disperser, ont marche sur Bagh, ville voisine, ou leur effectif a atteint
5.000 personnes et a continue a augmenter d'une faqon
considerable au cours des deux journees suivantes.
Ces foules etaient armees d'armes a feu de divers
modeles, de haches, de lances ainsi que d'autres amies."
Les mesures prises pour reprimer ce mouvement
ont ete a Torigine des incursions de tribus. Je cite un
extrait d'un article du correspondant special du journal
The Times de Londres, qui a ete publie le 10 octobre
1948. Les renseignements dont il fait etat ont certainement ete recueillis au moins quelques jours avant cette
date et les incidents qu'il relate ont du se derouler encore plus tot. Cet article dit ce qui suit:

Now let us see what the evidence in support of my
assertion is. I shall first draw the attention of the
Security Council to a Press note issued by the Maharaja's Government on 12 September, from which I
quote as follows:
"On 24 August 1947 . . " — and I would beg the
Council to note that date — "large and highly excited
mobs collected in West Bagh Tehsil and on 25th August, disregarding all efforts to persuade them to disperse, marched on to Bagh, a town in the vicinity, where
they reached the number of some 5,000, which swelled
considerably during the next two days. These mobs
were armed with firearms of various patterns, axes,
spears and other weapons."
The measures taken to suppress this movement are
the measures which became responsible subsequently
for the tribal incursion. Here is an extract from an
article which was published in The Times of London of
10 October 1948 by a special correspondent. It was
published on 10 October, and therefore the material
upon which it was based must have been obtained at
least several days earlier and the incident to which it
referred must have taken place earlier still. The extract
says:
"In the remaining Dogra area 237,000 Muslims were
systematically exterminated unless they escaped to
Pakistan along the border."
Two hundred and thirty-seven thousand Muslims
were systematically exterminated — according to the
representative of India, nothing had happened — and
by whom? "By the forces of the Dogra State headed
by the Maharaja in person and aided by Hindus and
Sikhs."
The representative of India yesterday said that he
denied the assertion by Pakistan that anything had happened before 22 October. According to him, this is
nothing. Here are all the elements that were present:
237,000 Muslims systematically exterminated "by the
forces of the Dogra State headed by the Maharaja in
person and aided by Hindus and Sikhs". This happened
in October 1947, five days before the Pathan invasion
and nine days before the Maharaja's accession to India.
The extract was published on 10 October 1948, but it
relates to those days:

"Dans la region de Dogra, 237.000 Musulmans ont
ete systematiquement extermines, sauf ceux qui se sont
refugies au Pakistan en traversant la frontiere."
Deux cent trente-sept mille Musulmans ont ete systematiquement extermines — et pourtant, d'apres le
representant de TInde, aucun incident ne s'est produit
— et par qui Tont-ils ete? "Par les forces de TEtat de
Dogra, conduites par le Maharadjah en personne et
aidees par les Hindous et les Sikhs"
Le representant de TInde a nie hier que des incidents se soient produits avant le 22 octobre, ainsi que
Ta affirme le representant du Pakistan. Selon lui, ces
faits sont sans importance. Et pourtant, 237.000 Musulmans ont ete systematiquement extermines "par les
forces de TEtat de Dogra, conduites par le Maharadjah
en personne et aidees par les Hindous et les Sikhs".
Ces faits se sont produits en octobre 1947, cinq jours
avant Tincursion des Pathans et neuf jours avant le
ralliement du Maharadjah a TInde. L'article en question
a ete publie le 10 octobre 1948, mais il relate des
faits qui se sont deroules a cette epoque:
"L'extermination des deux tiers de la population
musulmane de la province de Jammu a completement

"This elimination of two-thirds of the Muslim population of Jammu Province has entirely changed the pres11

ent composition of East Jammu. Its communications
and economic links, until then almost exclusively with
West Punjab, have not been and cannot be reoriented
so easily towards Pathankot."

modifie la representation actuelle du Jammu oriei
Ses communications et ses relations economiques,
etaient jusqu'ici presque exclusivement limitees
Pendjab occidental, n'ont pu etre et ne peuvent
etre orientees si facilement vers Pathankot."
C'est a Pathankot qu'on trouve la seule route e
seule tete de ligne indienne voisine de TEtat. C
ce que j'ai souligne precedemment. II ne peut y a'
de doute quant au Dominion auquel doit etre ratta
TEtat si Ton tient compte des desirs de sa populai
et de ses conditions geographiques et economiques.
La population du Pakistan a ete, naturellement, i
fondement troublee par tous ces evenements. Elle
pouvait rester indifferente au spectacle de ses fre
massacres, extermines et chasses de leurs foyers, o
ges de se refugier au Pakistan. C'est pourquoi un m
vement de liberation est parti du Pakistan et
regions des tribus vers le Cachemire pour leur poi
secours.
Sans doute, cette affirmation sera-t-elle conside
comme une affirmation gratuite de la part du Pal
tan. Permettez-moi de citer ce que le cheik Abdul
a declare lui-meme a ce sujet. Le representant de IT
accordera peut-etre un certain credit a ses declaratie
qui vont a Tencontre de ce que certains autres ten
gnages pourraient faire croire. Le 21 octobre 194/
Delhi, le cheik Abdullah a fait une declaration a
presse. La date de cette declaration est significati
elle est anterieure a toute incursion de tribus d
TEtat de Cachemire. A cette epoque, le cl
Abdullah n'etait pas encore completement assujetti
Gouvernement de TInde et n'etait pas prisonnier d'
tres interets, comme il Test devenu par la suite. II aete emprisonne sous Tinculpation de trahison a Teg
du Maharadjah — ce qui est tout a son honneur —
avait ete relache a la fin du mois de septembre
l'intervention, je crois, du Premier Ministre Nehru
il se trouvait alors a Delhi. II ne savait pas encore
qui allait arriver et il n'avait, a cette epoque, enc
aucune autorite, mais il esperait bien en avoir un je
Neanmoins, il a tenu une conference de presse le
octobre, au cours de laquelle il a declare, au sujet
la position strategique du Cachemire, ce qui suit:

Pathankot is India's only road and rail head near
the State. That is the point I had made previously.
"There can be no doubt which Dominion the whole
State would join ultimately if population, geography
and economy were to decide."
Of course, the people of Pakistan were deeply
stirred by all these events. They could not remain indifferent when their brethren were being massacred, exterminated, compelled to leave their homes, to seek
refuge in Pakistan. Therefore, that movement started
from Pakistan and the tribal areas into Kashmir; they
had to go to their assistance.
Perhaps this will still be regarded as an assertion
on the part of Pakistan. Let me quote to the Security
Council what Sheikh Abdullah himself said on that
point. It is possible that the representative of India
will be disposed to give credence to what Sheikh Abdullah said, as against what other evidence might indicate.
Sheikh Abdullah gave a Press statement in Delhi on
21 October 1947. The date is significant; it was prior
to any tribal incursion into the State of Kashmir. Of
course at that time Sheikh Abdullah was not so completely subservient to the Government of India or to
other interests as he has since become. He had been in
jail under sentence of treason against the Maharaja
— which is to his credit — and was released towards
the end of September, I believe, at the intervention of
Prime Minister Nehru, and was then in Delhi. He did
not know what was likely to happen, but in any case
he was not yet in any position of authority, although
he was hoping to be so. But on 21 October he gave
a Press interview in the course of which he said this —
first, with reference to the strategic position:

"Due to the strategic position that the State held,
if his State joins the Indian Dominion, he thought
Pakistan would be completely encircled."
The map shows that it is perfectly obvious; nevertheless, the representative of India might question it.
But that was Sheikh Abdullah's own appreciation of the
strategic position. Explaining the difficulties with which
the people were beset in making up their minds without responsible government, Sheikh Abdullah said:

"En raison de la position strategique du Cachem
si cet Etat adhere au Dominion de TInde, le Pakis
se trouvera completement encercle."
L'examen de la carte montre que ce fait est evide
le representant de TInde le contestera sans doute ne
moins. Mais tel etait l'avis du cheik Abdullah en
qui concerne la position strategique du Cachemire. I
lant des difficultes qu'eprouvait la population a se d
der sans Tappui d'un gouvernement responsable,
cheik Abdullah ajoutait:
"Les evenements survenus dans certains Etats,
particulier dans les regions de Patiala, de Bahawal
et dans d'autres regions, ont cause naturellement
certaine apprehension chez les Musulmans du Cae
mire qui forment la majorite de la population . .
c'est-a-dire dans les regions ou les populations mu
manes avaient ete massacrees — . . cette majc
craignait que le rattachement de TEtat a TInde
constituat pour elle une menace."
Tel etait, suivant le cheik Abdullah, Tetat d'es
des Musulmans du Cachemire. Le cheik Abdt
poursuivait ainsi:

"The happenings in certain States, such as Patiala,
Bahawalpur and elsewhere, have naturally caused apprehension in the minds of the Muslims in Kashmir who
formed the majority of the population"— in one word,
those areas where the Muslim populations had been
massacred — "they were afraid that the State's accession to India portended danger to them."
That, according to Sheikh Abdullah, was the state
of feeling of the Muslims of Kashmir. Later on in the
statement he said:
12

"The present troubles in Poonch" — and I will remind the Council that he was speaking on 21 October,
although the representative of India will say "What
troubles?" According to the representative of India,
there was no trouble at all; nothing had happened, but,
according to Sheikh Abdullah — "The present troubles
in Poonch were because of the unwise policy adopted
by the State. The people of Poonch who suffered under
their local Ruler, and again, under the Kashmir Durbar, which was the over-lord of the Poonch, had started
a people's movement for the redress of their grievances.
It was not communal."

"Les troubles actuels dans le Panch . . ." Jerappelle
a nouveau au Conseil que cette declaration a ete faite le
21 octobre, quoique le representant de TInde pretende
qu'aucun incident ne s'etait encore produit; d'apres le
cheik Abdullah: "Les troubles actuels dans le Panch
sont dus a la politique maladroite poursuivie par
TEtat. La population du Panch, qui a souffert sous la
domination du souverain local et egalement des representants du Gouvernement du Cachemire, a provoque
un mouvement populaire pour faire aboutir ses revendications. II ne s'agissait pas d'un mouvement religieux."

That is what the representative of India denies. He
said there had been no people's movement; nothing
had happened. I do not know what name he will give
to Sheikh Abdullah for having made that statement.
Sheikh Abdullah went on to say "That movement having started, the Kashmir State sent its troops and there
was panic in Poonch."

C'est precisement ce que nie le representant de
TInde. II pretend qu'il n'y a pas eu de mouvement
populaire et qu'aucun incident ne s'est produit. Je ne
sais comment il qualifiera le cheik Abdullah pour avoir
fait cette declaration. Le cheik Abdullah poursuit ainsi:
"Ce mouvement ayant commence, TEtat de Cachemire envoya ses troupes et la panique s'empara du
Panch"

Again, according to the representative of India, the
troops were there only to restore law and order to
see that nothing untoward happened. Why, then, was
there panic among the people? To whose succour, for
whose aid, to protect whom, according to the representative of India, had these troops arrived? Sheikh Abdullah says:

Or, aux dires du representant de TInde, les troupes
n'avaient pour mission que de retablir Tordre et de
veiller a ce qu'aucun incident facheux n'eclatat. Pourquoi, s'il en est ainsi, la population fut-elle saisie de
panique? Au secours de qui, a Taide de qui, pour la
protection de qui, le representant de TInde pretendrat-il que ces troupes etaient arrivees ? Le cheik Abdullah
declare:
"L'Etat de Cachemire envoya ses troupes et la panique s'empara du Panch. Or, la majeure partie de la
population adulte du Panch etait formee d'ex-soldats
de Tarmee des Indes que des liens etroits unissaient a
la population de Jhelum et de Rawalpindi . . . — c'esta-dire aux districts pakistanais limitrophes — . .
Ils evacuerent leurs femmes et leurs enfants, fermerent la frontiere et revinrent, munis d'armes qui leur
avaient ete volontairement fournies. II s'ensuivit que
les forces de TEtat de Cachemire durent battre en
retraite dans certains secteurs."

"The Kashmir State sent its troops and there was
panic in Poonch. But most of the adult population of
Poonch were ex-servicemen in the Indian Army who
had close connexions with the people in Jhelum and
Rawalpindi;" — that is to say, the neighbouring districts of Pakistan.—"They evacuated their women and
children, closed the frontier and returned with arms
supplied to them by willing people. The present position was that the Kashmir State forces were forced to
withdraw in certain areas."
That was the position on 21 October. But nothing
had happened. The Kashmir State forces were defeated
and had to withdraw from the area; these men who
were fighting had evacuated their women and children
into Pakistan. And yet nothing had happened; it was
all peace and quiet; and this was before 22 October.
When the delegation of India goes on making repeated
assertions of that kind, how much credit is to be given
to its airy statements that India is merely there to restore law and order? Why was there panic if it was
only a matter of the restoration of law and order?
Why did these men evacuate their women and children
into Pakistan? Why do human beings act like that?
Not purely out of frolic and fun. They would do that
when they know that their lives or their honour, or
both, are in danger and that the time has come to sell
their lives. They started doing it. And they did it so
effectively that the Maharaja's forces had to withdraw
from the area.

Telle etait la situation au 21 octobre. Or, il ne
s'etait rien passe, n'est-ce-pas ? Les forces de TEtat de
Cachemire, battues, avaient du se retirer; les combattants locaux avaient evacue leurs femmes et leurs
enfants sur le Pakistan. Cependant, il ne s'etait rien
passe; la paix et la tranquillite regnaient; et ceci se
passait avant le 22 octobre. Quand on voit la delegation de TInde repeter inlassablement des assertions de
ce genre, quel credit peut-on accorder aux declarations
oiseuses dans lesquelles elle affirme que, si TInde est
presente au Cachemire, ce n'est que pour retablir Tordre et la legalite? Pourquoi y a-t-il eu panique, s'il
ne s'agissait que de retablir Tordre ? Pourquoi ces homines ont-ils evacue leurs femmes et leurs enfants sur
le Pakistan? Pourquoi des etres humains agissent-ils
ainsi? Ce n'est pas de gaiete de cceur. Ils le font lorsqu'ils savent que leur existence, leur honneur ou les
deux a la fois sont en danger et que Theure est venue
pour eux de vendre cherement leur vie; c'est ce qu'ils
se mirent effectivement en devoir de faire. Ils le firent
meme si efficacement que les forces du Maharadjah
durent battre en retraite.

I do not know whether the representative of India
would pay much attention to that. But there is further
evidence on that point. Mr. M. N. Roy, who is a well

Je ne sais pas si le representant de TInde considere
ces faits comme probants. Mais il existe d'autres temoignages a cet egard. M. M. N. Roy qui, quelles que
13

known Indian patriot, whatever his political and ideological views may be, made a contribution to the Radical Humanist of Bombay in its issue of 2 October 1949,
called "India's Lust for Conquest of Kashmir May
Cause World War". It is a longish article but I shall
quote one or two extracts from it.

puissent etre ses opinions politiques et ideologiques,
est un patriote indien notoire, a publie, dans le numero
du 2 octobre 1949 du Radical Humanist de Bombay,
un article intitule "Les visees de TInde sur le Cachemire peuvent causer une guerre mondiale". C'est un
article assez long, mais je tiens a en citer un ou deux
extraits.

"The origin: The Kashmir dispute originated neither
in the two nations' theory nor in India's concern for
liberty of the people of Kashmir, nor, again, in any
strategic consideration. The origin was an undemocratic
act on the part of the Government of India, although it
could be justified on technically constitutional grounds.
The British having surrendered power, sovereignty reverted to the people of Kashmir, as to the people of
any other part of the former British Indian Empire.

"L'origine: Le differend dont le Cachemire est Tenjeu n'a ete provoque, ni par la theorie des deux nations, ni par Tinteret que TInde aurait pu porter a la
liberte de la population du Cachemire, ni meme par
une consideration d'ordre strategique quelconque. II a
ete cause par une mesure antidemocratique prise par
le Gouvernement de TInde, bien que celui-ci ait pu la
justifier en alleguant des motifs techniques d'ordre
constitutionnel. Les Britanniques ayant renonce a leur
autorite supreme, la souverainete a fait retour a la
population du Cachemire, comme elle a fait retour 3
la population de n'importe quelle autre partie de l'ancien
empire britannique des Indes.

"The people of Kashmir had for years struggled
against the feudal aristocracy of the ruling dynasty,
backed up by British power. On the disappearance of
the latter, the opportunity came for the Kashmiri people to overthrow the autocratic Ruler. The majority of
the people of Kashmir being Mohammedans, it is only
natural that their aspiration had the active sympathy
and support of their co-religionists of the neighbourhood. India itself had pledged sympathy and support
to the cause of the freedom of the people of Kashmir.

"Depuis des annees, la population du Cachemire luttait contre Taristocratie feodale de la dynastie regnante,
que soutenait la puissance britannique. A la disparition
de cette derniere, l'occasion s'est offerte a la population du Cachemire de renverser son souverain autocratique. Etant donne que la majeure partie de la
population du Cachemire se compose de Musulmans, il
etait tout naturel que leurs aspirations eussent la sympathie active et Tappui de leurs coreligionnaires des
pays voisins. L'lnde elle-meme avait proclame sa syrapathie pour la cause de la liberte du peuple du Cachemire et promis de Tappuyer.

"As the Maharaja would not transfer power voluntarily to his subjects, it had to be expected that the
latter would avail of the power vacuum to assert their
sovereignty. The issue was entirely between the people
of the State and its autocratic Ruler. Unless this basic
fact is borne in mind, the Kashmir situation cannot be
placed in the proper perspective.

"Le Maharadjah refusant de se demettre volontairement de son pouvoir en faveur de ses sujets, il etait
a prevoir que ces derniers profiteraient du vide laisse
par le retrait des Britanniques pour affirmer leur souverainete. II s'agissait d'une question qui interessait
uniquement le peuple de TEtat et son souverain autocratique. Voila le fait essentiel qu'il importe de ne
pas perdre de vue si Ton veut considerer la situation
du Cachemire sous son veritable jour.

"The rise of a parallel authority challenging the
established one is a familiar feature of such a political
crisis. And it was natural that, in its fight to overthrow
the established authority, the new one would enlist
the support [of outside sympathizers. America enlisted
French support in] its struggle against Britain, and a
section of the Indian Nationalists wanted to overthrow
British rule with the help of Japan. So the establishment of the Azad Kashmir Government and its getting support, either from the tribesmen from the frontier or actually from the Pakistan Government, were
quite in the order of things in the critical situation. If
Abdullah had established a parallel government somewhere near the Indian border, he would have received
help from the neighbourhood^ also.

"II arrive couramment, dans les crises politiques de
ce genre, qu'une autorite parallele surgisse et vienne
defter l'autorite etablie. II etait non moins naturel que,
dans la lutte qu'elle menait pour renverser l'autorite
etablie, la nouvelle autorite s'assurat Tappui de sympathisants a Texterieur. C'est ainsi que TAmerique
s'est assure Tappui de la France dans sa lutte contre
la Grande-Bretagne et qu'un groupe de nationalistes
indiens a tente de secouer le joug britannique avec
Taide du Japon. Dans cette situation critique, il etait
done tout a fait normal qu'un gouvernement azad
(libre) du Cachemire se creat et qu'il fut appuye, soit par
les tribus frontalieres, soit meme par le Gouvernement
du Pakistan. Si Abdullah avait etabli un gouvernement parallele quelque part dans le voisinage de la
frontiere indienne, il aurait, lui aussi, requ aide et
assistance des regions voisines.

"In that critical moment, confronted with a popular
revolt against his autocratic rule, the Maharaja declared the accession of his State to India, and the Government of India rushed troops to Kashmir. That is how
the dispute over Kashmir began. The act of the Govment of India implied recognition of the constitutional

"A ce moment critique, ou il avait a faire face a un
soulevement populaire dirige contre sa domination autocratique, le Maharadjah proclama le rattachement de
son Etat a TInde et le Gouvernement de TInde depecha
des troupes au Cachemire. Voila comment debuta le
differend relatif au Cachemire. La mesure prise par le
14

right of an autocratic Ruler to regard the State as his
personal property, and its people as his chattels.

Gouvernement de TInde impliquait qu'il reconnaissait
a un souverain autocratique le droit constitutionnel de
considerer TEtat comme sa propriete personnelle et
sa population comme des biens meubles lui appartenant.

"Since that was an indefensible position taken up in
haste, all manner of reasons had to be invented to confuse the simple issue by raising a thick cloud of irrelevant considerations — technically legal and strategic,
but mostly emotional.

"Comme il s'agissait, en Toccurrence, d'une position
independable prise a la hate, il a fallu inventer toutes
sortes de raisons pour embrouiller la question qui, au
fond, etait simple, en faisant valoir une foule de considerations fort peu pertinentes, considerations d'ordre
techniquement juridique ou strategique, mais surtout
sentimental.

"The issue thus can be restored to its original simplicity by returning to the status quo ante bellum. With
the disappearance of British power, sovereignty has reverted to the people. The Maharaja has no constitutional locus standi nor has the Indian Army in Kashmir, because it went there to defend a position created
by an act of the autocratic Ruler."

"On peut done ramener la question a sa simplicite
initiate en se reportant a Tetat de choses qui regnait
avant la guerre. A la disparition de la puissance britannique, la souverainete a fait retour au peuple. Le
Maharadjah n'a pas de locus standi constitutionnel et
Tarmee indienne qui se trouve au Cachemire n'en a pas
davantage, car elle y a penetre pour defendre une
situation creee par un acte du souverain autocratique."

That is a non-Muslim patriotic political leader speaking. His political views may differ from the Government's, but he is speaking in India and he is a nonMuslim. He talks of that movement, but the representative of India says, "No, nothing had happened."

C'est un chef politique patriote non musulman qui
s'exprime en ces termes. II se peut que ses opinions
politiques different de celles de son Gouvernement,
mais c'est dans TInde qu'il parle et il ne s'agit pas d'un
Musulman. II fait allusion au mouvement dont j'ai
parle, ce qui n'empeche pas le representant de TInde
de dire qu'il ne s'est rien passe.

As against that, with regard to what the representative of India calls the atrocious position taken up by
Pakistan, he has quoted Margaret Bourke-White's
book, Halfway to Freedom.2 He was fair enough, just
enough, to remark that Pakistan was not responsible
for and deplored the atrocities to which the book draws
attention. But he said that Pakistan did nothing to
stop them or to arrest them. I shall take up both points.

En regard de ces faits, le representant de TInde a
cite, en ce qui concerne ce qu'il appelle l'attitude atroce
du Pakistan, le livre de Margaret Bourke-White: Halfway to Freedom2 (A mi-chemin de la liberte). II a su
montrer assez (juste assez) d'equite et d'honnete pour
declarer que le Pakistan n'etait pas responsable des
atrocites que signale le livre, qu'il les deplorait meme.
Toutefois, il a dit que le Pakistan n'avait rien fait pour
y mettre fin. Je vais repondre a ces deux points.

In the first place, how far this lady's authority may
be accepted is open to serious question. She appears
to have drawn very largely upon her own imagination,
and one of the very passages quoted by the representative of India proves that. That passage appears in Halfway to Freedom, in the opening paragraphs of a chapter headed "Struggle for Kashmir". I shall repeat the
quotation:

Tout d'abord, il s'agit de savoir jusqu'a quel point
on peut aj outer foi aux declarations de la femme de
lettres citee. Elle semble avoir donne libre cours a sa
propre imagination, ce que prouve Tun des passages
memes qu'a cites le representant de TInde. Dans le
livre Halfway to Freedom, ce passage se trouve vers
le debut du chapitre intitule "Struggle for Kashmir"
(La lutte pour le Cachemire). Je vais repeter la citation en question:

"While the People's Government in Kashmir's capital was completing the new constitution, with such
' clauses as 'Freedom of conscience and of worship shall
; be guaranteed for all citizens', across the border in Pa'. kistan a thousand-year-old cry was raised: 'Islam is in
danger!'"

"Tandis que, dans la capitate du Cachemire, le
Gouvernement populaire achevait d'elaborer la nouvelle constitution, laquelle comprend des dispositions
comme celle-ci: "La liberte de conscience et de culte
est garantie a tous les citoyens", de Tautre cote de la
frontiere, au Pakistan, un cri millenaire a retenti:
"L'Islam est en danger!"

"While the People's Government in Kashmir's capital . . .": Will the representative of India inform the
; Security Council — and I shall stop for that purpose —
what that People's Government in Kashmir was at that
,date?

"Tandis que, dans la capitate du Cachemire, le Gouvernement populaire
" Plairait-il au representant
de TInde — auquel je passerais volontiers la parole a
cette fin — d'indiquer au Conseil de securite ce qu'etait,
a cette date, ce Gouvernement populaire du Cachemire ?

• Sir Benegal N. RAU (India): I shall answer all the
^questions when my turn comes. A number of statei ments have been attributed to me which I never made,

Sir Benegal N. RAU (Inde) (traduit de Vanglais) :
Je repondrai a toutes les questions lorsque mon tour
viendra. On m'a attribue un grand nombre de declara1

'Simon and Schuster, 1949.
15

Simon and Schuster, 1949.

and I have kept quiet for the last quarter of an hour;
but I shall answer these statements very faithfully
when my turn comes, if I may.

tions que je n'ai pas faites et j'ai observe le silence pendant le dernier quart d'heure; cependant, si on m'y
autorise, lorsque mon tour viendra, je repondrai a
fr»nf*»c loo n i i o c t i n n i <

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA K H A N (Pakistan):
Whenever I attribute anything to the representative
of India or to his Government, I shall quote chapter and
verse. I am now reading this quotation from his actual
speech: "While the People's Government in Kashmir's
capital . . .". After all, this is a quotation from the
speech of the representative of India, and I suppose he
endorses it. I should like to know what was the People's Government in Kashmir at that date — according to him, the 22nd of October. Again I quote:

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA K H A N (Pakistan) (traduit
de Vanglais): Lorsque j'attribue une declaration au representant de TInde ou a son Gouvernement, je donne
toujours des references precises. Je donnerai maintenant
lecture de la citation suivante, extraite de son discours:
"Alors que, dans la capitate du Cachemire, le Gouvernement du peuple . . . " , c'est la une citation du discours du
representant de TInde et je suppose qu'il ne la desavoue
pas. Je voudrais done savoir quel etait ce Gouvernement du peuple au Cachemire a cette date, c'est-a-dire,
d'apres lui, le 22 octobre. Je cite a nouveau:

"While the People's Government in Kashmir's capital was completing the new constitution" — which new
constitution? — "with such clauses as" — and then
this lady puts the following phrase within quotation
marks — "Freedom of conscience and of worship shall
be guaranteed to all citizens" — Where is that constitution? Who was framing it? When was it framed?
Where can it be had, so that we may read from it this
clause, "Freedom of conscience and worship shall be
guaranteed for all citizens" ? — "across the border in
Pakistan" — this and that was happening. When an
author is capable of making statements of that kind,
what reliance can she claim for other statements which
she makes in the course of her book?

"Alors que, dans la capitate du Cachemire, le Gouvernement du peuple achevait d'elaborer la nouvelle constitution . . . — de quelle nouvelle constitution s'agitil ? — .
laquelle comprend des dispositions comme
celle-ci . . . — et ici Tauteur du livre met entre guillemets le passage suivant: "La liberte de conscience et
de culte est garantie a tous les citoyens" . . . — Ou est
cette constitution ? Qui Ta redigee ? Ou a-t-elle ete redigee? Ou peut-on se la procurer, afin de pouvoir en
extraire la clause d'apres laquelle "la liberte de
conscience et de culte est garantie a tous les citoyens"?
— . . . de Tautre cote de la frontiere, au Pakistan",
tels ou tels evenements se produisaient. Lorsque Tauteur d'un livre est capable d'emettre de pareilles affirmations, comment peut-on accorder foi a d'autres declarations formulees dans son livre?

That all sorts of regrettable incidents did occur in
Baramula is not denied. As I have said, the representative of India himself was fair enough to say that Pakistan was not responsible for those incidents and that
Pakistan deplored them. But he went on to say that
Pakistan did nothing to stop them. Very good.

II est indeniable que des incidents regrettables se
sont produits a Baramula. Comme je Tai deja dit, le
representant de TInde lui-meme a ete assez equitable
pour reconnaitre que le Pakistan n'etait pas responsable
de ces incidents et qu'il les a deplores. Cependant, il
a dit ensuite que le Pakistan n'avait rien fait pour
prevenir ces incidents.
Le representant de TInde a fait allusion au bombardement du couvent de Baramula et aux blessures
subies par la mere superieure. Le ler Janvier 1948,
Mary Philippa, mere superieure des sceurs de Thopital de St-Joseph a Baramula, Cachemire, envoya la
lettre suivante a la Begum Shahnawaz et a sa fille Mile
M. Shahnawaz. J'ai deja cite cette lettre au cours
d'une seance precedente du Conseil de securite [229eme
seance]. Je la cite a nouveau. La mere superieure y dit:

The representative of India made reference to the incidents in connexion with the convent at Baramula and
the injury suffered there by the Mother Superior. On
1 January 1948, Mary Philippa, Mother Superior of all
the Sisters of Saint Joseph's Hospital, Baramula, Kashmir, addressed a letter to Begum Shahnawaz and her
daughter, Miss M. Shahnawaz. I quoted from the original of this letter during a previous meeting of the
Security Council [229th meeting]. I shall quote it
again. The Mother Superior says:
"We cannot let this season for greetings pass without
sending you a very affectionate remembrance from us
all with our prayers and every best wish for a very
happy New Year and God's blessings on all your
undertakings. We will never forget how you two brave
girls of the Pakistan Voluntary Service risked your
lives to save us from Baramnla when the bombing and
machine-gunning from the air made our situation there
dangerous and impossible."

"Nous ne pouvons pas laisser passer cette saison des
voeux sans vous envoyer un tres affectueux souvenir
de nous toutes, avec nos prieres et tous nos souhaits
les meilleurs pour une heureuse nouvelle annee et pour
que Dieu benisse toutes vos entreprises. Nous n'oublierons jamais comment vous deux, vaillantes filles
du service volontaire du Pakistan, avez risque vos vies
pour nous sauver de Baramula, quand les bombes et
les mitrailleuses des avions rendaient notre situation
dangereuse et impossible."

Who was bombing? Not the tribesmen. It has never
been alleged that the tribesmen were so equipped as
to carry out any bombing. Who was machine-gunning
from the air? Not the tribesmen. They have no machine guns, and in any case they have no aircraft. I

Qui effectuait le bombardement ? Certes pas les homines des tribus. Personne n'a jamais affirme que les
hommes des tribus possedaient Tequipement necessaire
pour proceder a un bombardement. A qui appartenaient
les avions qui mitraillaient Thopital? Certes pas aux
16

have no doubt that the representative of India will explain this, also, when his turn comes.

hommes des tribus. Ces derniers n'ont pas de mitrailleuses et encore moins d'avions. Je suis sur que le representant de TInde pourra nous Texpliquer lorsqu'il
prendra la parole.

At any rate, from whichever direction the danger
was coming, there were Pakistani women helping as
far as they could. The Mother Superior goes on: "Be
sure we shall never forget you and we want to come
to see you again. We have been so busy making clothes
for ourselves and working at war refugee camps." It
goes on to say, and the sentence is very significant: "We
hope to go back to Barmula soon. Otherwise I think we
shall all join the Hazara Kashmir forces." Those are
the Azad Kashmir forces, and not the Indian forces.
"Please accept a very tiny present we have made for
you as a sign of our gratitude and remembrance of
you both. Yours affectionately, Mary Philippa."

De toute faejon, de quelque cote que vint le danger,
il y avait des femmes pakistanaises qui ne menageaient
pas leur aide. Et la lettre de la mere superieure continue : "Soyez sures que nous ne vous oublierons jamais et que nous tiendrions a venir vous revoir, mais
nous avons ete fort occupees a faire des vetements
pour nous-memes et a travailler dans les camps de
refugies de guerre". La lettre continue, et cette phrase
est tres significative: "Nous esperons revenir bientot
a Baramula. Autrement, je pense que nous nous engagerons toutes dans les forces hazara du Cachemire. (II
s'agit des forces du Cachemire azad et non pas des forces de Tarmee indienne.) Veuillez accepter un tout petit
cadeau que nous avons fait pour vous en temoignage
de notre gratitude et de nos bons souvenirs a vous
deux. Affectueusement a vous, Mary Philippa."

Pakistan was doing something, but I plead guilty on
behalf of Pakistan to the charge made by the representative of India in this connexion that Pakistan did not
do what it should have done to put an end to these
things. It should have marched its forces into the State
of Kashmir to put an end to the persecution of the
Muslims by the Maharaja's State forces, and also to
restore law and order in the areas where it had been
disturbed by the tribesmen. It should have done that;
it did not do it. And I plead guilty to the charge. It did
not do it because, for one thing, it did not want to extend the area of trouble. For another, I shall show what
effort Pakistan was trying to make very soon afterward with the Government of India to settle this question amicably, peaceably and in a fair and equitable
manner.

Le Pakistan faisait done quelque chose, mais au nom
de mon pays, je reconnais que le representant de
TInde est fonde a accuser le Pakistan de ne pas avoir
fait tout ce qu'il aurait du faire pour mettre fin a ces
incidents. II aurait du faire entrer ses forces armees
dans TEtat de Cachemire, afin de mettre fin a la persecution des Musulmans par les forces du Maharadjah
et de restaurer le.regne de la loi et Tordre public dans
les regions ou il avait ete trouble par les tribus. Le
Pakistan aurait du le faire; il ne Ta pas fait, je le
reconnais. Si le Pakistan n'a pas agi comme il Taurait
du, c'est que, d'une part il ne desirait pas voir s'etendre les troubles et que, d'autre part — comme je vais
maintenant le demontrer — il s'est efforce, peu de
temps apres les incidents, d'arriver avec TInde a un
reglement a Tamiable, a un reglement pacifique, juste
et equitable de la question.

What had happened up to that time was that this
movement had taken place. In certain areas this movement defeated and dispersed the forces of the Maharaja. These people, as I have said, had taken women
and children across the river into Pakistan and left
them there. They were prepared to sell their lives
dearly for the sake of their freedom, and they started
this movement. That was the spearhead of the movement. It is true then that these tribal incursions took
place on 22 October.

Jusque-la, ce qui s'etait produit, e'etait Texplosion
d'un mouvement populaire. Dans certaines regions, ce
mouvement avait battu et disperse les troupes du
Maharadjah. Comme je Tai dit, les combattants de ce
mouvement avaient transports les femmes et les enfants
sur Tautre rive de la riviere, au Pakistan, et ils les y
avaient laisses. Ils etaient prets a combattre jusqu'a la
mort pour la defense de leur liberte et, a cette fin,
avaient declenche le mouvement. Tels avaient ete le
debut et la pointe du mouvement. II est vrai qu'alors
les incursions de tribus eurent lieu le 22 octobre.

By 26 October the position was such that the Maharaja left Srinagar. He evacuated his capital and went
away to Jammu. From Jammu he wrote a letter, which
is in the records of the Security Council [227 meeting], to Lord Mountbatten. Part of the letter was read
out yesterday by the representative of India. In this
letter he asked for Indian troops and said that inasmuch as he could not obtain them without offering accession, he offered accession. In reply to that letter,
Lord Mountbatten did say specifically: "The question
of accession should be settled by a reference to the
people".

Le 26 octobre, la situation etait telle que le Maharadjah avait ete oblige d'abandonner Srinagar. II avait
evacue sa capitate et s'etait refugie a Jammu. C'est de
Jammu qu'il envoya a Lord Mountbatten une lettre
qui se trouve dans les archives du Conseil de securite
[227erne seance]. Le representant de TInde nous a
donne hier lecture d'une partie de cette lettre. Dans
cette lettre, le Maharadjah demandait le secours de
troupes indiennes et declarait que, puisqu'il ne pouvait
obtenir cette assistance sans accepter le rattachement
de son pays a TInde, il proposait ce rattachement. En
reponse a cette lettre, Lord Mountbatten precisa: "La
question du [rattachement de TEtat de Cachemire]
doit etre reglee par voie de consultation populaire."
Cependant, comme Ta dit hier le representant de
TInde, les troupes de son pays sont arrivees a Srinagar

However, India's troops landed in Srinagar on 27
October, as mentioned yesterday by the representative
17

of India. It is of interest that the letter of the Maharaja was written on 26 October from Jammu — the
Security Council is now in a position to see where
Jammu is situated — and that Indian troops were in
Srinagar on 27 October, by an airborne invasion. I believe that is a very significant fact as to what had gone
on behind the scenes in the meantime.

le 27 octobre. II est interessant de signaler que cette
lettre du Maharadjah a ete ecrite le 26 octobre de
Jammu — le Conseil de securite est actuellement a
meme de constater ou se trouve Jammu — et que les
troupes indiennes ont ete parachutees a Srinagar, des
le 27 octobre. Je pense que c'est la un fait tres significatif et qui permet de comprendre ce qui s'etait passe
entre temps dans les coulisses.

Obviously, Pakistan could not accept that letter of
the Maharaja and Lord Mountbatten's reply as any
kind of an accession at all. Lord Mountbatten himself
had said that the question of accession should be settled
by a reference to the people. It is not as if it were
just a case as visualized even by the Government of
India with regard to other States where the majority
of the people are on one side, the Ruler belongs to another community, and the Ruler will not accede to the
Dominion which is indicated by the majority of the
population. Here a freedom movement had started, and
over the greater part of the Province of Kashmir and
some portions of the Province of Jammu the Maharaja's
authority had effectively been ended. His armed forces
were dispersed and he had left the capital. Not only had
these incidents taken place, but the Maharaja was practically on the verge of becoming a refugee, and in that
desperation, he wrote the tetter. What effect that letter
can possibly have, and whether it is expected by the
representative of India that Pakistan _ should recognize
the validity of that letter, is beyond my comprehension.

De toute evidence, le Pakistan.ne pouvait accepter
ni la lettre du Maharadjah ni la reponse faite par Lord
Mountbatten comme representant un accord de rattachement. Lord Mountbatten lui-meme avait declare
qu'il voulait laisser au peuple le soin de trancher la
question. II ne s'agissait pas ici d'un cas semblable a
celui d'autres Etats ou meme le Gouvernement de
TInde pouvait se rendre compte que la majorite du
peuple se prononqait pour une solution, alors que le
souverain, appartenant a une autre communaute religieuse, se refusait a accepter la solution desiree par la
majorite de la population. Au Cachemire, un mouvement de liberation avait eclate et s'etait propage a tel
point que la plus grande partie de la province de
Cachemire et certaines parties de la province de Jammu
avaient echappe a l'autorite effective du Maharadjah.
Non seulement ses forces avaient ete dispersees, et il
avait du quitter sa capitate, mais encore il se trouvait,
en fait, sur le point de devenir un refugie et c'est en
desespoir de cause qu'il avait ecrit la lettre que j'ai
rappelee. Je ne puis done comprendre quel effet cette
lettre pourrait avoir et si le representant de TInde
s'attend vraiment a ce que le Pakistan en reconnaisse
la validite; il y a la quelque chose qui depasse mon entendement.

The whole of the subsequent legal statement of the
representative of India is based upon the fact of that
tetter. I pause here for one moment. I would beg the
Security Council to compare the positions with regard
to Junagadh and Kashmir. Junagadh first had a standstill agreement with Pakistan. It then acceded to Pakistan. The ruler offered accession, and accession was accepted. A Provisional Government of Junagadh was set
up within the territory of India, and eventually Indian forces marched into Junagadh. There is the picture on one side.

Tous les arguments juridiques que le representant de
TInde a developpes par la suite se fondent sur le fait
que cette lettre a ete ecrite. II convient que je m'arrete
un instant sur la situation qui regne dans le Junagadh
et celle qui regne dans le Cachemire, pour demander au
Conseil de les comparer. D'abord le Junagadh avait
conclu avec le Pakistan un accord maintenant le statu
quo. Ensuite, le souverain du Junagadh a offert le
rattachement de son pays au Pakistan et cette offre a
ete acceptee. Un Gouvernement provisoire du Junagadh
a ete alors constitue en territoire indien et, plus
tard, les forces indiennes sont entrees dans le Junagadh.
Telle est la situation en ce qui concerne le Junagadh.

In Kashmir this movement took place, and there was
the condition of fighting and disturbance which I have
already explained. The Maharaja, obviously for the
purpose of obtaining troops to restore his authority
in areas where it had been cast off by these people who
were seeking to set up an independent government,
offered accession. Lord Mountbatten replied: Very
good, troops will be sent; the question of the accession
of the State shall be determined by the wishes of the
people.

Par contre, dans le Cachemire, un mouvement populaire a pris naissance; il y a eu des combats et des
desordres sur lesquels j'ai donne des eclaircissements.
Dans Tintention evidente d'obtenir des troupes pour
retablir son autorite dans les regions ou le peuple (qui
cherchait a etablir un gouvernement independant) s'en
etait affranchi, le Maharadjah a offert le rattachement
de son pays a TInde. Lord Mountbatten a repondu
qu'il etait pret a envoyer des troupes, mais que la question du rattachement serait reglee conformement aux
voeux du peuple.

Whatever consequences, if any, flow from this letter,
far stronger consequences flow from the accession of
Junagadh to Pakistan.

Quelles que soient les consequences que cette lettre
puisse avoir, si tant est qu'il y en ait, bien plus importantes devraient etre les consequences du rattachement
du Junagadh au Pakistan.
Que TInde enonce done un principe qu'elle puisse
appliquer dans les deux cas et en justifie Tapplication
a Tun et Tautre des deux Etats. II sera possible alors

Let India apply whatever principle it chooses to
both States and justify it with regard to its attitude
respecting each. It would then be possible to judge
18

whether India's measures, standards and ideals with
respect to each situation are the same, or whether India merely adjusts its standards, ideals and declarations
with regard to each situation and its aspects which
might be beneficial to India itself.

de se rendre compte si les criteres, les normes et les
ideaux que TInde applique a Tun et Tautre cas sont
les memes ou si, dans chaque cas, elle adapte ses
normes, ses ideaux et ses declarations a chaque situation et a chacun des facteurs de cette situation qui
peuvent servir ses interets.

Now what did we do further to stop this type of
things from proceeding? On 28 or 29 October the Governor-General of Pakistan made an offer to the Governor-General of India and to the Government of India to co-operate in working out the best way to deal
with the situation and to resolve it peacefully, which
was the following. Let the two Governors-General be
authorized by their respective Governments to deal
with the situation. Then let them take steps to stop the
fighting and restore law and order, even if that should
necessitate military action being taken against the
tribesmen who had committed these incursions. That
having been done, let everyone who had gone into the
State withdraw simultaneously. That meant the Indian
armed forces, the tribesmen, the Pakistani volunteers,
and anyone who had gone in. That having been done,
let the administration of the State be assumed by the
two Governors-General. Let them then proceed to organize a free and impartial plebiscite for the people of
the State of Jammu and Kashmir to decide whether
they wanted to accede to India or to Pakistan.

Qu'a fait, pour sa part, le Pakistan pour empecher
que ce genre de choses ne se prolonge? Le 28 ou le 29
octobre, le Gouverneur general du Pakistan a adresse
au Gouverneur general de TInde et au Gouvernement
de TInde une offre les invitant a collaborer pour trouver le meilleur moyen de faire face a la situation et
pour rechercher une solution pacifique. Cette offre
consistait a demander aux Gouvernements respectifs
d'autoriser les deux Gouverneurs generaux a regler la
situation, a les laisser prendre les mesures necessaires
pour arreter les hostilites et retablir Tordre, a recourir
au besoin a une action militaire contre les tribus responsables des incursions. Ceci fait, tous ceux qui
avaient penetre sur le territoire de TEtat devaient se
retirer simultanement; les forces indiennes, les tribus,
les volontaires du Pakistan, bref tous ceux qui avaient
penetre au Cachemire. Ulterieurement, les deux Gouverneurs generaux devaient se charger de Tadministration de TEtat et organiser ensuite un plebiscite libre
et impartial pour que la population de TEtat de Jammu
et Cachemire puisse decider si elle voulait etre rattachee a TInde ou au Pakistan.

I should like to know what was there in this offer
which was open to objection, and whether it was not
a statesmanlike offer to end the situation in a peaceful,
fair, just and equitable manner?

Je voudrais savoir ce que Ton peut reprocher a cette
offre, et si le Pakistan ne temoignait pas-d'un grand
sens politique en faisant une telle proposition pour
mettre fin a la situation, d'une maniere pacifique, equitable et juste.

That is the contribution that Pakistan attempted to
make towards the solution of this problem and towards
stopping what was happening within the State. It was
not accepted; it was turned down.

Telle est la faqon dont le Pakistan entendait contribuer a resoudre ce probleme et mettre fin aux
evenements qui se deroulaient au Cachemire. Cette
offre n'a pas ete accept.ee; elle a ete rejetee.

The objection taken was that constitutionally it was
embarrassing to the Government of India to invest
their Governor-General with such authority. I shall
not comment on that, but we had made that offer, and
I again repeat that it was the fairest offer that could,
in the circumstances, be made. It would give no advantage to either side, and it left the issue of the accession in the hands of the people of the State. Then,
later on, the reply was actually received in writing
to this offer and is contained in a telegram from the
Prime Minister of India to the Prime Minister of
Pakistan, dated 8 November. I shall read out paragraphs
10 and 11, in which the following was stated:

L'objection que Ton lui a opposee etait que, pour
des raisons constitutionnelles, il eut ete genant pour le
Gouvernement de TInde de donner au Gouverneur
general les pouvoirs requis. Je ne ferai pas de commentaires a ce sujet et me bornerai a faire remarquer
que notre offre etait la plus equitable que Ton put faire
dans les circonstances. Elle n'aurait donne aucun avantage a aucune des parties et elle laissait a la population
de TEtat le soin de trancher la question du rattachement.
Plus tard, le Gouvernement du Pakistan a requ une
reponse ecrite a son offre, un telegramme, date du 8
novembre et adresse par le Premier Ministre de TInde
au Premier Ministre du Pakistan. Je vais lire les paragraphes 10 et 11 de ce telegramme ou il est dit:

"It will thus be seen that our proposals" — that is,
India's proposals — "which we have repeatedly stated
are: (1) that the Government of Pakistan should publicly undertake to do its utmost to compel the raiders
to withdraw from Kashmir; (2) that the Government
of India should repeat its declaration that it will withdraw its troops from Kashmir's soil as soon as the
raiders have withdrawn and law and order are restored;
(3) that the Governments of India and Pakistan should

"On verra ainsi que nos propositions . . . — c'est-adire les propositions de TInde — . . . formulees a maintes reprises, consistent en ceci: 1) le Gouvernement du
Pakistan s'engagera publiquement a faire tout ce qui
est en son pouvoir pour contraindre les envahisseurs
a se retirer du Cachemire; 2) le Gouvernement de
TInde reiterera la declaration selon laquelle il s'engage
a retirer ses troupes du territoire du Cachemire aussitot que les envahisseurs auront quitte ce territoire et
19

make a joint request to the United Nations to undertake a plebiscite in Kashmir at the earliest possible
date."

que Tordre public y aura ete retabli; 3) les Gouvernements de TInde et du Pakistan adresseront a l'Organisation des Nations Unies une demande commune pour
qu'un plebiscite soit organise le plus tot possible dans
le Cachemire."

This is all that we have insisted upon during the
last two years. But the efforts of the Security Council,
of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, and such efforts as we could make to persuade the
Government of India to carry this out, have so far
unfortunately failed. I now continue quoting:

II s'agit la de ce que nous n'avons cesse de reclamer
durant ces deux dernieres annees. Mais les efforts du
Conseil de securite et de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour TInde et le Pakistan, et tous les efforts
que nous avons pu entreprendre pour persuader le
Gouvernement de TInde de prendre ces mesures, n'ont
malheureusement pas pu aboutir jusqu'a present. Je
poursuis ma citation:

"The above conclusions relate only to Kashmir, but it
is essential" — says the Prime Minister of India —
"in order to restore good relations between the two
Dominions that there should be acceptance of the principle that where the Ruler of a State does not belong
to the community to which the majority of his subjects
belong, and where the State has not acceded to that
Dominion the majority community of which is the same
as that of the State, the question whether the State has
finally acceded to one or the other Dominion should
be ascertained by reference to the will of the people."

"Les conclusions ci-dessus concernent uniquement
le Cachemire, mais il est essentiel, declare le Premier
Ministre de TInde, pour retablir les bonnes relations
entre les deux Dominions, que soit respecte le principe selon lequel, lorsque le souverain d'un Etat n'appartient pas a la communaute religieuse a laquelle appartient la majorite de ses sujets et lorsque TEtat n'a
pas demande son rattachement a celui des Dominions
dont la majorite professe la meme religion que celle
de TEtat, la question du rattachement definitif de TEtat
a Tun ou Tautre Dominion ne devrait etre tranchee
qu'en s'en rapportant a la volonte populaire."

These proposals were not exactly what we had offered, but we nevertheless agreed to treat them as a
basis for complete negotiations and a settlement of the
matter. And we suggested at that stage that the whole
dispute between the two Dominions over these matters
should be referred o the United Nations. I quote from a
Press statement of the Prime Minister of Pakistan on
14 November, in the course of which he said the following :

Ces propositions ne correspondent pas exactement a
celles que nous avions offertes, mais nous avons cependant accepte de les considerer comme une base de negotiations detaillees en vue d'un reglement de la question. Nous avons propose a ce moment que Tensemble
du differend qui oppose les deux Dominions sur ces
questions soit porte devant l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Je cite une declaration faite a la presse le 19
novembre par le Premier Ministre du Pakistan et dans
laquelle il dit ce qui suit:

"The fundamental principle of the Charter of the
United Nations is to prevent might prevailing over
right. The whole dispute should therefore be brought
before the bar of international opinion. We are ready
to request the United Nations immediately to appoint its
representatives in Jammu and Kashmir State in order
to put a stop to the fighting and to the repression of
Muslims in the State; to arrange the programme of
withdrawal of outside forces; to set up an impartial
administration of the State until a plebiscite is held;
and to undertake the plebiscite under its direction and
control for the purpose of ascertaining the free and
unfettered will of the people of the State."

"Le principe fondamental de la Charte des Nations
Unies est d'empecher que la force ne prime le droit.
L'ensemble du differend doit done etre porte devant
Topinion publique. Nous sommes prets a demander a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies de designer immediatement ses representants pour mettre fin, dans
TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire, aux combats et aux
persecutions dont sont victimes les Musulmans, pour
fixer les details du retrait des forces etrangeres, pour
etablir une administration impartiale sous la direction
et le controle de ces representants, dans le but de determiner quelle est la volonte de la population de TEtat
lorsqu'on lui permet de s'exprimer librement et sans
entraves."

Also, in a telegram addressed by the Prime Minister
of Pakistan to the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, dated 22 November, the Prime Minister of Pakistan said this :

Dans un telegramme adresse le 22 novembre par le
Premier Ministre du Pakistan au Premier Ministre du
Royaume-Uni, on pouvait egalement lire ceci:

"The above analysis shows that: first, fighting must
stop and all outside forces must withdraw; and secondly, which is no less essential, that the Kashmir administration must be taken over by an impartial and
independent authority immediately. Not until these
conditions are fulfilled is there any hope of getting a
free plebiscite which, in our opinion, need not wait until
the spring.

"L'analyse ci-dessus montre que, d'abord, les combats doivent cesser et toutes les forces etrangeres se
retirer; ensuite, et ce qui n'est pas moins essentiel,
que Tadministration du Cachemire doit etre immediatement confiee a un organisme impartial et independant.
Ce n'est que lorsque ces conditions auront ete remplies qu'il y aura quelque espoir d'obtenir un plebiscite
libre pour lequel, a notre avis, il n'est pas necessaire
d'attendre jusqu'au printemps.
20

"I hope you now realize the actual position, if you
will consider these basic facts. You will, I hope, support our proposal that the United Nations should immediately send out a commission to undertake the tasks
outlined in the paragraph above."

"J'espere qu'ayant considere ces faits fondamentaux,
vous concevez maintenant la veritable situation. Vous
appuierez, j'espere, la proposition que nous faisons
pour que les Nations Unies envoient immediatement
une commission chargee d'entreprendre la tache definie dans le paragraphe ci-dessus."

That is paragraph 5 I just read. Our position from
the very beginning with regard to the solution of this
question, while all these occurrences were going on, is
indicated by this. The offer that we made through our
Governor-General to the Governor-General of India and
the Government of India was not acceptable for certain
constitutional considerations. There is then the offer we
made in reply to Prime Minister Nehru's telegram of
8 November; but let us take that telegram by itself.

C'est le paragraphe 5 que je viens de lire. Ce paragraphe indique quelle a ete notre position en ce qui
concerne la solution du probleme et cela, des le debut,
alors que tous ces evenements se deroulaient. La proposition que nous avons faite au Gouverneur general
de TInde n'a pu etre acceptee pour certaines raisons
d'ordre constitutionnel. Voyons maintenant Toffre que
nous fimes, en reponse au telegramme du .8 novembre
du Premier Ministre Nehru; examinons ce telegramme.

Although the two Governments have been agreed
that this question shall be decided by the free and unfettered expression of the will of the people, there
has all along been a difference between the two Governments as to what would constitute conditions which
would guarantee a free expression of the will of the
people. There is one factor which I trust the Security
Council will note, and it is this: In the case of Junagadh,
India insisted that the plebiscite should be undertaken
by the Government of India and the State of Junagadh.
We have not, in the case of Kashmir, at any time suggested, much less insisted, that the plebiscite should be
undertaken by the Government of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir and the Government of Pakistan, excluding from it the Government of India. All the logic that
there might be behind India's suggestion with regard
to Junagadh surely applies to the Kashmir case, too.
But we did not consider that fair. We could not, either
to ourselves or to anybody else, pretend that under
those circumstances a plebiscite would be fair. We
therefore were completely willing and have been willing
throughout — as a matter of fact, we have insisted —
that the plebiscite should be undertaken by an impartial
authority under conditions which should make it really
free and impartial.

Bien que les deux Gouvernements aient decide d'un
commun accord que ce probleme serait tranche par
la volonte librement exprimee de la population, ils
ont eu, tout au long de ce probleme, un point de vue
different sur le fait de savoir quelles conditions garantiraient la libre expression de la volonte de la population. J'espere que le Conseil de securite tiendra compte
du facteur suivant: dans le cas du Junagadh, TInde a
soutenu que le plebiscite devait etre organise par le
Gouvernement de TInde et TEtat de Junagadh. Dans
le cas du Cachemire, nous n'avons jamais suggere
que le plebiscite devait etre organise par le Gouvernement de TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire et le Gouvernement du Pakistan, a Texclusion du Gouvernement
de TInde, et nous avons moins encore insiste pour
qu'il en fut ainsi fait. Toutefois, il est manifeste que
toute Targumentation logique sur laquelle se fondait
sans doute la suggestion de TInde en ce qui concerne le
Junagadh s'applique egalement au cas du Cachemire.
Mais nous avons estime que cette procedure ne serait
pas equitable. Nous ne pouvions pas faire semblant de
croire nous-memes ou tenter de faire croire aux autres
que le plebiscite serait impartial dans de telles conditions. C'est pourquoi nous avons ete entierement favorables, et cela depuis le debut, a Torganisation du
plebiscite par une autorite impartiale et dans des conditions qui le rendraient vraiment libre et impartial;
en fait, nous avons insiste pour qu'il en soit ainsi.

That is the whole crux of the matter and the whole
difference between the Government of India and ourselves. We insist that, as minimum conditions of a free
and impartial plebiscite, all foreign troops and other
fighting elements should be withdrawn from the State
— those who have entered from outside; that a nonpartisan administration should be set up in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir; and that the plebiscite should be
organized and conducted by and under the authority of
the United Nations. But if anybody says, "Oh, but
what you suggest would not enable anybody who wants
to vote for accession of Kashmir to India to vote for it;
they might be compelled to vote for Pakistan; let that
condition be modified," one must ask: What is there in
these conditions which would force anybody to vote
one way when he wanted to vote the other, and what
is it to which anybody could take any reasonable
exception?

C'est la qu'est le noeud de la question et c'est la que
reside toute la difference entre l'attitude du Gouvernement de TInde et la notre. Pour qu'il existe un minimum de conditions necessaires a un plebiscite libre et
impartial, nous avons insiste pour que toutes les troupes etrangeres et autres elements combattants venant de
Texterieur soient retires du territoire de TEtat, pour
qu'une administration impartiale soit etablie dans TEtat
de Jammu et Cachemire et pour que le plebiscite soit
organise et ses operations conduites par l'Organisation
des Nations Unies et sous l'autorite de celle-ci. Et si
on vient me dire: "Mais ce que vous avez propose ne
permettra pas aux personnes desirant voter en faveur
du rattachement du Cachemire a TInde de le faire; ces
personnes peuvent etre obligees de voter pour le
Pakistan; il faut done modifier ces conditions", je
repondrai: "En quoi ces conditions obligeraient-elles
qui que ce soit a voter dans un sens s'il voulait voter
dans Tautre et que contiennent-elles qui pourrait faire
Tobjet d'une objection fondee?"
21

^
Then the matter was not brought to the United Nations as we had suggested. We had suggested that we
should both join in taking the matter to the United
Nations and abide by such arrrangements as the Organization might make for a free and impartial plebiscite. India chose to come to the Security Council as a
complainant against Pakistan.

L'Organisation des Nations Unies ne fut pas saisie
de la question comme nous Tavions suggere. Nous
avions propose que, d'un commun accord, les deux parties soumettent ce probleme a l'examen de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et se conforment aux dispositions que celle-ci pourrait prendre pour organiser un
plebiscite libre et impartial. L'lnde jugea bon de se presenter devant le Conseil de securite en qualite de
plaignante contre le Pakistan.

Nevertheless, Pakistan welcomed the reference to
the United Nations. After all, it was not very material
whether both of us made a request jointly to the United
Nations or whether one party raised the question in a
form in which, in fact, it chose to raise it — a form
which we thought unjustified. While we should have
preferred the two parties to have taken up the question
together, we could, of course, come and explain the
situation to the Security Council, and the Council
would then be seized of the matter. The position taken
up by India and Pakistan is summed up in paragraphs
200 and 201 of the Commission's third report [S/1430],
and members of the Council are already familiar with
it. As I have said, the whole struggle has been in
connexion with the demilitarization of the State and
the setting up of an impartial administration until the
plebiscite can be completed. After careful consideration of the whole matter, all these factors except those
that have arisen subsequently, and to which reference
was made by the representative of India, such as tribal
incursions, the so-called accession of Kashmir to India,
the question of sovereignty, integrity, and so on, were
all agitated in detail before the Security Council. The
members of the Security Council expressed certain
views on the situation and on what measures, in their
opinion would bring about a peaceful solution.

Le Pakistan, neanmoins, se felicita de ce que le
probleme ait ete renvoye aux Nations Unies. Apres
tout, il importait peu que nous venions tous deux presenter ensemble notre demande aux Nations Unies ou
que Tune des parties soulevat la question sous la forme
qu'elle avait juge bon de choisir et que nous estimions
injustifiee. Bien que nous eussions prefere voir les
deux parties poser de concert cette question, nous pouvions tout de meme venir expliquer la situation au
Conseil de securite, et le Conseil se trouverait alors
saisi de Taffaire. La position prise par TInde et par
le Pakistan est exposee aux paragraphes 200 et 201
du troisieme rapport de la commission [S/1430] que
les membres du Conseil connaissent deja. Comme je
Tai deja dit, toute la lutte a porte sur la demilitarisation de TEtat et Tetablissement d'une administration
impartiale jusqu'a ce que les operations de plebiscite
aient pu etre terminees. Apres un examen approfondi
de Tensemble de la question, tous les facteurs, sauf
ceux qui intervinrent ulterieurement et auxquels le
representant de TInde a fait allusion — tels que les
incursions de tribus, le pretendu rattachement du
Cachemire a TInde, la question de la souverainete, de
Tintegrite territoriale, etc. — furent debattus en detail
devant le Conseil de securite. Les membres du Conseil
exprimerent certains points de vue sur la situation et
sur les mesures qui, a leur avis, permettraient d'aboutir
a une solution pacifique.
J'attirerai l'attention du Conseil sur trois ou quatre
breves citations seulement. A la 235eme seance du
Conseil de securite, le 24 Janvier 1948, M. Austin a dit:

I shall draw attention to only three or four brief
quotations. At the 235th meeting of the Security Council on 24 January 1948, Mr. Austin said:
"It seems to me that our advice to the two parties
should be, and that is what they are asking for when
they come here, that they proceed with the Kashmir
matter, without prejudice to the other question, complete the negotiations that are now pending and, with
respect to the media and methods of creating those conditions in which a fair plebiscite can be held, arrange
an interim government that is recognized as free from
the smell of brimstone, as nearly impartial and perfect
as two great countries like India and Pakistan can
make it, in which the rest of the world will have confidence as being fair."
At the same meeting Mr. de la Tournelle said:

"Je pense que nous devrions conseiller aux deux
parties, et c'est ce qu'elles demandent en venant ici,
de regler Taffaire du Cachemire, sans prejudice de
Tautre question, de terminer les negotiations actuellement en cours, et, au sujet des moyens et methodes
a employer pour creer les conditions d'un plebiscite
loyal, de s'entendre pour designer un gouvernement
provisoire qui sera reconnu comme ne sentant pas
le soufre, aussi impartial et parfait que deux grands
pays comme TInde et le Pakistan pourront le realiser,
et dans lequel le reste du monde aura confiance parce
qu'il sera equitable."
A la meme seance, M. de la Tournelle declara:

"Personally, I would suggest three conditions:

"Pour moi, j'en vois trois (il s'agit des conditions):

"1. The withdrawal of foreign troops from the State
of Kashmir.

" 1 . Le retrait des troupes etrangeres de TEtat du
Cachemire.

"2. The return of the inhabitants, irrespective of their
race — Hindu or Moslem — to their places of origin
in that State.
"3. The establishment of a free administration which
would not exert pressure on the population and would
give absolute guarantees of a free vote."

"2. Le retour dans cet Etat des habitants, quelle
que soit leur race — hindous ou musulmans — et leur
reinstallation dans leur lieu d'origine.
"3. L'installation d'une administration libre qui ne
fera pas pression sur la population et donnera des
garanties absolues sur la loyaute des votes."
22

At the next [236th] meeting of the Council held on
28 January 1948, Mr. Noel-Baker stated:

A la seance suivante [236eme] du Conseil, qui eut
lieu le 28 Janvier 1948, M. Noel-Baker declara:

"In my conception, infinitely the best way to stop the
fighting is to'assure those who are engaged in it that
a fair settlement will be arrived at under which their
rights will be assured. In other words, as I remarked
to the representative of India in our first talk after his
arrival, in my profound conviction, a settlement arrived
at quickly in the Security Council is the real way to
stop the fighting. The whole thing, from the preliminary measures as to the fighting right up to the
conduct of the plebiscite, in the end is all one problem.
Only when the combatants know what the future holds
for them will they agree to stop."

"A mon avis, le moyen de beaucoup le meilleur qui
permettra d'arreter les combats est de donner aux
combattants Tassurance qu'un juste reglement va intervenir qui leur garantira la jouissance de leurs droits.
En d'autres termes, comme je Tai fait observer au
representant de TInde au cours de la premiere conversation que nous avons eue apres son arrivee, je suis
absolument convaincu que le meilleur moyen de mettre
fin aux combats, c'est que le Conseil de securite prenne
sans retard une decision a ce sujet. Les mesures de
detail, depuis les instructions preliminaires pour arreter
la lutte jusques et y compris la procedure du plebiscite,
ne constituent en realite qu'un seul et meme probleme.
Les combattants ne consentiront a deposer les armes
que le jour ou ils sauront ce que leur reserve l'avenir."

Finally, at the 237th meeting of the Council, Mr.
Tsiang observed as follows:

Enfin, a la 237eme seance du Conseil, M. Tsiang
fit remarquer ce qui suit:

"It is obvious that the key to the problem lies in the
'• plebiscite. If the principle of a free and impartial plebiscite for deciding the all-important question of the
accession of Kashmir to India or Pakistan should be
; accepted, much of the incentive to violence and the use
' of force would be removed.

"II est manifeste que la cle du probleme reside dans
le plebiscite. Si les parties en presence acceptent le
principe d'un plebiscite libre et impartial, qui deciderait de la question fondamentale du rattachement du
Cachemire soit a TInde soit au Pakistan, les raisons
qui ont amene les actes de violence et le recours a
la force se trouveraient en grande partie eliminees.
"D'autre part, a moins que la paix soit restauree
dans le Cachemire, il serait impossible d'y conduire un
plebiscite de ce genre."
Le Conseil de securite elabora, le 6 fevrier 1948, une
resolution [S/667] connue sous le nom de "resolution van Langenhove et McNaughton", qui condensait
les vues du Conseil de securite. Apres que six membres du Conseil de securite se furent declares en faveur
de cette resolution [243eme seance], la delegation
de TInde fit entendre qu'elle avait requ des instructions lui enjoignant de retourner a New-Delhi aux
fins de consultation. Hier, le representant de TInde
a fait observer que deux facteurs, dont je parlerai
ulterieurement, ont ete la cause du retard et de Tobstruction apportes au plebiscite. II a accuse le Gouvernement du Pakistan d'en etre responsable. Le premier
retard et la premiere obstruction se manifesterent, si
mes souvenirs sont exacts, le 12 fevrier 1948 [244 eme
seance], lorsque la delegation de TInde se retira des
deliberations du Conseil de securite pour retourner
consulter son Gouvernement. Je ne blame pas la delegation de TInde d'avoir agi de la sorte; mais sa decision a eu pour resultat d'interrompre l'examen d'un
probleme qui, selon les assertions repetees de la delegation de TInde, etait d'une extreme urgence; en fait,
Tune de ses formules favorites etait que le Conseil de
securite n'examinait pas le probleme avec toute la
rapidite voulue et que, comme Neron, il jouait de la
lyre pendant que le Cachemire brulait. L'examen de
Taffaire fut done interrompu lorsque la delegation de
TInde se retira le 12 fevrier pour ne revenir qu'en mars.

"On the other hand, unless we restore peace in Kash. mir, such a plebiscite would not be possible."
:

The Security Council propounded a resolution on 6
February 1948 [S/667] — known as the van Langeni hove and McNaughton resolution — which contained
i the crystallized views of the Security Council. After six
members of the Security Council had spoken in support
of that resolution [243rd meeting] the Indian delega; tion intimated that its instructions were that it was to
; go back to New Delhi for consultation. The representative of India yesterday pointed to two factors, to which
I shall come later, as having been responsible for the
: delaying and obstruction of the plebiscite. He charged
: the Government of Pakistan with having been respon; sible for this delay and obstruction. The first delay and
: obstruction took place on 12 February 1948 [244th meetj ing] — or whatever the date was — when the Indian
j delegation withdrew from the deliberations of the Secu; rity Council in order to return for consultations with its
t Government. I do not blame the Indian delegation for
= that, but the effect was that the consideration of the
; case which India had repeatedly insisted was one of
great urgency — in fact, one of the expressions used
was that the Security Council was not dealing with it
1
with due expedition and that it was fiddling while
, Kashmir burned — was interrupted when the Indian
delegation withdrew on 12 February and did not rei turn again until some date in March.

Que prevoyait la resolution que j'ai rappelee tout
a Theure? En quelques mots, les principales dispositions de cette resolution etaient les suivantes: premierement, la question du rattachement de TEtat de Jammu
et Cachemire au Pakistan ou a TInde devrait etre
reglee democratiquement par un plebiscite qui serait

!

What was provided by the resolution to which I
have just referred? Briefly, it was this. The main provisions were that the question as to whether the State
; of Jammu and Kashmir should accede to Pakistan or
' to India should be decided by the democratic method
of a plebiscite to be held, as recognized by the parties,
23

under the auspices of the United Nations to ensure
complete impartiality; secondly, that fighting should
stop; thirdly, that all irregular forces and armed individuals who had entered Jammu and Kashmir from outside should withdraw; and, fourthly, that the Indian
and Pakistan Armies should co-operate.

organise, comme convenu par les parties, sous les aui
pices des Nations Unies, afin de garder un caractei
de parfaite impartialite; deuxiemement, les hostility
devraient prendre fin; troisiemement, les forces irre
gulieres et les partisans armes venus de Texterieu
devraient evacuer TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire; qua
triemement, les armees indienne et pakistanais
devraient agir en cooperation.

I draw the particular attention of the Council to this,
and I shall come to it again later when I have to deal
with the first of the effects of the obstruction of which
the representative of India spoke yesterday, and for
which he said Pakistan was responsible. It was provided
that the Indian and Pakistan Armies should co-operate
to establish order and security until the question of
the accession had been determined, and that the regular
forces should be withdrawn as soon as the re-establishment of law and order permitted. It was further
provided that citizens of the State of Jammu and Kashmir who had left on account of the disturbances there
should be invited and should be free to return in order
to participate in the plebiscite. It was also provided
that an interim administration should be set up which
should command the confidence and respect of the people
of the State, and that the plebiscite must be organized,
held and supervised under the authority of the Security
Council.

J'attire tout particulierement l'attention du Consei
sur ce point; je reviendrai la-dessus plus tard, lorsqm
je traiterai de la premiere des consequences entrainee:
par Tobstruction dont le representant de TInde a parle
hier et dont il a rejete la responsabilite sur le Pakistan
II etait done prevu que les armees indienne et pakistanaise devraient cooperer en vue de retablir Tordre
et la securite, en attendant le reglement de la questioi
du rattachement, et que les forces regulieres devraienl
evacuer le pays des que le retablissement de Tordre
public et de la paix le permettrait. II etait aussi prevu
que les citoyens de TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire
qui avaient quitte ^ le pays a la suite des troubles
devraient etre invites, en toute liberte, a regagner leur
domicile pour participer au plebiscite. II etait enfin
prevu qu'une administration provisoire devrait etre
mise sur pied, qui inspirit la confiance et le respect
a la population de TEtat, et que le plebiscite devrait
etre organise, tenu et controle sous l'autorite du Conseil
de securite.

As I have said, the first obstruction took place when
the delegation of India refused to go on with the discussion in the Security Council. The second obstruction
took place when the delegation of India declined to
accept these recommendations of the Security Council.
When the delegation of India returned the discussions
went on and the Security Council then adopted its
resolution of 21 April 1948 [S/726]. In respect of this
resolution also I would wish to draw attention to one
paragraph, paragraph 5. At a certain stage, after fighting
has been stopped and so on, the Security Council says:

Comme je Tai deja dit, le premier cas d'obstruction
s'est produit lorsque la delegation de TInde a refuse
de poursuivre la discussion au sein du Conseil de
securite. Le second cas d'obstruction s'est produit
lorsque cette meme delegation n'a pas voulu accepter les
recommandations du Conseil de securite. Apres le
retour de la delegation de TInde, les discussions se
sont poursuivies et le Conseil de securite a alors adopte
sa resolution du 21 avril 1948 [S/726]. A ce sujet,
je voudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil sur un paragraphe de cette resolution, a savoir le paragraphe S.
Le Conseil de securite prevoyait que, a un certain stade
de Involution de la situation, lorsque les hostilites
auront pris fin, etc.:

"If these local forces should be found to be inadequate,
the Commission, subject to the agreement of both the
Government of India and the Government of Pakistan,
should arrange for the use of such forces of either
Dominion as it deems effective for the purpose of
pacification."

"Dans le cas ou ces forces locales seraient jugees
insuffisantes, la commission, sous reserve de Taccord
du Gouvernement de TInde aussi bien que du Gouvernement du Pakistan, devrait prendre des dispositions pour
Tutilisation des forces de chacun des deux Dominions
de la faqon qu'elle jugerait la plus propre a assurer le
retablissement de la paix et de Tordre public."

Both these resolutions, the one that was not persisted in and the one that was actually adopted, visualized under certain circumstances the use of Pakistan
forces for the purposes of pacification. It is a point to
which I shall revert later. However, since I was dealing
with resolutions, I have drawn attention to it at this
stage.

Ainsi, ces deux resolutions, celle qui a ete abandonnee
comme celle qui a ete adoptee, prevoyaient que, dans
certaines conditions, les forces du Pakistan pourraient
etre utilisees en vue du retablissement de la paix. C'est
un point sur lequel je reviendrai plus tard. Cependant,
etant donne que je traite actuellement de ces resolutions, j'ai voulu attirer des maintenant l'attention du
Conseil sur ce point particulier.

The Government of India rejected the resolution of
21 April 1948. The Government of Pakistan, in my
letter of 30 April 1948 addressed to the President of
the Security Council [S/735], pointed out that it noted
the explanations of the various clauses that had been
offered during the discussion of the resolution, but that

Le Gouvernement de TInde a rejete la resolution
du 21 avril 1948. Le Gouvernement du Pakistan a, dans
la lettre que j'ai adressee au President du Conseil de
securite le 30 avril 1948 [S/735], souligne qu'il avait
pris note des explications dont les diverses clauses de
la resolution avaient fait Tobjet au cours de la discus24

unfortunately those explanations were not made part
of the resolution, and that for that reason the Government of Pakistan regarded the resolution as inadequate
for the purpose of securing a fair and impartial plebiscite.

sion, mais que ces explications n'ayant pas ete incorporees dans la resolution, le Gouvernement du Pakistan
considerait que cette resolution ne saurait assurer un
plebiscite vraiment loyal et impartial.

However, whatever the attitude of the parties, the
resolution was adopted by the Security Council, and in
pursuance of that resolution the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan was directed to go to
the sub-continent and place its good offices at the disposal of the two Governments in order to implement
the resolution of the Security Council.

Cependant, quelle qu'ait ete l'attitude prise par les
parties, la resolution a ete adoptee par le Conseil et,
comme suite a cette resolution, la Commission des
Nations Unies pour TInde et le Pakistan a requ pour
instructions de partir pour la peninsule de TInde et
d'offrir ses bons offices aux deux Gouvernements en
vue de la mise en ceuvre de la resolution du Conseil de
securite.

We now approach that point which the representative of India emphasized so much yesterday afternoon:
the entry of Pakistan forces into certain areas of the
State. The representative of India said that each side
had been asked not to aggravate the situation in any
way, but that Pakistan had done so by sending in its
forces, and that that was something which changed
the whole situation and occasioned the delay in, and the
obstruction to, the holding of the plebiscite.

Nous abordons maintenant le point sur lequel le
representant de TInde a tellement insiste hier apresmidi, a savoir Tarrivee des forces pakistanaises en
certaines regions de TEtat. Le representant de TInde
a fait observer que les deux parties avaient ete invitees
a ne rien faire qui put aggraver la situation, mais que le
Pakistan avait envenime les choses en envoyant ses
forces dans le pays et que cette action militaire du
Pakistan modifiait toute la situation, retardait et genait
Torganisation du plebiscite.

While the Security Council was debating the Kashmir
case, India, in spite of the appeal to do nothing to aggravate the situation, was building up its forces in the
State for an all-out offensive in Kashmir. India's attitude throughout the discussions here with Mr. van Langenhove and General McNaughton was that, once a
Commission was agreed upon, all that was necessary
was to see whether the tribesmen had made incursions
into the State or not and whether Pakistan volunteers
were fighting there or not, and that the rest would be
done by India. I do not want to give too many quotations
from the proceedings of the Security Council, but I am
sure that even the Security Council proceedings would
reflect that certain members of the Security Council
were anxious to avoid the situation which India was
no doubt anxious to bring about: that is to say, to
achieve a military decision in Kashmir and to occupy
the whole of Kashmir with its troops. And what would
happen once they had occupied the areas in which the
Azad freedom movement had started and been carried
on, can easily be imagined.

Pendant que le Conseil de securite discutait de la
question du Cachemire, TInde, bien qu'elle eut ete invitee a ne rien faire qui put aggraver la situation, renforqait ses forces dans TEtat en vue de lancer une
offensive generale au Cachemire. Pendant les discussions qui se sont poursuivies ici avec M. van Langenhove et le general McNaughton, TInde a constamment
soutenu le meme point de vue, a savoir qu'une fois
decidee la creation de la commission, il n'y avait plus
qu'a voir si les membres des tribus avaient ou non
envahi TEtat et si des volontaires pakistanais avaient
combattu a leurs cotes, et que TInde s'occuperait du
reste. Je ne veux pas multiplier les citations empruntees
aux proces-verbaux des debats du Conseil, mais je
suis sur que meme ces proces-verbaux montreraient que
certains membres du Conseil desiraient vivement eviter
ce que TInde, elle, s'efforqait vraisemblablement d'obtenir, c'est-a-dire le succes militaire de TInde au Cachemire et Toccupation par ses troupes de Tensemble de
cet Etat. II est facile d'imaginer ce qui se serait produit
a la suite de Toccupation des regions ou le mouvement
de liberation azad avait pris naissance et s'etait developpe.

It was pretended at one time that the whole population of the State was opposed to Pakistan and that
Pakistan was an aggressor and was regarded as a tyrant.
But there is the incontrovertible fact today that between
600,000 and 700,000 Muslims of Kashmir, who had their
homes on that side of the State which is in the military
occupation of India today, are refugees in Pakistan. That
fact is eloquent in itself. What does it show ? What does
it prove ? Who are the liberators ? Who are the aggressors ? Who are the tyrants ? After all, it may be possible
to present arguments in any juxtaposition. But facts,
which are undeniable and which speak for themselves,
are more eloquent than any argument at all. If the role
of the Indian military forces in Kashmir has been that
of restorers of peace and of law and order and protectors of the population, how is it that as large a
number as 600,000 to 700,000 Muslim inhabitants of
those areas of Kashmir which are in the military occu-

L'on a pretendu a un certain moment que toute la
population de TEtat etait hostile au Pakistan, que ce
pays etait Tagresseur et etait regarde comme un tyran.
Mais, aujourd'hui, il est un fait incontestable: de
600.000 a 700.000 Musulmans du Cachemire, qui
demeuraient dans la partie de TEtat actuellement occupee militairement par TInde, se sont refugies au Pakistan. Ce fait en dit long. Que revele-t-il? Que prouvet-il? Ou sont les liberateurs? Ou sont les agresseurs?
Ou sont les tyrans? Apres tout, il est possible d'arranger a sa guise des arguments. Mais des faits aussi
incontestables et significatifs ont plus de force que
n'importe quelle argumentation. Si les forces militaires
indiennes qui ont penetre au Cachemire n'avaient eu
d'autre mission que de restaurer la paix, la legalite et
Tordre public et de proteger la population, comment se
fait-il alors que de 600.000 a 700.000 Musulmans,
habitant les regions du Cachemire occupees par TInde,
25

pation of India are today refugees in Pakistan? That
number, of course, would have been augmented and
multiplied many times if the military forces of India
had been able to occupy the whole of the rest of the
State. That goes without saying; nobody can deny it.

aient cherche refuge au Pakistan ? Ces chiffres auraient,
bien entendu, ete beaucoup plus eleves si les forces
militaires indiennes avaient pu occuper Tensemble de
TEtat; cela va sans dire; personne ne peut le nier.

Then India launched its offensive in Kashmir early
in April 1948, while the matter was being debated in the
Security Council. This ted to a very large exodus of
Kashmiri Muslim refugees to Pakistan and threatened
the very security of Pakistan itself.

L'lnde a lance son offensive au Cachemire au debut
d'avril 1948, alors que la question etait discutee par le
Conseil de securite. Cette offensive a eu pour resultat un
exode en masse des Musulmans du Cachemire vers le
Pakistan et a menace la securite meme de cet Etat.

If the members of the Security Council will be good
enough to turn once again to the map which has been
supplied to them, they will see that a dotted line starts
slightly to the west of Jammu. That dotted line represents the cease-fire line. It runs parallel for many miles
to the Pakistan border and then turns northward. Members of the Council can see how close to the Pakistan
border the military forces of India had arrived.

Si les membres du Conseil de securite veulent bien
examiner une fois de plus la carte qui leur a ete distribute, ils apercevront un trait pointille qui part d'une
region situee legerement a Touest de Jammu. Ce trait
pointille correspond a la ligne fixee par Tordre de
cesser le feu. Cette ligne suit sur bien des kilometres
la frontiere du Pakistan et s'inflechit ensuite vers le
nord. Les membres du Conseil peuvent voir a quelle
faible distance de la frontiere pakistanaise etaient arrivees les troupes indiennes.

More than that, the irrigation system of West Pakistan, based on the River Jhelum, takes off from a point
inside the State boundary of Jammu and Kashmir, just
where the river parts company with the State's border
beyond the railway line and the road. But the actual
headworks are inside the State.

Mieux encore, le systeme d'irrigation du Pakistan
occidental, qu'alimente la riviere Jhelum, commence
en un point situe a Tinterieur de la frontiere de TEtat
de Jammu et Cachemire, precisement a Tendroit ou
la riviere quitte la frontiere, au-dela du chemin de fer
et de la route. Mais, en fait, les amorces du systeme
d'irrigation se situent a Tinterieur de TEtat.

There is an arrangement for a 99-year tease, and so
on, but that is something with which I need not trouble
the Council. At any rate, the headworks, as I have said,
are inside the State. It is perfectly obvious what would
happen to the headworks once the Indian military forces
had pushed their advance to the borders of the State.
With respect to other headworks which have been left
on India's side by the partition, India has claimed that
it can stop our water; and it did stop our water on
1 April 1948, and restored it only on our agreement to
make a deposit for the price of the water supplied. The
same thing would undoubtedly have happened with the
Mangla headworks.

Des arrangements existent, notamment un bail de 99
ans, mais ce sont la des questions au sujet desquelles
je n'ai pas a importuner le Conseil. En tous les cas,
comme je Tai dit, les amorces se situent a Tinterieur
de TEtat. Le sort de ces amorces, au cas ou les forces
militaires de TInde s'avanceraient jusqu'aux frontieres
de TEtat, ne fait pas de doute. Pour ce qui est des
autres sources d'irrigation restees en territoire indien
par suite du partage, TInde s'est fait fort de pouvoir
arreter notre eau; et elle Ta fait le ler avril 1948, ne
revenant sur sa decision que lorsque nous avons accepte
de faire un versement correspondant au prix de l'eau
qui nous avait ete fournie. Nul doute que la meme situation se serait produite pour ce qui est des installations
de Mangla.

These were the factors that were created toward the
end of April 1948. On 15 March 1948, the Indian
Defence Minister had already announced in the Indian
Constituent Assembly that the Indian Army would
clear out all resistance from Kashmir's soil in the next
two or three months. What did that indicate? It indicated that India was going to mount a fresh offensive
in Kashmir. I am not for the moment discussing whether
India was justified or not; I am merely giving facts
to the Council so that it may appreciate the situation.

Tels etaient les elements de la situation vers la fin
du mois d'avril 1948. Le 15 mars 1948, le Ministre
de la defense de TInde avait deja annonce devant
l'Assemblee constituante indienne que Tarmee de TInde
liquiderait toute resistance sur le sol du Cachemire
au cours des deux ou trois prochains mois. Que signifiait cette declaration? Certainement que TInde s'appretait a lancer une nouvelle offensive au Cachemire.
Je ne discute pas pour le moment le point de savoir
si TInde avait raison ou non; je me borne a exposer
des faits pour permettre au Conseil de juger la situation.

The Times of London of 13 April 1948 had a communication from its special correspondent at Srinagar,
in the course of which this was stated:

Le journal de Londres The Times publiait, le 13
avril 1948, une depeche de son correspondant special
a Srinagar, dans laquelle il etait dit notamment:

"The Indian Army has worked extremely hard during the winter months and its position has been much
improved. In spite of snow-storms and rain and the
resulting drifts, mud and landslips, it has doggedly
moved up supplies and reinforcements, improved roads

"L'armee de TInde a effectue un travail considerable
au cours des mois d'hiver et a beaucoup ameliore ses
positions. En depit de tempetes de neiges et de pluies,
en depit des amoncellements de neige, de la boue et des
glissements de terrain qui en ont resulte, elle a continue
26

and airfields and intensified the training of its troops.
Logistically, it has won a notable victory, but even
now in April, traditionally the month for a spring
offensive, this necessary phase has not been completed.
The road between Jammu and Srinagar, which winds
over the Banihal Pass, is still snow-covered and convoys
are often snowbound. To improve communications a
daily air service has been organized although weather
conditions will make flying unsafe for at least two or
three weeks. But the force has been considerably
strengthened and it should soon be ready for a limited
offensive. Already some units have advanced from
Rajauri in Jammu and from Uri and some small successes have been reported. Fighting is bloody. Few
prisoners are taken and acts of barbarism have been
committed by both sides. Many Pathans have been decapitated by Sikh troops."

opiniatrement a envoyer du materiel et des renforts en
premieres lignes, a ameliorer les voies de communication et les aerodromes et a entrainer ses troupes. Au
point de vue de Torganisation des services de Tarriere,
elle a remporte une victoire marquante, mais meme en
ce mois d'avril, ou par tradition se lancent les offensives
de printemps, cette phase necessaire de la preparation
n'est pas encore terminee. La route entre Jammu et
Srinagar, qui serpente a travers le col de Banihal, est
encore couverte de neige et les convois y sont souvent
immobilises. En vue d'ameliorer les communications,
un service aerien quotidien a ete organise, mais les
vols seront perilleux pendant deux ou trois semaines
encore en raison des conditions atmospheriques. Les
effectifs^ de Tarmee ont ete neanmoins considerablement
renforces et elle devrait etre bientot prete a lancer une
offensive partielle. Quelques unites ont deja penetre
dans le Jammu, venant de Rajauri et d'Uri, et Ton
signale quelques succes d'importance secondaire. Les
combats sont sanglants. Des prisonniers ont ete faits
de part et d'autre, et des actes de barbarie commis.
De nombreux Pathans ont ete decapites par les Sikhs."

That was some weeks before Pakistan moved its
forces in, but this leaves no doubt whatever that India
was mounting an offensive to clear the State of all
military resistance. With what was Pakistan at that
time faced? So far as its own security was concerned,
it was faced with a deadly danger. Once the whole State
was militarily occupied, Pakistan's flank was completely
broken. It was faced with the certainty that at that date
all its irrigation system based on the River Jhelum
might be cut off. Remember, this was at the end of
April 1948, and on 1 April 1948 India had stopped the
water from the Sutlej and Ravi Canals into Pakistan,
and that stoppage was then in progress and was continuing in the month of April.

Cela se passait quelques semaines avant que le Pakistan n'eut amene ses forces, mais il en ressort clairement que TInde preparait une offensive en vue de
liquider toute resistance militaire a Tinterieur de TEtat.
Quelle etait la situation du Pakistan a ce moment-la?
En ce qui concerne sa propre securite, il se trouvait
en danger mortel. Une fois TEtat entierement occupe
par les forces militaires, le Pakistan aurait vu son
systeme de defense entierement aneanti sur un flanc.
En outre, il avait le certitude qu'en cette eventualite
tout le systeme d'irrigation qu'alimente la riviere Jhelum serait coupe. Souvenez-vous, ceci se passait a la
fin du mois d'avril 1948, et, le ler avril 1948, TInde
avait interrompu Tapprovisionnement en eau du Pakistan par les canaux de Sutlej et de Ravi; a ce moment,
cette operation etait en pleine execution et devait se
poursuivre pendant tout le mois d'avril.

Obviously, therefore, once they got possession of the
Jhelum headworks inside the State, the same would
follow. The problem of refugees was already becoming
unmanageable so far as Pakistan was concerned, and
again it meant that once their troops advanced into
the areas held by the Azad Kashmir people, Pakistan
would have a large influx of refugees too. At that stage
the Government of Pakistan received an appraisal of
the military situation from its Commander-in-Chief,
dated 20 April 1948, from which I quote:

II etait done evident que la meme chose se produirait, une fois que les ouvrages de Jhelum, a Tinterieur
de TEtat, seraient aux mains des Indiens. Le probleme
des refugies etait devenu tel que le Pakistan commenqait deja a eprouver de grandes difficultes a y faire
face, et, en cas d'avance des troupes indiennes dans les
regions occupees par la population du Cachemire azad,
cette avance se serait traduite, pour le Pakistan, par un
afflux considerable de refugies. A cette epoque, le
Commandant en chef des troupes du Pakistan a envoye
au Gouvernement pakistanais un rapport sur la situation militaire, en date du 20 avril 1948, dont j'extrais
la citation suivante:

"General military situation: (a) The build-up of the
Indian Army for an all-out offensive in Kashmir started
towards the end of February 1948 at a very rapid rate.
Eight brigade groups, complete with supporting arms,
artillery, armour, engineers etc. backed by a considerable
air force of fighters, bombers and transport aircraft
are at present deployed in Jammu and Kashmir and
the process of building-up continues but appears to be
almost complete now. On 15 March 1948 the Indian
Defence Minister announced in the Indian Constituent
Assembly that the Indian Army will clear out the
so-called raiders from Kashmir within the next two
or three months. So far the main concentrations are

"Situation militaire generale: a) Le renforcement
de Tarmee de TInde en vue d'une offensive generale au
Cachemire a commence vers la fin de fevrier 1948 et
s'est poursuivi a un rythme accelere. Huit brigades,
dotees d'armes, d'artillerie, d'engins blindes, d'unites
du genie, etc., et renforcees par un nombre considerable
d'avions de chasse, de bombardement et de transport,
sont actuellement deployees dans le Jammu et Cachemire; les operations de renforcement continuent mais
semblent maintenant presque achevees. Le 15 mars
1948, le Ministre de la defense de TInde a annonce a
l'Assemblee constituante indienne que Tarmee de TInde
liquiderait dans les deux ou trois prochains mois les

27

in the south, i.e., in the area Jammu-Naoshera at least
one additional brigade group is already reported to
have moved into the Valley. There are also indications
of two separate commands being organized, one in
the Valley and one in the Jammu area. The offensive
on a limited scale appears to have started already and
Rajauri was captured by Indian troops on 12 April.
This was followed by a reign of terror which included
the burning of villages, the massacre of the civilian population and other atrocities. Four thousand men are
reported to have been victimized in this manner and
great panic and confusion prevailed in the area.

pretendues guerillas du Cachemire. Pour le moment,
les principales concentrations de troupes se trouvent
dans le sud, c'est-a-dire que dans la region de JammuNaoshera, au moins une nouvelle brigade est deja
signalee comme ayant penetre dans la vallee. II semble
egalement que deux commandements distincts soient
en voie d'organisation, Tun dans la vallee et Tautre
dans la region de Jammu. Une offensive a objectif limite
semble deja avoir ete lancee et les troupes indiennes
se sont emparees de Rajauri le 12 avril. La prise de
Rajauri a ete suivie par un regime de terreur, au cours
duquel des villages ont ete incendies, la population
civile massacree et d'autres atrocit.es perpetrees. On dit
que cette attaque a fait quatre mille victimes; la panique
et la confusion regnent dans la region.

"(b) Deduction: It is obvious that a general offensive is about to start very soon now. The present dispositions suggest that it will first start in the south with
Bhimbar and Mirpur as the most likely objectives with
a view to coming right up to the Pakistan border."
This is a long appraisal and I shall not quote the
body of it. I shall go on to the summary of deductions
towards the end, which says:

"b) Conclusion: II est evident qu'une offensive generate va etre lancee tres prochainement. Les dispositions
actuelles laissent entendre qu'elle sera declenchee dans
le sud, Bhimbar et Mirpur paraissant devoir constituer
les objectifs les plus probables d'un mouvement dont le
but serait d'atteindre la frontiere meme du Pakistan."
Le rapport est long et je ne le citerai pas en entier.
Je passe au resume des conclusions, qui figure vers la
fin du document. Voici ce qu'on y lit:

"Summary of Deductions: (a) That a general offensive is being planned by the Indian Army in the north
and the south is a certainty. Their objectives are likely to
be as follows: south: (i) Bhimbar-Mirpur, (ii)
Poonch; north: Muzaffarabad-Kohala.

"Resume des conclusions: a) II ne fait pas de doute
que Tarmee de TInde prepare une offensive generale
dans le nord et dans le sud. Les objectifs paraissent
devoir etre les suivants: dans le sud: i) Bhimbar-Mirpur, ii) le Panch; dans le nord: Muzaffarabad-Kohala.

"(b) Judging from what has happened in Rajauri,
an advance by the Indian Army in any of the above
areas is almost certain to create a big refugee problem
for Pakistan, which is already saturated. Refugees will
be an extremely serious strain on the civil administration and a heavy drain on the country's economic and
financial resources. From this point of view alone it is
imperative that the Indian Army is prevented from gaining any of the above objectives.

"b) A en juger par ce qui s'est produit a Rajauri,
une avance de Tarmee de TInde dans Tune des regions
cities ci-dessus creera presque certainement de grandes
difficultes pour le Pakistan en ce qui concerne les
refugies, dont il est deja sature. Les refugies constitueront un probleme extremement grave pour Tadministration civile et un lourd fardeau pour les ressources
financieres et economiques du pays. Ne fut-ce qu'a
ce seul point de vue, il importe absolument que Tarmee
de TInde soit empechee d'atteindre Tun quelconque des
objectifs ci-dessus.

"(c) Occupation of Bhimbar and Mirpur will give
India the strategic advantage of having crossed two
major obstacles, i.e., the Rivers Ravi and Chenab, and
of coming right up to the Pakistan border, thereby sitting
on our doorsteps, threatening the Jhelum Bridge which
is so vital for us, and getting further opportunities for
intrigue etc. It would also give them the control of the
Mangla headworks, thus plating the irrigation in Jhelum
and other districts at their mercy.

"c) L'occupation de Bhimbar et de Mirpur donnerait a TInde un avantage strategique: celui d'avoir
franchi deux obstacles majeurs, les rivieres Ravi et
Chenab, et d'avoir ainsi atteint la frontiere meme du
Pakistan; elle se trouverait alors a notre porte, menacerait le pont de Jhelum, dont Timportance est si
vitale pour nous, et serait en mesure de mener de
nouvelles intrigues, etc. L'lnde s'assurerait egalement
le controle des installations de Mangla, et le systeme
d'irrigation de la region de Jhelum et d'autres regions
seraient a sa merci.

"(d) Occupation of Poonch by the Indian Army is
certain to have a most serious effect on the morale of
the many Poonchis in the Pakistan Army, and this in
turn will adversely affect the morale of other troops.
Desertions will undoubtedly increase and discipline
will receive a big set-back.
"(e) The loss of Muzaffarabad or Kohala will,
broadly speaking, have the most far-reaching effect on
the security of Pakistan. It would enable the Indian
Army to secure the rear gateway to Pakistan through
which it can march in at any time it wishes to do so,
without any major obstacle such as the River Jhelum to

"d) L'occupation du Panch par Tarmee de TInde
aurait certainement un effet desastreux sur le moral
des nombreux Panchis que compte Tarmee du Pakistan
et cela, a son tour, affecterait le moral des autres soldats. Les desertions ne manqueraient pas de s'accroitre
et la discipline en souffrirait considerablement.
"<?) La perte de Muzaffarabad ou de Kohala aurait,
d'une maniere generale, des repercussions graves en
ce qui concerne la securite du Pakistan. Elle assurerait
a Tarmee de TInde Tacces au Pakistan par Tarriere
et lui permettrait d'y penetrer a tout moment, selon
ses desirs, sans avoir a surmonter d'obstacle de Tim28

portance de la riviere Jhelum. Une telle perte encouragerait les elements subversifs tels que le Khan Abdul
Ghaffar Khan et son parti, Tlpi, et TAfghanistan; et
elle jetterait certainement la panique et Talarme dans
certaines des regions voisines de la province de la
frontiere du nord-ouest et du Pendjab, donnant lieu
a un exode en masse de la population, qui creerait un
probleme insoluble pour le Pakistan.
"/) II est presque certain qu'une victoire facile de
Tarmee de TInde dans Tun quelconque des secteurs
mentionnes ci-dessus, et notamment dans la region de
Muzaffarabad, provoquerait la colere des tribus contre
le Pakistan, qui ne leur serait pas venu plus directement
en aide, et pourrait les inciter a se soulever contre lui.
"Recommandations: 7. Si Ton veut eviter que le
Pakistan n'ait a faire face a un nouveau et grave
probleme des refugies, cree par Tafflux de 2.750.000
personnes arrachees a leurs foyers; si Ton veut empecher que TInde ne s'installe au seuil du Pakistan, a
Tarriere et sur le flanc, et ne soit en mesure d'y penetrer
a son gre; si Ton ne veut pas compromettre dangereusement le moral de la population civile et de Tarmee;
et si Ton ne veut pas encourager les forces politiques
subversives et les dechainer au sein meme du Pakistan,
il importe absolument que Tarmee de TInde soit contenue en deqa de la ligne generale Uri-Panch-Naoshera."
Je pose aux representants au Conseil de securite la
question suivante : si chacun d'eux, en ce qui le concerne,
etait charge d'assurer la defense et la securite de son
propre pays et s'il recevait un pareil rapport de son
Commandant en chef — et, en Tespece, ce n'est pas
un ressortissant du Pakistan qui a redige le rapport:
le Commandant en chef etait et continue d'etre le
general Sir Douglas E. Gracey, brillant officier britannique — s'il recevait, dis-je, un rapport que tout
le reste venait confirmer et corroborer — par tout le
reste, j'entends les nouvelles adressees a leurs journaux par les observateurs etrangers et les discours
prononces tant en public qu'a l'Assemblee constituante
par les hommes d'Etat indiens et le Ministre de la
defense de TInde — s'il etait convaincu que telle etait
la situation, quel est le minimum qu'il se serait contente
de faire en pareilles circonstances ? Le Pakistan n'a rien
fait de plus que ce minimum. II a envoye ses troupes
pour tenir cette ligne.
Le representant de TInde a dit hier que cela constituait un acte d'agression. Le representant de TInde
s'attendait-il a voir les troupes de son pays avancer
victorieusement, briser ce mouvement de liberation
dont je viens de donner au Conseil de securite une image
incomplete et occuper militairement tout le territoire?
L'lnde avait rejete la resolution du Conseil de securite
du 6 fevrier [S/667] ; elle avait egalement rejete celle
du 21 avril [S/726] ; elle n'etait pas disposee a accepter
un plebiscite qui se deroulerait dans des conditions de
nature a assurer, si peu que ce soit, la libre et sincere
expression de la volonte populaire. Son but avoue etait
d'occuper militairement le territoire tout entier, ce
qui, sans parler du tort cause au Cachemire et a ses
habitants, aurait compromis Tensemble de la situation
au Pakistan et paralyse Tun des principaux systemes
d'irrigation de ce pays. Je demande a nouveau au Conseil de securite quel est le minimum que pouvait faire
toute personne responsable de la defense du Pakistan?
C'est ce minimum que nous avons fait.

stand in its way. It will encourage subversive elements
such as Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan and his party, Ipi,
and Afghanistan; and it will certainly cause extreme
panic and alarm in some of the adjoining districts of the
North West Frontier Province and Punjab resulting
in the mass exodus of population which will create an
insoluble refugee problem within Pakistan itself.
" ( / ) An easy victory of the Indian Army in any of
the above-mentioned sectors, particularly in the Muzaffarabad area, is almost certain to arouse the anger of the
tribesmen against Pakistan for its failure to render
them more direct assistance, and might well cause them
to turn against Pakistan.
"Recommendations: 7. If Pakistan is not to face
another serious refugee problem with about 2,750,000
people uprooted from their homes; if India is not to
be allowed to sit on the doorsteps of Pakistan to the
rear and on the flank at liberty to enter at its will and
pleasure; if civilian and military morale is not to be
affected to a dangerous extent; and if subversive political forces are not to be encouraged and let loose within
Pakistan itself, it is imperative that the Indian Army is
not allowed to advance beyond the general line UriPoonch-Naoshera."
I put it to the representatives on the Security Council that if they, in their respective spheres, were charged
with the responsibility of the defence and the security
of their own countries, and they received this report
from their Commander-in-Chief — and in this case it
was not a Pakistan national who had made the report;
the Commander-in-Chief was and is General Sir Douglas
E. Gracey, a distinguished British officer — if they had
received this report which everything else reinforced
and supported: the reports of foreign observers to their
newspapers, the speeches of Indian statesmen and their
Defence Minister both in public and in the Constituent
Assembly, and if they were convinced that this was the
situation, what is the very least that they would have
done in the circumstances ? Pakistan did that very least
and no more. It sent in its troops to hold that line.

Yesterday, the representative of India said that that
was an act of aggression. Did the representative of India
expect that the Indian Army should march victoriously
forward, crush this freedom movement of which I have
now given some slight, inadequate picture to the Security Council, and occupy the whole of the State militarily? India had rejected the Security Council's resolution of 6 February [S/667]; it had rejected the
Security Council's resolution of 21 April [S/726] ; it
was not willing to hold a plebiscite under any conditions that would approximate to conditions which would
ensure a free ana impartial plebiscite. India's avowed
object was to occupy the whole State militarily and that
action, in addition to what it would have done to Kashmir and the Kashmiris, would have put the whole situation of Pakistan in jeopardy and would have put out
of action one of the principal irrigation projects. I say
again to the Security Council, what is the minimum that
any one responsible for the defence of Pakistan would
have done? That is the minimum that we did.
29

The question that was asked us was: Why did you
not notify the Security Council?
Did the Government of India, in mounting its offensive, notify the Security Council, though that was a
serious change in the situation? It was an aggravation
of the situation. It cannot be pretended otherwise.
India not only mounted its offensive, it subsequently
continued to move on to other areas, occupying certain
portions and rapidly advancing towards the Pakistan
border. Did India notify the Security Council? But we
did. Our troops moved in about 6 May, or some such
date. It is obvious, of course, that military action of
that kind could not be broadcast, and any communication
to the Security Council on that subject would have been
broadcasting to the world, and certainly to India. Again,
as I have said, anybody responsible for the defence and
security of his country could not have taken that step.
But by that time the Council had set up a Commission
to which it had entrusted the carrying out of the duties
which were set out in the resolution of 21 April. That
Commission was momentarily expected on the subcontinent of India. Unfortunately — for good reasons
perhaps, but unfortunately from this point of view —
its arrival was delayed until 7 July.

L'on nous a demande pourquoi nous n'avions pas
mis le Conseil de securite au courant de notre action.
Lorsque le Gouvernement de TInde a prepare son
offensive, en a-t-il a vise le Conseil de securite? Et
pourtant, c'etait la une modification importante de la
situation. La situation en a ete aggravee. On ne saurait
soutenir le contraire. L'lnde ne s'est pas contentee de
preparer son offensive, elle a ensuite envoye ses troupes
dans diverses regions, occupant certaines parties du
territoire et avanqant rapidement vers la frontiere
du Pakistan. A-t-elle prevenu le Conseil de securite? Non, c'est nous qui Tavons fait. Nos troupes se
sont rendues sur les lieux aux environs du 6 mai. II est
de toute evidence que Ton ne pouvait faire de publicite
autour d'une operation militaire de ce genre; or, toute
communication faite a ce sujet au Conseil de securite
aurait ete connue du monde entier, et certainement de
TInde. Je le repete, aucune personne chargee d'assurer
la defense et la securite de son pays n'aurait pris une
telle mesure. Mais, a cette epoque, le Conseil avait
cree une commission chargee de s'acquitter des fonctions
enoncees dans la resolution du 21 avril. Cette commission devait arriver d'un moment a Tautre dans la
peninsule de TInde. Malheureusement, son arrivee a
ete retardee jusqu'au 7 juillet; peut-etre ce retard
a-t-il ete motive par d'excellentes raisons, mais il n'en
est pas moins regrettable du point de vue qui nous
occupe.
Dans la matinee du 8 juillet, la commission me fit
l'honneur de me rendre une visite officieuse pour nous
permettre de faire connaissance. J'ai retenu les membres
de la commission pendant deux heures et, a Taide de
cartes, je leur ai donne les renseignements les plus
detailles et complets sur la situation militaire existant
sur les differents fronts, notamment sur les effectifs et
la disposition des troupes du Pakistan dans la region.
Nous avons donne des renseignements a la commission,
mais nous Tavons fait de faqon a ne pas detruire Tobjectif meme de notre action. C'eut ete le comble de la
folie, apres avoir conqu et decide d'entreprendre une
action en vue d'arreter Tavance de Tarmee indienne,
que d'annoncer cette decision au monde, et a TInde en
particulier, mais nous nous sommes mis en rapport avec
la commission des son arrivee dans la peninsule
indienne.
Quel etait d'ailleurs Tobjet de notre "agression"?
Contre qui etait-elle dirigee? Notre peuple a-t-il envahi
des territoires? Avons-nous lance une offensive militaire? Nos armees ont-elles penetre dans des regions
ou elles pouvaient se livrer a des persecutions et a
des actes de pillage au detriment des populations? Du
point de vue du Cachemire, elles n'ont fait que venir a
Taide de la population dont la liberte etait menacee,
pour lui permettre de defendre contre Tavance indienne
ce qui lui restait de territoire. Et, en ce qui nous concerne, le but principal de notre action etait de parer
au danger imminent qui menaqait la securite et l'ecfr
nomie du Pakistan. Quoi qu'il en soit, nous avons saisi
la premiere occasion pour porter le fait a la connaissance de la commission.

On the morning of 8 July the Commission did nie
the honour to pay me an informal visit so that we should
get to know each other. I detained the members for two
hours and, with the help of maps, I gave them the most
detailed and complete information on military situations
that existed then, including the presence, the number
and the disposition of the Pakistan armies in the section. We did communicate, but we communicated in
a manner which would not have destroyed the very
objective of that action itself. It would have been the
height of folly if we intended and decided to take that
action to stop the further advance of the Indian Army,
to have broadcast the matter to the world and to India
in particular, but we did communicate with the Commission almost as soon as it set foot on the sub-continent
of India.
But what was the aggression against ? Against whom
was the aggression? Did our people go into areas? Did
we make an advance? Did our armies go into areas
where they could commit persecution and deprivations
of the people? They went, so far as Kashmir was concerned, in aid of the freedom of the people, in order
to enable them to hold what territory was left to them
against the Indian advance. And so far as we were
concerned, that was the main object: to avoid the imminent danger that threatened the security of Pakistan
and the economy of Pakistan. But we did take the
earliest feasible step to communicate the fact to the
Commission.

L'lnde n'a pas cesse — ou tout au moins le Premier
Ministre de TInde et d'autres hommes d'Etat n'ont pas
cesse — de soutenir que le Pakistan avait nie cette operation militaire devant le Conseil de securite, mais qu'il
avait du reconnaitre les faits devant la commissionOr, ce que nous avons nie devant le Conseil de securite

India has gone on saying all through — the Prime
Minister of India and other statesmen — that, before
the Security Council, Pakistan denied this, but that
before the Commission, it was forced to accept the
position, forced to admit it. But what we denied before
the Security Council and what we admitted before the
30

Commission had not happened until 6 May, or some
such date, both according to the Government of India
and according to us : the first week in May. I could not
admit something in January which was neither contemplated nor necessitated until some time in May. It
was necessitated by India's action, and India's action
] became imminent, although the preparation had started
; in February, in May. How could I, in January, tell the
Security Council something that was not thought of
till April and did not occur until May? As soon as the
'' Commission arrived on the sub-continent the information was given.

et ce que nous avons reconnu devant la commission
ne s'est produit que le 6 mai ou approximativement a
cette date — comme nous en sommes d'accord, le
Gouvernement de TInde et nous — en tous cas, au cours
de la premiere semaine de mai. Je ne pouvais pas reconnaitre en janyier ce qui n'avait pas ete envisage, ce qui
n'avait pas ete regarde comme necessaire avant le mois
de mai. Ce sont les preparatifs de TInde qui ont rendu
notre intervention necessaire et ces preparatifs, bien
qu'entrepris des fevrier, ne sont devenus un danger
imminent qu'en mai. Comment aurais-je pu signaler
au Conseil de securite, en Janvier, un fait dont il n'a
pas ete question avant le mois d'avril et qui ne s'est produit qu'en mai ? Des que la commission est arrivee dans
la peninsule, nous lui avons donne toutes informations
utiles.

The representative of India used a quaint phrase
yesterday — I appreciated the phrase itself. He said:
"Thus India's . . . complaint . . . was now proved to be
true, or at least to have become true . . ." It has become
true by some action in May of 1948 — the complaint
that India made on 1 January 1948 has become true.
But that is not so much the point. The point is that all
through, and this is the first public opportunity of dealing with it, Indian statesmen, led by the Prime Minister,
have gone on the basis of that factor, saying that Pakistan's case before the Council was a tissue of lies. Pakistan's troops are in the Kashmir area. Pakistan's troops
were not in the Kashmir area until the first week in
May and we were under no international obligation
not to intervene. India had committed an act of aggression. India was in the course of occupying those areas.
I plead guilty to the fact that when these troubles
started we should have sent our troops in the beginning
in order to stop the persecution of the Muslims by the
Maharaja and his troops and to restore the law and
order which the tribesmen had disturbed. To that I
plead guilty. That was a default which we regret, but
that is not to say we were not entitled to do so. As a
matter of fact we were under obligation to do so as
Kashmir had a stand-still agreement with us at that
date. We were not guilty of any breach by sending
troops on 6 May, and that is not what delayed the
plebiscite. How could it?

Le representant de TInde a eu recours hier a une
formule etrange, que j'ai moi-meme fort gofitee. II a
dit: "Ainsi, . . . la plainte . . . formulee par TInde se
revele fondee, ou tout ou moins elle Test devenue"
La plainte formulee par TInde, le ler Janvier 1948,
adonc requ un commencement de justification par suite
d'une initiative prise en mai 1948! Mais la n'est pas la
question. Ce qui importe — et c'est la premiere fois que
l'occasion se presente de debattre ce point publiquement
— c'est que les hommes d'Etat de TInde, le Premier
Ministre en tete, n'ont cesse de prendre pretexte de
ce facteur pour dire que la cause du Pakistan, telle
qu'elle etait presentee au Conseil, n'etait qu'un tissu
de mensonges. Les troupes du Pakistan se trouvent
sur le territoire du Cachemire, mais ces troupes n'ont
penetre dans ledit territoire qu'au cours de la premiere
semaine de mai et aucune obligation d'ordre international ne nous interdisait d'intervenir. LTnde s'etait
livree a un acte d'agression. L'lnde procedait a Toccupation du territoire du Cachemire. Je reconnais que,
des que ces troubles ont eclate, nous aurions du depecher nos forces pour faire cesser la persecution des
Musulmans par le Maharadjah et ses troupes et pour
retablir Tordre et la legalite, que les tribus avaient
troubles. Cela, je le reconnais. C'est la une faute que
nous regrettons, ce qui ne veut pas dire que nous
n'ayons pas ete en droit d'agir comme nous Tavons
fait. En fait, nous etions tenus d'agir ainsi, en raison
de Taccord de treve qui etait en vigueur a la date en
question, entre le Cachemire et nous. En envoyant des
troupes au Cachemire, le 6 mai, nous ne nous sommes
rendus coupables d'aucun manquement, et ce n'est pas
la ce qui a retarde le plebiscite. Comment pourrait-on
le supposer?

With regard to pacification itself after fighting ceases,
>' and now fighting has ceased since 1 January, the Secu'•[ rity Council contemplated that the forces of both Domin\ ions might be utilized by the Commission or by the
;
Plebiscite Administrator. How does that delay the
:
' holding of the plebiscite ? And if the forces of any side
' had to be used, is it not obvious that, at least in those
' areas in the section of the Azad Kashmir people, Indian
''troops could not be used for purposes of pacification?
• It would have to be Azad or Pakistan troops. How
does that interfere with the question or the principle of
: the plebiscite ? When the Commission arrived it started
s negotiations with both sides. I must pay tribute to the
(Commission in respect of its activity on the sub-con(tinent. Its members undertook a great deal of physical
i discomfort and put in a lot of work in an attempt to

En ce qui concerne la pacification proprement dite
apres Tarret des hostilites — or, les combats ont cesse
depuis le ler Janvier — le Conseil de securite avait
envisage Tutilisation des forces des deux Dominions
par la commission ou par Tadministrateur du plebiscite. En quoi cela peut-il retarder le plebiscite? En admettant qu'il faille avoir recours aux forces d'une des
deux parties en presence, n'est-il pas evident que, tout
au moins dans les regions qui se trouvent dans le secteur occupe par la population du Cachemire azad, les
troupes de TInde seraient inutilisables aux fins de
pacification? II faudrait pour cela utiliser des troupes
azad ou pakistanaises. Quel rapport cela peut-il avoir
avec la question ou le principe du plebiscite? Des son
arrivee, la commission a entame des pourparlers avec
les deux parties en presence. J'ai le eievoir de rendre

1

31

bring the two Governments together with regard to
some agreement which might result in the holding of a
fair and impartial plebiscite.

Yesterday, the representative of India sought to
make a virtue, at least on the side of India, of the fact
that India accepted these two combined resolutions, or
this composite resolution, on 23 December
[S/1196,
annex 4], whereas, even at that stage, Pakistan did
not accept until 25 December [S/1196, annex 5]. H e
seemed to think that there was some default on the
part of Pakistan, or at afly rate, that there was some
merit on the part of India in having accepted on 23 Dec-

hommage a la commission pour Tactivite qu'elle a deployed dans la peninsule. Ses membres ont accompli
dans les pires conditions materielles, un travail considerable aux fins d'amener les deux Gouvernements a se
mettre d'accord pour organiser un plebiscite dans des
conditions d'equite et d'impartialite.
Apres plusieurs deplacements et de longues discussions, la commission a pu mettre au point sa resolution du 13 aout 1948 [S/1100, paragraphe 75]3. Si
le Gouvernement du Pakistan n'a pu accepter cette
resolution, c'est surtout pour la raison suivante: elle
traitait bien de la suspension d'armes, ainsi que de
Taccord et des modalites de la treve, mais, en ce qui
concerne le plebiscite, elle se bornait a specifier que
le statut futur de TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire —
je ne cite pas textuellement — serait fixe conformement a la volonte de la population. Le Pakistan, connaissant par experience l'attitude que TInde adoptait
le cas echeant, souligna qu'avant de consentir a la
cessation des hostilites et a la treve, il entendait recevoir Tassurance que TInde avait souscrit a des conditionsequitables et justes en vue de Torganisation d'un plebiscite equitable et impartial.
Or, le Conseil de securite sait parfaitement (puisquela question a deja ete discutee par le Conseil quand il en
a ete anterieurement saisi) que, dans cette affaire, tout
se tient. J'ai donne lecture d'un passage de Texpose de
M. Philip Noel-Baker. Tout se tient et tout le monde a
affirme a maintes reprises que les combats ne pouvaient
pas cesser; que personne ne pourrait persuader le
Gouvernement du Pakistan ni qui que ce soit de cesser
le combat tant que la population n'aurait pas ree;u
Tassurance que le plebiscite lui apporterait ce pour quoi
elle combattait; que personne ne pouvait esperer une
suspension d'hostilites tant que la population n'aurait
pas requ Tassurance qu'il en serait ainsi, qu'un plebiscite equitable et impartial serait organise, et a moins
que les conditions proposees ne la tranquillisent, tout
au moins dans une large mesure, sur Tequite et Timpartialite du plebiscite.
Aujourd'hui il ne s'agit point de savoir si cette
attitude etait justifiee. Le fait est qu'on Tavait adoptee.
La commission a decide finalement d'elaborer avec
plus de details la troisieme partie de sa resolution en
date du 13 aout 1948, et c'est ainsi qu'elle a redige
sa deuxieme resolution, celle du 5 Janvier 1949 [Sf
1196, paragraphe 15]*, qui ne faisait, bien entendu,,
que completer la resolution du 13 aout 1948, en en
etendant la port.ee et en comblant les lacunes de la
troisieme partie de cette resolution.
Hier, le representant de TInde a essaye de presenter
comme une action d'eclat la decision de son pays
d'accepter, des le 23 decembre [S/1196, annexe 4], ces
deux resolutions, ou plutot cette resolution composite,,
alors que, meme a cette etape des negotiations, le
Pakistan ne Taurait acceptee que le 25 [S/1196, annexe 5]. Le representant de TInde semble estimer que
le Pakistan a manque en quelque sorte a son devoir ou,
en tout cas, que TInde a un certain merite a avoir

* For the text of the first interim report of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, document S/1100,
see Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year,
Supplement for November 1948.
* For the text of the second interim report of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, document S/1196,
see Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Supplement for January 1949.

" On trouvera le texte du premier rapport provisoire de 11
Commission des Nations Unies pour l'lnde et le Pakistani
document S/UOO, dans les Proces-verbaux officiels du Consm
de4 security, troisieme annee, supplement de novembre 1948.
On trouvera le texte du deuxieme rapport provisoire de »
Commission des Nations Unies pour TInde et le Pakistan,
document S/1196, dans les Proces-verbaux officiels du Consul
de securite, quatrieme annee, supplement de Janvier 1949.

After several journeys and discussions backwards
and forwards, they were able to put forward their resolution of 13 August 1948 [S/1100, paragraph 75]3. The
resolution of 13 August 1948 could not be accepted by
the Pakistan Government for this main reason: that,
though it dealt with the cease-fire and, also, with the
truce agreement and arrangements, all that it said with
regard to the plebiscite was that the future of the State
of Jammu and Kashmir — and I am not quoting this
verbatim — would be settled in accordance with the
wishes of the people. Pakistan insisted, having had experience of the attitude adopted by India from time to
time, that, before it would agree to the cease-fire and
the truce, it must know that fair, just and equitable conditions had been agreed to by India with regard to the
holding of the fair and impartial plebiscite.
Now, again, the Security Council is aware, since the
discussion took place here when the case was previously
before the Council, that the whole is one process. I
have read out an extract from the speech of Mr. Philip
Noel-Baker. The whole is one process, and it was
repeatedly stated by everybody that fighting could
not stop; that nobody could persuade the Pakistan
Government or anybody else to stop the fighting unless
the people had the assurance that they could have that,
for which they were fighting, through the plebiscite;
that, unless they were assured that that would happen,
a fair and impartial plebiscite would be held, and unless
the conditions satisfied them, at least to a major degree,
that the plebiscite would be fair and impartial, no one
could expect them to stop.
Again, the point today is not whether that stand was
justified or not. But that was the position. Eventually,
the Commission did take up the question of elaborating
part I I I of the resolution of 13 August 1948, and they
eventually put forward their second resolution of
5 January 1949 [S/1196, paragraph 15]*, which was, of
course, supplementary to the 13 August 1948 resolution, inasmuch as it expanded and filled in the details
of part I I I of that resolution.

32

ember. Mr. Lozano, then, I think, the Chairman or
Vice-Chairman of the Commission, who was entrusted
by the Commission with the task of proceeding to the
sub-continent to explain the resolution to the two
Governments, went first to Delhi, had conversations with
the Government of India, and, as it now appears, obtained the acceptance of the Government of India of
this resolution on 23 December. It was only thereafter
that he came to Karachi and held conversations with the
representatives of the Pakistan Government, on 24 and
25 December. The acceptance of the Pakistan Government was communicated to him on 25 December. Where
was the default on the part of Pakistan, if there is any
question of default? The juxtaposition of the two dates
which was insisted upon yesterday is inexplicable to
me. We were not even approached until 24 December.
How could we have accepted on 23 December? Mr.
Lozano went first to Delhi and then to Karachi. Had he
gone first to Karachi and then to Delhi, we should probably have accepted first.

accepte cette resolution des le 23 decembre. M. Lozano,
qui etait alors, si je ne m'abuse, President ou VicePresident de la commission et qui avait ete charge par
celle-ci de se rendre dans la peninsule afin d'expliquer
cette resolution aux deux Gouvernements en cause,
s'est rendu d'abord a Delhi ou il a eu des conversations
avec_ le Gouvernement indien et ou, comme cela apparait maintenant, il a obtenu que ce Gouvernement
acceptat la resolution le 23 decembre. Ce n'est qu'ensuite qu'il s'est rendu a Karachi, ou, les 24 et 25
decembre, il s'est entretenu avec les representants du
Gouvernement pakistanais. L'acceptation de la resolution par le Gouvernement du Pakistan lui a ete communiquee le 25. Ou est done ce manquement qu'aurait
commis ce Gouvernement, si tant est qu'on puisse parler
de manquement? La juxtaposition des deux dates sur
laquelle on a tant insiste hier me parait inexplicable.
Personne ne s'est adresse a nous avant le 24 decembre.
Comment, dans ces conditions, aurions-nous pu accepter la resolution des le 23. M. Lozano s'est rendu
d'abord a Delhi, puis a Karachi. S'il etait venu a
Karachi avant de se rendre a Delhi, nous aurions
probablement ete les premiers a accepter la resolution.

Nothing turns on the two dates. What is essential
is that, up to those two dates, 23 and 25 December, the
resolutions had not been accepted. The first had not
been accepted by us; the acceptance of the second by
India was not known until 23 December. And, obviously,
if we had not accepted a resolution, how could that
resolution become binding upon us before acceptance?
I shall, however, also come back later to that aspect of
the matter which the representative of India raised
yesterday.

Ces deux dates ne prouvent done rien. L'essentiel
est ceci: avant ces deux dates, le 23 et le 25 decembre,
ces resolutions n'etaient pas acceptees. Pour ce qui est
de la premiere, c'est nous qui Tavions rejer.ee; quant
a la deuxieme, ce n'est que le 23 decembre que TInde
en a annonce l'acceptation. II est evident que nous ne
pouvions nous considerer comme lies par une resolution que nous n'avions pas acceptee. Je reviendrai
d'ailleurs sur cet aspect de la question que le representant de TInde a soulevee hier.

What did the resolutions, taken together, provide?
First, that there should be a cease-fire and that, following the cease-fire, a cease-fire line should be laid
down on the ground. I need not revert to this, because
the cease-fire became effective on 1 January 1949, and,
since then, though it took a much longer time than it
need have, the cease-fire line has also been determined.
That is out of the way, and no further reference to it
need be made now. The next was the truce stage. These
two phases were dealt with in the resolution of 13
August 1948. On the truce stage, the first and main
question was the reduction of the armed forces of both
sides in the areas concerned. At that date, on the Pakistan side there were the tribesmen, there were the
nationals of Pakistan who had entered the State for
the purpose of fighting, there were the regular troops
of the Pakistan Army, and there were the Azad Kashmir forces. On the Indian side, the forces engaged were
the regular troops of the Indian Army, Indian nationals
who had entered the State for the purpose of fighting,
the State military forces, and the Jammu and Kashmir
State Militia. Now, that was the state of the military
forces on each side, apart from their numbers and their
equipment and the weapons available. The agreed arrangements for the disposal of these forces were as follows:

Que prevoyaient ces deux resolutions prises dans
leur ensemble? Tout d'abord, elles stipulaient qu'un
ordre de cesser le feu devrait etre donne et que, des
qu'il prendrait effet, il y aurait lieu de tracer une
ligne de demarcation. Je n'ai point besoin de revenir
sur ce point, puisque Tordre de cesser le feu a pris
effet le ler Janvier 1949 et que, depuis, une ligne de
demarcation a ete tracee, bien que cette operation ait
pris beaucoup plus de temps qu'il n'eut ete necessaire
en realite. Cette question est desormais reglee et il est
inutile d'y revenir maintenant. Vint ensuite la treve.
Ce sont ces deux etapes qui font Tobjet de la resolution du 13 aout 1948. La premiere et principale question qu'il fallait trancher pendant la treve etait la
reduction des forces armees maintenues par les deux
parties dans les regions interessees. A cette epoque,
les forces pakistanaises comprenaient les membres des
tribus, les ressortissants pakistanais qui avaient penetre sur le territoire de l'Etat pour y combattre, les
troupes regulieres de Tarmee pakistanaise et les forces
du Cachemire azad. Du cote indien, les forces engagees
dans les combats se composaient de troupes regulieres
de Tarmee indienne, de ressortissants indiens qui
avaient penetre sur le territoire de Jammu et Cachemire pour y combattre, des forces armees de cet Etat
et des milices nationales de Jammu et Cachemire.
Telles etaient done les forces armees de chacune des
parties, la composition numerique de ces forces, leur
equipement et les armes dont elles disposaient mis
a part. Les arrangements conclus relativement au
retrait de ces forces contenaient les dispositions suivantes:
33

First, Pakistan was to use its best endeavours to
secure the withdrawal of tribesmen and Pakistan nationals who had entered the State for the purpose of
fighting. This was to happen in the truce stage, but this
was the first thing that was to happen. The truce stage
had not yet arrived because the truce agreement had not
been settled and a deadlock had been reached. Nevertheless, there was no further object either in fighting
or in continuing in the State for that purpose, although the obligation of securing the withdrawal of
tribesmen and Pakistan nationals arose only after the
signing of the truce agreement, inasmuch as the Pakistan Government was not in a position to assure the
people concerned that a free and impartial plebiscite had
been agreed upon, to be held under conditions, though
not guaranteeing it one hundred per cent, still offering a
fair chance of its being free and impartial. Once the
cease-fire was arranged, Pakistan succeeded in getting
the area evacuated of the tribesmen and such Pakistan
nationals as had entered the State for the purpose of
fighting. This was an obligation which, though it was
to be imposed and would have become applicable to
Pakistan only in the truce stage, had already been
discharged by Pakistan.

En premier lieu, le Pakistan devait faire tout en
son pouvoir pour faire evacuer TEtat de Jammu et
Cachemire par les membres de tribus et les ressortissants pakistanais qui y avaient penetre afin de combattre. II devait prendre ces mesures pendant la treve
et c'etait la premiere chose a faire. Notons, d'ailleurs
que la treve n'etait pas encore conclue parce que les
negotiations relatives a Taccord de treve avaient abouti
a une impasse. Neanmoins, il n'y avait aucune raison
de poursuivre la lutte ou de maintenir des troupes sur
le territoire de TEtat de Jammu et Cachemire, bien
que ce ne soit qu'apres la signature de Taccord de treve
que le Pakistan eut du s'engager a retirer les membres
des tribus et les ressortissants pakistanais. En effet
tant que Taccord n'etait pas conclu, le Gouvernement
pakistanais n'etait pas en mesure d'assurer a la population interessee qu'on s'etait entendu sur un plebiscite
qui, sans garantir une liberte et une impartialite
absolue, promettait d'etre libre et impartial (ians une
certaine mesure tout au moins. Lorsque Tordre de
cesser le feu a ete mis en vigueur, le Pakistan a
reussi a faire retirer de cette region les membres des
tribus et les ressortissants pakistanais qui avaient penetre sur le territoire de TEtat afin de combattre. Le
Pakistan n'a pas attendu la conclusion de la treve pour
s'acquitter d'une obligation qui ne devait lui etre imposee qu'aux termes de Taccord de treve et qui ne
devait etre appliquee que pendant cette treve.

Next, what was envisaged was the withdrawal of
the regular forces of India and Pakistan, so arranged
that Pakistan would take the first step, but after Pakistan troops had begun to withdraw, India undertook to
begin the withdrawal of its forces in stages to be agreed
with the Commission. That was the next stage. It was
to begin with the withdrawal of the Pakistan forces, and
then later on the withdrawal would be synchronized and
the entire Pakistan forces on one side were to withdraw,
and the bulk of the Indian Army on the other side was
to withdraw. The Commission assured the Pakistan
Government that the withdrawal of the Pakistan Army
and the withdrawal of the bulk of the Indian Army
would be synchronized with the two High Commands.

La disposition suivante prevoyait le retrait des
troupes regulieres de TInde et du Pakistan; les troupes
pakistanaises devaient commencer a se retirer les premieres, mais TInde avait promis qu'une fois ce retrait
commence, elle se mettrait a retirer ses propres troupes
par etapes, selon des modalites a etablir apres entente
avec la commission. Telle etait done Tetape suivante.
Elle devait commencer par le retrait des troupes pakistanaises; puis, le retrait des troupes devait etre synchronise et Tensemble des forces pakistanaises, ainsi
que le gros de Tarmee indienne, devaient etre retires en
meme temps. La commission a assure au Gouvernement
du Pakistan qu'elle s'occuperait avec les deux Hauts
Commandements de synchroniser le retrait de Tarmee
pakistanaise et Tevacuation du gros de Tarmee indienne.

I wish to draw the attention of the Council to paragraph 10 of the appendix to the Commission's letter
dated 27 August 1948, annex 27 to the Commission's
first report [S/1100]. The letter was addressed to me.
Paragraph 10 reads as follows: "In accordance with
part II, section B, paragraph 1 of the resolution" —
that is the resolution of 13 August — "the Indian Government, when apprised that the Pakistan forces are
being withdrawn from the State of Jammu and Kashmir, agrees to begin to withdraw the bulk of its forces
from the State in stages to be agreed upon with the
Commission. Synchronization of the withdrawal of
the armed forces of the two Governments will be arranged between the respective High Commands and
the Commission."

Je tiens a attirer l'attention du Conseil sur le paragraphe 10 de Tannexe accompagnant la lettre de la
commission en date du 27 aout 1948, qui figure a
Tannexe 27 du premier rapport de la Commission [Sj
1100]. Le paragraphe 10 de cette lettre, qui m'etait
destinee, se lit comme suit: "Conformement a la deuxieme partie, section B, paragraphe 1, de la resolution
(c'est-a-dire de la resolution du 13 aout), le Gouvernement de TInde, lorsqu'il aura ete informe que les forces
du Pakistan se seront retirees de TEtat de Jammu et
Cachemire, acceptera de retirer progressivement de
TEtat le gros de ses forces, selon les modalites a etablir
d'accord avec la commission. Les Hauts Commandements respectifs et la commission prendront les mesures
necessaires pour synchroniser le retrait des forces
armees des deux Gouvernements"

Under paragraph 4 of the resolution of 5 January
1949 [S/1196, paragraph 15] the Plebiscite Administrator was authorized to determine the final disposal, on
the one hand, of the Indian forces remaining in the
State after the withdrawal of the bulk of the Indian

Le paragraphe 4 de la resolution du 5 Janvier 1949
[S/1196, paragraphe 15] autorise Tadministrateur
du plebiscite a fixer les modalites du retrait definitif
des forces indiennes qui seront restees sur le territoire de Jammu et Cachemire apres le retrait du gros
34

forces, the Maharaja's State forces and the State
Militia and, on the other, the final disposal of the Azad
Kashmir forces, having due regard to the security of
the State and the freedom of the plebiscite.

des forces armees de TInde, des forces armees du
Maharadjah et de la milice nationale d'une part, et des
forces du Cachemire azad d'autre part, compte etant
dument tenu des conditions necessaires a la securite
de TEtat et a la liberte du plebiscite.

I think I had better draw the attention of the Council
to the actual paragraph in the resolution. The first withdrawals were to take place during the truce stage,
then after the truce stage and the plebiscite stage, these
final disposals were to take place. I shall draw the attention of the Council to the particular paragraph so that
members will be able to appreciate what was then
intended. I emphasize this because yesterday the representative of India stated that the Commission's proposal did not visualize any reduction in the State forces
or in the State Militia. I was rather surprised. Perhaps
it was due to an oversight, but this is the paragraph
dealing with the whole of this- question. It is contained
in sub-paragraph 4 (a). It reads as follows:

Je crois devoir attirer l'attention du Conseil sur le
texte meme de ce paragraphe de la resolution. Les
premieres troupes devaient etre retirees pendant la
treve; puis, apres cette periode de treve et apres les
operations de plebiscite, les dernieres troupes restant
sur le territoire devaient etre retirees. J'attire l'attention des membres du Conseil sur ce paragraphe pour
qu'ils puissent se rendre compte des intentions veritables des auteurs de ce texte. Si j'y insiste tenement,
c'est parce que le representant de TInde a declare
hier que la proposition de la commission n'envisageait
pas la reduction des forces armees de TEtat ou de la
milice nationale. J'ai eprouve quelque surprise a entendre cette declaration. Peut-etre n'etait-elle due qu'a
une erreur. Quoi qu'il en soit, voici le texte du paragraphe qui traite de Tensemble de cette question. II
s'agit de Talinea a du paragraphe 4, qui se lit comme
suit:

"After implementation of parts I and II of the Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948, and when the
Commission is satisfied that peaceful conditions have
been restored in the State, the Commission and the
Plebiscite Administrator will determine in consultation
with the Government of India the final disposal of
Indian and State armed forces, such a disposal to be
with due regard to the security of the State and the
freedom of the plebiscite."

"Lorsque les mesures prevues dans les premiere et
deuxieme parties de la resolution adoptee par la commission le 13 aout 1948 auront ete executees et lorsque la commission estimera que la paix et Tordre
public ont ete retablis dans TEtat, ladite commission
et Tadministrateur du plebiscite fixeront, en consultation avec le Gouvernement de TInde, les modalites du
retrait definitif des forces armees de TInde et de TEtat
de Jammu et Cachemire, apres avoir dument tenu
compte des conditions necessaires a la securite de TEtat
et a la liberte du plebiscite."

That was with regard to the Indian-occupied portion.
Sub-paragraph 4 (b) deals with the Azad Kashmir
side:

Ce texte se rapporte a la partie occupee par TInde.
Quant au territoire occupe par les forces du Cachemire azad, il en est question a Talinea b du paragraphe 4 :

"(b) As regards the territory referred to in section
A, paragraph 2 of part II of the resolution of 13 August,
final disposal of the armed forces in that territory will
be determined by the Commission and the Plebiscite
Administrator in consultation with the local authorities."

"b) Le retrait definitif des forces armees cantonnees
sur le territoire, dont il est question au paragraphe 2
de la section A de la deuxieme partie de la resolution
du 13 aout, sera determine par la commission et
Tadministrateur du plebiscite agissant de concert avec
les autorites locales."

That was the scheme that was established by these
two resolutions. There is nothing imperfect there;
there is no loophole. The whole thing, the whole demilitarization, has been taken care of.

Tel etait done le plan qu'etablissaient ces deux resolutions. II ne contenait aucune imperfection, ni aucune
echappatoire. II prevoyait Tensemble des mesures a
prendre afin d'assurer une demilitarisation totale.

There were two stages during the truce. There was
the final disposal during the plebiscite stage. During the
truce the tribesmen were to withdraw; Pakistan na: tionals who were fighting were to withdraw. They have
; already withdrawn; that is over. Then the Pakistan
Army was to begin its withdrawal. When this withdrawal had begun, the Indian Army was to begin the
withdrawal of the bulk of its forces, this bulk to be
determined with the Commission, in certain stages, and
so on. That was to happen during the truce stage. Then,
during the plebiscite stage, there was the final disposal
of the remaining Indian forces and the State armed
forces of whatever description, on the Indian-occupied

II devait y avoir deux etapes pendant la treve. Puis
le retrait final des troupes devait s'effectuer pendant
la periode de plebiscite. Les membres des tribus et les
ressortissants pakistanais qui avaient pris part aux
combats devaient etre retires pendant la treve. Cela a
ete fait et cette etape est terminee. L'evacuation de
Tarmee pakistanaise devait commencer pendant Tetape
suivante. Mais des le debut de cette evacuation, Tarmee
indienne devait, elle aussi, commencer a retirer le
gros de ses forces, les modalites de ce retrait devant
etre determinees en accord avec la commission, qui
indiquerait egalement ce qu'on devrait entendre par
"le gros des forces" Tout cela devait se produire
35

side of Kashmir, and of the Azad Kashmir forces, on
the Azad side.

pendant la periode de treve. Puis, pendant le plebiscite, on devait proceder au retrait definitif des forces
indiennes et de toutes les forces armees de TEtat qui
se trouvaient dans la partie du Cachemire occupee par
TInde, et de toutes les forces du Cachemire azad du
cote adverse.

There is no ambiguity; there is no loophole; there
is no lacuna. The scheme with regard to demilitarization
is complete, and it was accepted both by the Government
of India and by the Government of Pakistan.

II n'y a done aucune ambiguite, aucune echappatoire,
aucune lacune dans ce systeme. Le plan relatif a la
demilitarisation est complet et il a ete accepte par le
Gouvernement de TInde aussi bien que par celui du
Pakistan.

A further feature of this resolution of 5 January
1949 was that it made provision, after the demilitarization of the State, for the carrying through of the
arrangements for the holding of a plebiscite. For that
purpose, the Commission's resolution of 5 January provided for the appointment of a plebiscite administrator
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, which
plebiscite administrator was to be a man of high international standing commanding general confidence,
and he was to have all the powers which he considered
necessary to hold a free and impartial plebiscite.

Une autre caracteristique de la resolution du 5 Janvier 1949 est qu'elle prevoit que des mesures seront
prises pour organiser un plebiscite une fois que TEtat
aura ete demilitarise. Dans ce but, la resolution de la
commission, adoptee le 5 Janvier, stipule que le Secretaire general des Nations Unies nommera un administrateur du plebiscite, en le choisissant parmi les personnalites de reputation internationale qui commandent le respect et que cet administrates devra disposer
de tous pouvoirs necessaires pour que les operations de
plebiscite soient fibres et impartiales.

The representative of India made reference to the
phraseology of that paragraph in one connexion. I will
come to this later on.

Le representant de TInde a fait une fois allusion a
la redaction de ce paragraphe. Je reviendrai la-dessus.

The main conditions under which the plebiscite
would be held were clearly laid down. From this it
will be perceived that although the resolution was accepted by the Pakistan Government, the Pakistan Government, in accepting this composite resolution, had
had to give up one of the main guarantees of a free
and impartial plebiscite in its anxiety to bring about
a settlement of this problem in a peaceful manner,
and that was that both the draft resolution of 6 February
[S/667] and the Security Council resolution of 21
April [S/726] had provided for the setting up of an
impartial administration in Kashmir, or a coalition of
the two administrations which would neutralize any
interference with the population in the choice which
they were to make in the plebiscite. This resolution got
away from that.

Les conditions principales qui devaient regir le plebiscite etaient clairement definies. On comprendra done
que, tout en acceptant cette resolution composite, le
Gouvernement du Pakistan a du renoncer, par suite
de son extreme desir d'aboutir a un reglement pacifique
du probleme, a Tune des garanties principales d'un
plebiscite fibre et impartial. Je veux parler des dispositions relatives a Tetablissement d'une administration
impartiale dans le Cachemire, prevue a la fois dans
le projet de resolution du 6 fevrier [S/667] et dans la
resolution adoptee par le Conseil le 21 avril [S/726], ou
encore d'une autorite administrative de coalition, composed de membres des deux administrations interessees,
qui neutraliserait toute intervention susceptible d'empecher la population de s'exprimer. La nouvelle resolution laisse de cote cette question.

I shall now make one comment on that aspect here,
although I shall have to dwell a little more on it later.
The representative of India said that the integrity of a
State must be maintained. There should not be two
authorities. There is no escape from the position that
one alternative was to have one authority for the whole
of the State, and if there is one authority for the whole
of the State, that authority must be acceptable to the
people of the State. That is what the Security Council
tried to bring about — an impartial administration "as
free from the smell of brimstone", as Mr. Austin put
it, as any two Governments can make it, as impartial
and as perfect as possible: Or, as the resolution said,
there must be a coalition Government in which both
States would be represented. Nominees of both the National Conference and the Muslim Conference would
sit in such a Government.

Je vais maintenant faire une observation a ce sujet,
auquel je reviendrai plus tard pour en parler plus
longuement. Le representant de TInde a dit que Tintegrite
d'un Etat doit etre maintenue. A son sens, il ne devrait
pas y avoir deux autorites. II est vrai qu'une solution
consiste a soumettre tout TEtat a une seule autorite.
Mais, s'il n'y a qu'une autorite pour Tensemble de
TEtat, il faut que la population la trouve acceptable.
C'est ce que le Conseil de securite a cherche a faire
en etablissant une administration "reconnue comme ne
sentant pas le soufre" pour faire usage d'une expression
de M. Austin, une administration aussi impartiale que
deux Gouvernements peuvent Tinstituer, bref, une
autorite aussi parfaite que possible. L'autre solution
consiste a avoir un gouvernement de coalition ou les
deux Etats seraient representes. La resolution envisage egalement cette solution. Des hommes choisis
par la Conference nationale et la Conference musulmane feraient partie de ce gouvernement.

The Government of India, however, would not have
that. What is to be done if it will not have an im-

Mais le Gouvernement de TInde n'a pas voulu accepter cette solution. Que peut-on faire s'il ne veut pas
36

partial administration? Does it expect either the Pakistan Government to agree, or the Security Council
to suggest, that the Government responsible for this
kind of "Belsen poster" should be accepted by Pakistan
and by the Azad Kashmir people as the authority which
should administer the whole of this State, as one unit,
for the purpose of holding a free and impartial
plebiscite? If that is expected it cannot be achieved.
Therefore, either India must agree to an impartial administration for the whole of the State — we have never
objected to this, but are willing and quite certain that
we could persuade the Azad Kashmir people to agree
— or, if it will not accept that, there is no escape from
the position that the Abdullah administration must continue to exercise authority on its side of the ceasefire line, and that the present local authorities, as they
, have been described out of deference to India's susceptibilities with regard to the expression "Azad Kashmir
'. Government", must continue to exercise authority on
'. the other side of the cease-fire line. How else can the
' integrity of the State be maintained? That was clearly
' recognized by the Government of India when it accepted these resolutions, as further consideration of the
clarifications given by the Commission will show.

avoir d'administration impartiale? S'attend-il a ce que
le Gouvernement du Pakistan accepte ou a ce que le
Conseil de securite propose que le Pakistan et le peuple
du Cachemire azad acceptent, comme l'autorite chargee
d'administrer Tensemble de TEtat et de veiller a la
mise en ceuvre d'un plebiscite libre et impartial, le
Gouvernement meme qui s'est rendu coupable de la
propagande par affiches que je vous ai signalee? Si
c'est la ce qu'on desire, on n'y parviendra pas. II
faudra done que TInde accepte une administration
impartiale pour Tensemble de TEtat — nous ne nous y
sommes, pour notre part, jamais opposes et nous
sommes, au contraire, tout disposes a persuader la
population du Cachemire azad d'accepter cette solution; nous sommes certains d'y reussir — sinon, au
cas ou TInde se refuserait a accepter cette solution,
on ne pourrait que laisser a Tadministration d'Abdullah
Texercice de son autorite d'un cote de la ligne de
demarcation et laisser aux autorites locales (comme
elles ont ete denommees par deference pour les susceptibilites de TInde en ce qui concerne Texpression
"Gouvernement du Cachemire azad") Texercice de
l'autorite de Tautre cote de ladite ligne de demarcation.
On se demande de quelle autre faqon Tintegrite de
TEtat pourrait etre preservee. Le Gouvernement de
TInde s'est parfaitement rendu compte de tout ceci
lorsqu'il a accepte les resolutions, comme l'examen des
precisions donnees par la commission le prouvera.

The Government of India succeeded in persuading
I the Commission to give up any attempt to set up one
;'. impartial administration or a coalition to administer
;. the whole of the State together. It was, in that way,
. able to destroy one of the chief guarantees of a free
." and impartial plebiscite. The Security Council had
•- sought to build those conditions on two main pillars:
. a free and impartial plebiscite and demilitarization of
j the State. Then the Government of India made that
, difficult. Of course, it can be said on the surface, "But
this situation is balanced, with Abdullah's administra-• tion on the one side and the Azad Kashmir administra•\ tion and the local people on the other." But it is not
v balanced. It is not balanced for the reason that almost
two-thirds of the population is under the control of
Abdullah's Government, with only one-third on the
„ other side. The area differs, but the area on the other
,,,, side comprises high mountainous valleys, very sparsely
•occupied, with only a small sector thickly populated.
;,. There are two-thirds of the population on one side
" and one-third on the other. There is no balance. Nevertheless, in order to bring about a peaceful settlement,
;,we accepted these conditions. The only guarantee now
''„ left is that the Plebiscite Administrator shall have and
"exercise such powers as he considers necessary for
guaranteeing a free and impartial plebiscite. We are
!
placing our trust in that so far as the administration
'side is concerned, and so far as interference with the
^freedom and impartiality of the plebiscite is concerned.
But it is absolutely essential that there should be
".complete demilitarization before the people can be
'expected to record their votes freely in this matter,
8
which has aroused passions both in Kashmir and
-'outside, and which has become a tug-of-war between
"the different parties in Kashmir and between India
and Pakistan themselves. And India's attempt throughout has been to get rid of the demilitarization provisions

Le Gouvernement de TInde a reussi a convaincre la
commission d'abandonner toute tentative pour creer
une administration impartiale ou une coalition chargee
d'administrer Tensemble de TEtat. De cette faqon, le
Gouvernement de TInde a pu detruire Tune des garanties essentielles d'un plebiscite libre et impartial. Le
Conseil de securite s'etait efforce d'etablir les conditions
d'une consultation populaire sur deux bases essentielles : un plebiscite libre et impartial et la demilitarisation du pays. Par la suite, le Gouvernement de TInde
a rendu difficile la realisation de ces deux conditions.
Certes, on pourrait dire a premiere vue: "Mais Tequilibre est assure du fait qu'il y a, d'une part, Tadministration d'Abdullah, et, d'autre part, Tadministration du
Cachemire azad avec la population locale". En fait,
Tequilibre n'est pas assure. II ne Test pas parce que
pres des deux tiers de la population sont sous le controle du Gouvernement d'Abdullah et le tiers seulement sous Tautre administration. Les chiffres ne se
rapportent pas a la superficie car Tune des zones ne
comprend que de hautes vallees montagneuses, tres
peu peuplees et un seul petit secteur a densite elevee.
II y a ainsi deux tiers de la population d'un cote et
un tiers de Tautre. L'equilibre n'est done pas assure.
Neanmoins, afin de permettre un reglement pacifique,
nous avons accepte ces conditions. La seule garantie
qui nous reste est que Tadministrateur de pleebiscite
possedera et exercera les pouvoirs necessaires pour
assurer un plebiscite libre et impartial. C'est la notre
seul espoir pour tout ce qui concerne Tadministration,
la liberte et Timpartialite du plebiscite. Mais il est
absolument essentiel qu'une demilitarisation complete
intervienne avant qu'on puisse esperer que la population se prononcera librement sur cette question qui a
souleve les passions tant au Cachemire qu'a Texterieur
et qui est devenue un motif de discorde entre les
differents partis du Cachemire et entre TInde et le

37

the meeting and continue it at 3 p.m. tomorrow if the
Council agrees.

rons nous reunir a nouveau demain a 15 heures, si les
membres du Conseil n'y voient pas d'objection.

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA K H A N (Pakistan): As
the President wishes, but I do want to say this. It is
possible that, like everyone else, I am liable to make
mistakes and fall into errors. If the representative of
India will let me know in what respect I have either
misquoted him or misunderstood him, if he chooses to
do so without in any way detracting from the reply
which he proposes to make later on to the points
I have laid before the Security Council, I shall make
whatever amends it may be within my power to make
to correct my misrepresentation of his arguments
wherever I may have fallen into error.

Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA K H A N (Pakistan) (traduit de Vanglais): Comme il plaira au President, mais
je tiens a dire ceci. Je peux, comme tout le monde
commettre des erreurs. Si le representant de TInde
veut bien me faire savoir a quel propos je Tai mai
compris ou ai mai cite ses paroles, s'il veut bien le
faire sans que cela doive nuire d'aucune faqon a la
reponse qu'il se propose de faire ulterieurement aux
arguments que j'ai exposes au Conseil de securite, je
ferai toutes rectifications en mon pouvoir afin de
retablir Texactitude de ses declarations toutes les fois
ou j'aurai pu me tromper.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
meeting will continue tomorrow at 3 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'espagnol): La seance
sera reprise demain a 15 heures.

The

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 heures.

40

Printed in U.S.A.

Sales Price: 40 cents

38230-April 193^
