THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

st
MEETING:

21 DECEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . ... .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12257), . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . . , . . . ,

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l981)

S/PV,lBXl

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~cppletnents of the Officid Records of the Secwity Coumil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are pub!ished in yearly volumes of Resolutiom NIIC/
Decisions of the Security Coutxil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

1981st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 21 December 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

M. Ion DATCU

(Romania).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l981)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Lesotho to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12257)
The meeting WIS crrlled to order at II .I0 u.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Lesotho to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/12257)

1, The PRESIDENT
(itlterprc’ttrtiorl ji-om Frenc*h):
I should like to draw the Security Council’s attention
to the relevant Council documents dealing with the
item on the agenda. In addition to the document
cited in the agt?nda, the President has received the
following communications
on this matter: a letter
dated 12 November 1976 from the representative of
the Libyan Arab Republic [S//2227]; and a letter dated
16 November from the representative of South Africa
[S//223/].

I should also like to inform the members of, the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Lesotho and Madagascar in which they
request to be invited to take part in the debate.

2.

3. Consequently, if there is no objection, I propose,
pursuant to the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council, to invite the representatives to whom I

have just referred to take part in the discussions
without the right to vote.
At the imitntion
qf the President, Mr.
(Lesotho) took n piece of the Cmrrlcil tflble.

Molrrpo

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtntiorr frunl Frctr~~h):
I invite the representative of Madagascar to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
he wishes to speak.

5. The PRESIDENT
(irlterprettrtiou ,fiom Frer~c-/I):
The Security Council will now proceed to consider
the item on its agenda.
6. The first speaker is Mr. Charles Molapo, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho. I should like
to welcome him in our midst and I call upon him to
speak.
7. Mr. MOLAPO (Lesotho): Mr. President, 1 wish
toexpress to you and through you to the other members
of the Council, my sincere gratitude for this opportunity to address the Council on an issue which is of
great importance to my country, It is particularly
gratifying to note that the Council is considering
this topic under the presidency of a representative
of a country with w-hich Lesotho enjoys very cordial,
friendly and diplomatic relations. I am more than
confident that you will guide our deliberations to a
successful and fruitful conclusion.
8. As thsis august Council assembles here today,, a
quarter million of my people are in a state of siege.
These people are being held hostage by South Africa
in an attempt to coerce Lesotho to accord recognition
to the bantustan Transkei. Since 26 October 1976.
three border posts between Lesotho and South Africa
have been unilaterally closed by the South African
Government. These are Tele Bridge, Qacha’s Nek and
Ramats’eliso’s
Gate. The South African Government
by telex acknowledged that the border was closed. It
‘stated:
“Pretoria
has the honour to state that since
Transkei
became independent
on 26 October,

South Africa has no control over the Transkei
border posts at Tele Bridge, Qacha’s Nek and
Ramats’eliso’s
Gate. Representations
in respect of
the three must be made to the Transkei Government.”

uncertain terms the racist apartheid
policies of the
South African Government. We have been resolutely
opposed, and we are still opposed, to a system based
on the myth of white superiority, a system that has
been formulated without any pretence of consultation
with the people it affects most-the
majority of the
African people of South Africa-a system which, in
desperation, unleashes its most sophisticated guns
and weapons and brutally murders innocent, defenceless school children in cold blood and a system which
creates bantustans and encircles Lesotho and other
neighbouring independent African States with those
bantustans with the intention of complicating the
already complex problems of those countries and of
diverting the world’s attention or focus from the real
issues of majority rule in South Africa, racial discrimination and npnrtheid.

9. It is common knowledge that when the National
Party of white South Africa took power in 1948, the
white minority Government
embarked upon a programme of separating
its African citizens and,
according to its manifesto,
proceeded, to develop
them apart and under the guidance of the Europeans.
This theory was developed further by Verwoerd, the
architect of bantustans, when he stated in 1961 that,
in the long run, “the Bantu will be able to develop
into separate Bantu states”. He added: “This is a form
of fragmentation which we would not have liked, if we
were able to avoid it. In the light of the pressure being
exerted on South Africa, there is, however, no doubt
that eventually this will have to be done”. Thus
South Africa started to create impoverished
miniStates and forcibly to move indigenous
African
people from the prosperous, well-developed areas into
the barren so-called homelands, African reserves. This
is a ploy by the white racist minority Government to
rid itself of the African majority in the hope of having
South Africa remain with a majority of whites in a large,
rich, developed “whitestan”.

14. To us, South Africa belongs to all South Africans
regardless of their race, colour or creed, and my
Government will not acquiesce in any scheme which
violates the territorial integrity of South Africa by
balkanizing it into so-called independent tribal homelands, without the consent of the majority of the
people of South Africa. The so-called independence of
Transkei imposed on a people by the white racists
of South Africa is nothing but one step in the perpetration of the abhorrent and inhuman racist policies
of South Africa. It follows, therefore, that recognition
of the independent Transkei would be not only an
approval of the racist npnrtheid
policies of South
Africa but also an actual and active participation
in the oppression of the black majority of South Africa
and in their condemnation to slavery and the denial
of their basic human rights.

10. As I stated before the General Assembly on
13 October 1976,l the policy of bantustanization
and
balkanization of South Africa is so lacking in sincerity,
so devoid of any rational justification
and so patently
racist in conception that it does not provide any basis
for resolving the question of apartheid. The homeland
areas constitute only 13 per cent of the land mass of
South Africa-an example of the twisted white South
African logic, when 87 per cent of the population can be
entitled to only 13 per cent of the land.

15. We therefore commend the wise decision of
freedom-loving
States-both
at the level of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and that of the
non-aligned countries, and now at the level of the
United Nations-not
to accord any recognition to the
so-called independent Transkei, thus registering their
firm opposition to and rejection of the nefarious
opwtkeid
acts of the Pretoria Administration.
Basing
itself on the lofty principles and ideals of the United
Nations and our abhorrence of the racist apartheid
policies, and in fulfilment of its obligations under the
Charter and resolutions of the United Nations, the
Lesotho Government took a firm and decisive stand
and refused to recognize the Transkei.

11, The homelands are purportedly based on ethnic
criteria, and yet the so-called independent Transkei,
supposedly a Xhosa homeland,
includes territories
traditionally
occupied by Basotho and other ethnic
groups, Africans are being herded there without
regard to the places of their real homes. Yet another
irony and absurdity of the system is that it applies to
African citizens of South Africa only, when, in fact, the
whites should also be separated into “Germanstans”,
“Frenchstans”
and “Boerstans”.
12. Under the system, all Africans would lose their
citizenship rights and consequential rights in rich South
Africa but remain a secure source of cheap labour
for the white South African economy. The system
enslaves, degrades, debases and dehumanizes the
black man and ultimately
makes him a foreigner in
his own motherland.

16. The geopolitical situation of Lesotho has always
presented us with problems of such magnitude that
ours is a life of hard choices. For us, ~rpcrrthei~l is a
day-to-day reality, a nightmare which hauntsbus. As
my Prime Minister stated at the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Colombo in August 1976, living
side by side with South Africa necessitates a constant
review of our policies and continual adjustment to
new situations. Lesotho, a small, mountainous landlocked African State, is surrounded by a rich devel-

13. Since our independence more than 10 years ago,
the Government
and the people of Lesotho have
‘unequivocally
and categorically
condemned in no
2

oped country dominated by a white racist minority
regimen which has turned oppression of the black
man into a day-to-day policy.

rest of the country. The Government has had to rely
on a rudimentary
and expensive air transport service
consisting of seven six-seater Cessna pla.nes. It is
significant to mention that that’area produces the bulk
of our main exports, namely, livestock, wool and
mohair. It follows, therefore, that that area *relied
upon the three now closed border posts for purposes
of export and import of goods and services and
movement of persons.

17. As I stated before the General Assembly on
13 October,’ we have an outstanding border problem
with South Africa. We have consistently pointed out
that large tracts of land in the South African provinces
of the Free State, Natal and Cape Province rightfully belong to the Basotho nation. The South African
Government proposed the establishment of a joint
boundary commission and, when we accepted, they
restricted the terms of reference of the commission
to the Cape Province on’ly. We argued that the
commission
should deal with all sectors of the
boundary question, .and South Africa replied by
unilaterally terminating the discussions. It is worth
while to note that the South African Government
has ceded large tracts of land in dispute to the so-called
independent Transkei. This has further complicated the
already difficult border problems on our south-eastern
border with South Africa. Again, for this problem,
the responsibility is squarely on the shoulders of South
Africa.

21. The closure of the border posts means that the
Lesotho Government
has got to find an alternative
route for goods and services to and from this area,
including the movement of labourers to and from
South Africa. These added costs and the magnitude
of the exercise are obviously beyond our means.
Failure to provide the affected quarter million of our
people with the necessary food, clothing and medical
services, failure to maintain the flow of trade into
and out of the affected area, and, indeed, failure to
provide alternative
employment for the people who
cannot now go to the mines, factories and farms of
South Africa, not only will adversely affect and disrupt
our economy but will cause untold social and political
difficulties.

18. Lesotho’s economy is highly interdependent with
that of South Africa. Approximately
45 per cent
of the male labour force aged 17 to 45 years is employed
in South African mines, factories and farms. Most of
our exports go to South Africa and most of our imports
come from South Africa. Most important of all, we
can exercise our right of transit and free access to
and from the sea only through South Africa.

22. It is common knowledge that the closure of the
border was meant to constitute pressure on Lesotho
because of our refusal to recognize Transkei. Indeed,
we ,are well aware that this is but a step in a series of
steps to be taken by South Africa to put pressure on
us to recognize the so-called independence ofTranskei.
23. As I have stated before, we shall not be cowed;
the people of Lesotho have never succumbed and
shall never succumb to blackmail and extortion. Our
appeal to the international
community is for support
in a situation which we view as transient and ephemeral. It is our firm belief that the struggle against
injustice towards and oppression of the black people
of South Africa will culminate in majority rule. Lesotho
has been turned into a confrontation State and we
shall shoulder our responsibilities to the very bitter
end.

19. It is the policy of the Lesotho Government to
extricate itself from excessive economic dependence
on South Africa. But we are realistic in this approach,
as we are well aware that there is need for accommodation and economic co-operation and not confrontation or economic isolation. In this spirit, Lesotho,
together with neighbouring countries, concluded a
Customs Union Agreement with South Africa,. That
Agreement was augmented by the Labour Agreement,
which was signed by Lesotho and South Africa in
1973. Those two Agreements govern the day-to-day
economic relations between our two countries and,
above all, they specifically. provide that 15 named
border posts shall remain open in order to allow for
the free flow of goods and free movement of persons
between Lesotho and South Africa. Three of the border
posts I have just referred to lie between Lesotho and
that part of South Africa called Transkei and serve
the south-eastern mountain area of Lesotho.

24. On learning of the border closure, my Government took immediate steps to impress upon the South
African Government that closure of the three border
posts was not only in violation of international
law
and the maintainance
of friendly relations amongst
States, but in violation of the Customs Union Agreement and the Labour Agreement. We argued that the
closure not only was disrupting the free flow of goods
and free movement of persons between our two countries, but was a denial of our transit rights and our
rights of access to the sea in respect of that arearights which are recognized and which form one of the
cardinal principles
of international
customary and
conventional law, rights which we mutually translated
into our Customs Union Agreement. My ,Government
reminded the South African Government that the
closure will result in a loss in our share of the Customs

20. The closure.of those three border posts has had
dire and profound consequences on our politicoeconomic life. The area affected is almost cut off from
the rest of the country because of the mountainous
terrain that rises to an altitude of 11,500 feet above sea
level. Up to now it has not been possible for the
Lesotho Government,
given its meagre economic
resources, to build roads linking that area with the
3

borders are often the life-blood of the country, the
only meaningful expression and symbol of its SOVereignty. The southern African ,situation is already
explosive enough because of the existense of the
die-hard racist minority regimes that are clinging to a
path dedicated to the destruction of our region.
As we have already stated, we cannot allow a few
selfish white minorities in the region to create
situations that threaten or are likely to threaten international peace and security.

Union revenue, with consequential adverse effects on
our budget. We reiterated our right to exercise one
of the basic attributes of sovereignty, namely, to
accord recognition to States that we feel qualify for
recognition.
25. At first, South Africa undertook to look into the
matter, but later the South African Government, by
the telex message I have already referred to, advised
the Lesotho Government to negotiate the reopening
of the border with the Government of the so-called
independent Transkei.
The Lesotho Government
refused and refuses to have anything to do with
Transkei, and we cannot be pressured into entering
into bilateral negotiations with Transkei, a step that
would be tantamount to recognizing the homeland’s
independence
and thereby giving legitimacy
to
upartheitl. So far as Lesotho is concerned, the onus is
on South Africa, a country with which we have
dealings and specific agreements, to open the border
posts. It is because of this indifference and lack of
co-operation by the South African Government that
my Government has resolved to take the matter up in
the Security Council.

29. My Government will do all in its power to prevent
incidents that are likely to lead to the deterioration
of an already explosive situation in the affected
border areas. My Government firmly believes that the
measures that we have just outlined and the adoption
of a positive and constructive resolution by the Council
will go a long way towards reaffirming and uplifting
the cardinal principles of the Charter and, indeed,
towards avoiding a possible threat to international
peace and security in our region.
30. The PRESIDENT
(intqwettrtion
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

26. In the interest of extricating itself from this
position of a hostage, my Government has committed
its efforts to a gigantic roads programme to open
up its mountain areas and link them with the rest of
the country. Feasibility studies have already been
concluded, and it is estimated that the building of
these roads will cost about 60 million rand or $US
70 million. I wish to mention that my Government
had intended to implement this programme within
the next five years of our development, but the closure
of the border has compelled us to put it into effect
now. With the assistance and co-operation of the
friendly and freedom-loving countries and the United
Nations and other international
organizations,
my
Government hopes to raise the necessary finances
for the programme. As a. short-term and immediate
measure, my Government intends to improve the
existing road tracks to the mountain area, to set up
mechanical repair units’ and storage facilities at strategic points in the mountain area, to procure heavy
vehicles for transport of food and clothing, and to
improve existing airstrips and add airstrips to handle
medium-sized aircraft to airlift supplies to the areas
affected. We have estimated the cost of these shortterm measures to be in the region of $10 million and
$12 million-a
very small figure by world standards.

31. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar)(i,lterp~etatio,l
fro/n French): In the absence of its Chairman, I
should like on behalf of the Group of African States
to thank all the members of the Council for allowing
us to participate in this discussion. Mr. President,
we are aware of your real interest in everything
that affects Africa; indeed, we have been aware of it
for some time. Your colleagues in the African Group
have always highly appreciated the relations of confidence you have maintained with them. Finally, the
fact that your country, Romania, has always acted as
a real friend of Africa gives us reason to hope that
these deliberations of the Council will continue in the
best possible atmosphere. The African Group wishes
again to assure you of its brotherly confidence in you.
32. A new aspect of the climate of violence characteristic of political relations in southern Africa is today
before the Security Council,’ which has this year
already discussed complaints against thesouth African
racist regime by Angola and Zambia, quite apart
from the illegal occupation of Namibia, the related
problem of Zimbabwe and in particular the bloody
events which have surrounded the reawakening of a
revolutionary spirit among the people of Azania.

27. My Government is firmly committed to living
harmoniously with neighbouring States. We firmly
believe that a positive resolution from the Council will
go a long way towards improving the general welfare
and friendly relations in our region, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

33. The closure on 26 October last of the frontier
between South Africa and southern Lesotho, which
adjoins the Transkei, undoubtedly ‘constitutes a new
blow. typical of the predilection of South Africa for
the violent methods to which it always resorts, whether
it is attempting to maintain inside the country a
fundamentally unjust order or to impose its will on
the outer world which has hitherto been powerless
to react effectively to its numerous provocations.

28. More often than not, closingthe borders of a landlocked country is tantamount to an act of aggression,
because it is more than ‘a blockade in that these
4

34. The facts of which the Government of Lesotho
is complaining fall into the same category as acts of
blackmail
and open aggression directed against
neighbouring independent States in order to force
them to renounce their support for the liberation
movements and thus to abandon their ‘opposition to
colonial domination and apartheid.
In its resolution
31/6 A, adopted on the very day of the illegal proclamation of the alleged independence of Transkei, the
General Assembly condemned that illegal act, just
as the Assembly condemned apnrtheid,
of which it
represents the most virulent form. The United Nations
therefore has refused to sanction that entity and has
recommended that its Members should not recognize it.

its budgetary capacities to non-programmed operations
that the South Africans can hope to arouse sympathy
in the international
community for the cause of the
racist minority,
Nor can they make new friends by
disrupting the economic life or social services of a
neighbouring
country. There is no doubt that the
leaders of Pretoria have committed a very grave
error of judgement
by calculating that, as a landlocked country completely
surrounded by South
African territory, Lesotho would be more malleable
than any other country and more likely to be induced
to open a breach in the international quarantine that
has been decreed against the Transkei.
40. There can be no doubt that by forcing Lesotho
to pay a very high price for its geographical position,
which is not a particularly enviable one, South Africa
has chosen the worst possible method to advance an
illegitimate cause that has already been condemned by
the United Nations. Racial segregation and the policy
of bantustanization
have not become more acceptable
to the inhabitants of Lesotho. For them, as for us,
those policies can only appear more reprehensible
and more threatening-to
such an extent that the
alleged independence
of Transkei and its present
ramifications
give a new dimension to the whole
question of apartheid.

35. Because we stood behind that unanimous
decision, which accorded with decisions taken by OAU
and the fifth summit Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries, Lesotho is at present the victim of pressure tactics which are imperilling the lives of a very
important segment of its population. The two districts
affected by South Africa’s decision contain no fewer
than 238,000 inhabitants who have been cut off from
their national territory because of the peculiar
geographical configuration of Lesotho. They have also
been cut off from their traditional sources of food
and medical supplies. Representing one fifth of the
population, today they find it impossible to continue
their traditional economic activities because both
imports and exports are covered by a Customs Union
Agreement between the two countries, as are their
population movements, which are covered by a
Labour Agreement suspended since the unilateral
closure of the frontiers.

41. Relying on tribal leaders and venal politicians,
the leaders of Pretoria haye in effect proposed a different form of alienation and have provoked division
both inside the bantustans and elsewhere by favouring
the appearance of a new political class whose interests
would depend upon the maintenance of dport/n+l and
the evolution of the homeland into sham independence.

36. In this context, the, problem confronting us is
very clear. South Africa is still a party to the agreements I have mentioned; therefore it must fulfil all the
obligations incumbent upon it under their present
provisions, since their texts cannot be modified without
the prior agreement of Lesotho.

42. The dangers involved in such an evolution of
events are not limited to the bargain by which the
tribes concerned,
while remaining subject to the
repressive laws of trptrrtheid, would cease to belong
to South Africa, thus giving up their equitable share
of lands and mineral resources of the country. The
designs of the racist regime go further than that and
envisage that Africans can defend rrpclrtkid
against
other Africans in confrontations of the kind that have
previously been considered by the Security Council.
These dangers, which perhaps are not the only ones
which might flow directly from bantuslanization,
appear to us to be too serious for us not to voice our
disquiet concerning them and for us not to express our
sympathies with the present concerns of the Government of Lesotho.

37. In view of the flimsy and unacceptable excuses
it has adduced to shirk its obligations, South Africa
must be internationally forced to meet its obligations,
since contracts are, a law between the parties concerned. If it is anxious to re-establish at least a modicum
of its already highly ‘attenuated credibility, it must
pursue its interests by scrupulously carrying out its
conventional obligations instead of trying to create
artificial and contrived difficulties for the sovereign
Government of Lesotho in order to lead it to adopt
an attitude contrary to its options.

43. Therefore,
the decisions which the Council
should take at the outcome of the present debate
should, as we see it, be along the three follotiing
main lines.

38. The reaction of the General Assembly has proved
that there is a certain virtue in the cynical behaviour
of the racist regime of South Africa, whose extremism
has called forth only condemnation, opposition and
rejection.

44. First, they should contribute to strengthening
the position of those who form the overwhelming
majority in southern Africa, whp do not intend in
any way to give up their rights and their dignity,

39. It is not by depriving a Government whose
earnings are already limited or by forcing it to divert
5

even less to acquiesce in manoeuvres intended to
destroy their national unity and to jeopardize
the
territorial integrity of their countries, The latter are
those who are the genuine depositaries of national
legitimacy,
and our political commitment
to them
should not vary according to the whim of circumstances. As a corollary, we must constantly mark
our opposition to the Transkei, which would have
chosen a better way of making known its existence
by refusing to play a trump card of the South African
regimen, that of destroying the solidarity and unity
of Africans against racism, colonialism and imperialism
in southern Africa.

48; Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): It gives
my delegation great pleasure to welcome to the Council
and indeed to the United Nations they new representative of France, Mr. Leprette. In view of his great
experience both here at the United Nations and elsewhere, we are sure that he will make a valuable
contribution to our work in meeting our high responsibilities.
We wish Mr. Leprette all success and
contentment.
49. On the other hand, we regret the departure of
our esteemed colleague, Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden. As
I think all will agree, Mr. Rydbeck never failed to
impart a sense of dignity and high purpose to all our
deliberations and he has proved to be a wise and
skilful diplomat. His own persona1 contributions to
the work of the Organization and to that of the Council
run parallel to the contributions of his country to the
common ideals we hold. He will be missed here at the
United Nations, and we wish him all success in his
new post.

45: Secondly, once the legal and political responsibilities
of South Africa have been determined,
undoubtedly once again it will have to be condemned,
but in the context of the situation existing in the Council, we wonder whether it would not perhaps be
redundant to repeat once again the various appeals
which have been made by the General Assembly in
favour of sanctions against that country, whether
through economic
blockade,
an obligatory
arms
embargo or the ending of military co-operation and
relations
between banks and transnational
corporations, on the one hand, and the racist regime,
on the other.

50. Also, with the departure of Mr. Malik of the
Soviet Union we shall lose a strong and familiar
voice in the Security Council and the Genera1 Assembly
dedicated to the defence of oppressed peoples under
the colonial yoke, as well as to the defence of the
cause of peace and progress in the world. I direct to
him, through the Soviet delegation, our sincere wishes
and our congratulations on his new high position.
While we shall miss the presence and the valuable
contribution of Mr. Malik, we know that in his new
position he will continue to work for the cause of the
high ideals that motivate the Organization, and we
wish him success in all his endeavours. It is really a
happy coincidence that, at the very time when
Mr. Malik is assuming his new duties as ViceMinister in charge of African affairs, a very important
and significant development should have been achieved
in the relations between my country, the Libyan Arab
Republic, and our great friend and ally, the Soviet
Union, marked by the official visit of Colonel AlQadhafi, President of the Revolutionary
Command
Cotincil of the Libyan Arab Republic, to Moscow.
It is a pleasure for us Africans to see African affairs
in Moscow placed in the able, expert and dedicated
hands of a great son of the Soviet Union.

46. The preoccupation
that overrides all other
considerations, in our minds, is that justice should be
done to the people of Lesotho by re-establishing
peace and security, which under the Charter is the
responsibility of the Council to provide by taking all
measures it deems fit.
47. In this context-and
this is the point of my third
and last remark-the
highest priority should be given
to ensuring that Lesotho’s right of transit be respected
in all circumstances by South Africa. South Africa
must be forced to respect its contractual obligations
and to fulfil all the norms of international
relations
relating to the preservation of international
peace
and security; but, above all, the international community must help Lesotho to improve its internal means
of communication
so that a permanent link can be
created between the various parts of the territory,
thus reducing its vulnerability to such acts of blackmail
as are now being considered by the Council. This is
a duty which is incumbent upon us all if we want
Lesotho to be able to continue to play its part in the
policy of opposition to rrpnrtheid, which is the very
heart of the matter. The Charter contains provisions
concerning the granting of assistance to those countries that find themselves in economic difficulties as a
result of measures decreed by the Organization. The
particular case we are considering now is fully in
accordance with the situations covered in Article 50,
and it would be only fair to give a favourable response
to the requests which have been made by the delegation of Lesotho, through the Foreign Minister of
that country.’

5 1. The departure of another distinguished colleague,
Mr. Huang Hua of China, is deeply felt by my delegation. We representatives of the third world will lose
another powerful and sincere friend and ally, but we
are confident that Mr. Huang Hua in his new post as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China will continue
his sincere efforts in the service of peace, progress and
liberation in the world. Through the Chinese delegation, I should like to convey to him our sincere
sentiments and congratulations.
52. It is my pleasure and privilege also to congratulate our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, upon
his re-election to his lofty position. In this context, it
6

is. appropriate to quote from a telegram sent by
Mr. Treiki, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the
Libyan Arab Republic, to the Secretary-General.
Mr. Treiki said:

of that action taken by the racist rkgime of South
Africa agains! Lesotho. Also, the African Group
maintained
that the international community must
assume ,its responsibility
to give all the support
required by Lesotho to ensure its existence .and the
welfare of its people, and I have the honour today to
join my colleague, the representative of Madagascar,
in reiterating the position of the Group of African
States.

“I take pleasure in extending to you my most
sincere congratulations
and best wishes on the
occasion of your re-election to the position of
Secretary-General of the United Nations. We are
certain that, as a result of this expression of
confidence in you, you will even further increase
the efforts and contributions that you have made
during your tenure of this position in the past.
The Libyan Arab Republic assures you that it will
support you in all your efforts in the cause of
maintaining the peace, security and stability of the
world and in the ensuring of freedom and independence for those peoples who are still struggling
under the yoke of colonialism and for those nations
whose rights have been suppressed by the racist
establishment. We wish you all contentment and
success. Peace be with you.”

57. The policy of bantustanization,
pursued by
the Pretoria rkgime in order to deprive ahd oppress
the indigenous inhabitants of South Africa, is the
cornerstone of the policy of apartheid, which has been
condemned by the United Nations and by ‘world
opinion.
The so-called independent Transkei has
been rejected by the United Nations, OAU and the
non-aligned movement. In its recent resolution 31/6 A,
of 26 October 1976, ‘the General Assembly strongly
condemned
the establishment
of bantustans as
designed to consolidate the inhuman policies of
apartheid
and to,destroy the territorial integrity of the
country. In the same resolution, the Assembly, rejected
the declaration of “independence”
of the ‘T’ranskei
and declared it invalid. The Assembly called upon all
Governments
to deny any form of recognition to
the so-called independent Transkei.

53. Once again. this year,..the Security Council is
meeting to discuss a serious matter in southern Africa
caused by an irresponsible action committep by ‘the
racist minority rBgime of South Africa against the
Kingdom of Lesotho; When the racist rCgime in
Pretoria closed its border with Lesotho on 26 October
of this year, South Afrida committed
a flagrant
violation of international
law. The closing of the
border is already creating extreme hardship for over
200,000 Lesotho citizens living,in the districts of the
aforementioned
area, as well as hardship for the
Government, which is losing a sizable portion of its
customs revenue.

58. Also, the Council of Ministers of OAU, in its
resolution CM/Res.493 (XXVII) at its twenty-seventh
regular session held at Port Louis from 24 June to
3 July 1976, invited all Stites,’ and in particular
Member States of OAU in their totality, not to accord
recognition
to any bantustan, in particular the
Transkei. The Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of OAU, held at Port Louis from 2 to
6 July, endorsed that resolution.

54. The purpose of the racist r&gime in this particular situation is quite clear: it is a form of political
blackmail
aimed at “arm-twisting”
Lesotho into
according recognition of the bantustan Transkei, which
is an appendage and puppet of the upurtheid
rhgime
of South Africa. This action not only poses a serious
econpmic problem for the people and Government of
Lesotho but also constitutes a threat to peace and
security in that area of the world.

59. In addition, the Fifth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, in its resolution
NAC/CONF.S/S/Res.4,
urged all Sates not to accord
recognition to the so-called independent Transkeiq2
60. The question under discussion is very clear. The
racist rigime of South Africa wants to pressure the
Government of Lesotho into recognizing the so-called
independent Transkei and then the policy of bantustanization and npartheid.

55. During the month of November 1976, the African
Group authorized me, as Chairman of that Group, to
alert both the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the
explosive situation in this area and to urge the action
required of the international community to ‘counter
this flagrant attempt by the racist rkgime of South
Africa to sway Lesotho from its stand against the
apartheid
policy of the Pretoria rkgime.

61. The Government of Lesotho should not be left to
stand alone, to be cowed by the Pretoria regime
because of Lesotho’s abhorrence of the policy ofapar*theid in South Africa and its full support of the resolutions of OAU and the non-aligned movement and of all
United Nations resolutions, in particular General
Assembly resolution 31/6 A of 26 October 1976, in
which the General .Assembly rejected the declaration of
“independence”
of the Transkei.

56. I sent a letter concerning this matter to the
President of the Security Council, Mr. Illueca,
[S/12227] and a similar letter to the Secretary-General.
In those two letters the African Group expressed its
great concern at the serious adverse economic effects

62. The Security Council should take appropriate
steps, first, tb implement effective measures against the
7

with the racist colonialists of Pretoria, are accomplices
in the oppression imposed on the people of South
Africa, and in the acts of aggression committed
against neighbouring countries. This means that,
clearly, the political aspect of the question should
not escape us.

racist r&ime of South Africa in order to end its
defiance %f United Nations resolutions and of world
opinion; secondly, to condemn the plans of South
Africa to create so-called independent bantustans;
and, thirdly, to support the Government of Lesotho
in its plans for an emergency programme to offset the
effects of the closing of the border.

69. Indeed, why has South Africa decided to close
the three border posts adjacent to Lesotho in the
present circumstances? The objective of the racist
colonialists of South Africa is to compel Lesotho to
recognize the policy of bantustanization and apartheid.
If Lesotho, a country disinherited by geography,
were to yield to this well-calculated blackmail, the
racist colonialists of South Africa would be encouraged
in their ignominious policy of oppression and aggression. Hence, it is a challenge that South Africa has
hurled at the international community and at the
United Nations, which, to a Member, unanimously
rejects apartheid and its by-product, the bantustans,
which will make the black population actual foreigners
in the land of their ancestors.

63. Finally, I should like to stress that all African
States, including my own, the Libyan Arab Republic,
fully support the Government and people of Lesotho
and will spare no effort to ensure our solidarity with
them.
64. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (intelp,.etntiotl~onl
Fretzch):
The question which is now before the Security Council, namely, the grave and explosive situation created
in Lesotho by the closing by South Africa of Lesotho’s
eastern border with the so-called independent
Transkei, is altogether typical of the inhuman and
odious policy practised by the racists and colonialists
of South Africa.

70. The matter we are discussing has broader dimensions. Actually, again at issue in the Council are the
implications of the policy of apartheid, the dangers
it poses to the peace and security of independent
African States, and its role in imperialist strategy.
My delegation believes that the Council should consider this question in all its aspects and that the
international community should once again become
aware of the situation and of its possible consequences.

65. It is true that Lesotho, a land-locked country
whose obstinate and brave opposition to the policy of
apartheid and to its by-product,
the cynical policy
of the bantustans, is a known fact and openly
proclaimed, is today the victim of odious blackmail
on the part of the racists and colonialists of South
Africa. One merely has to glance at a map of that
region of Africa to be convinced of this fact. It is also
true that Lesotho, which refuses to yield to this barely
concealed blackmail by recognizing Transkei, rigorously applies-as any self-respecting Member of the
Organization is duty bound to do-the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on the non-recognition
of Transkei and the unanimous condemnation of the
policy of bantustans practised by the white colonialists and racists of South Africa.

71. The bantustan policy is part of the very logic of
the odious apartheid system, the most cynical, most
inhuman and most abject form of colonialist practice.
Bantustanization,
which has been universally condemned, is a requirement for the survival of the
colonialist apartheid &gime in South Africa. The
Transkei is the first of 10 bantustans, the establishment
of which on the borders of independent African States
is designed primarily to strengthen the white racist
minority’s grip and oppression and serve as a means
of blackmail to force the hand of the independent
States of Africa so that they will co-operate.

66. It is only logical, therefore, that the international
community, through this organ of the United Nations,
should manifest its sympathy and active solidarity
with the people of Lesotho, which is an official
victim of the application of a collective measure
decided on by the Members of the Organization.
67. Accordingly, my delegation hopes that the Council will adopt the necessary measures to alleviate, and
even eliminate, the harmful consequences of the action
taken against Lesotho by the racist colonialists of
Pretoria. But my delegation does not think that we
are meeting here to consider only this aspect of the
problem, or that this important debate will be concluded quite simply on a note of charity.

72. The closure of the borders of Transkei with
Lesotho, decided by the racist colonialists of Pretoria,
is part of the same series of repeated acts of provocation and aggression which daily victimize the independent African countries of southern Africa. South
Africa, the bridgehead of imperialist’ aggression in
Africa, has set up a diabolical plan in an effort to
eliminate the nationalist and popular rigimes of southern Africa.

68. The people of Lesotho, whose dignity, pride and
courage in the face of the provocations by the Pretoria
racists is known to all, is not coming here to request
generous aid from the very ones who are responsible
for the exploitation of the wealth of the third world,
and who, by their overt friendship and collaboration

73. My delegatioti once again denounces the impenitent accomplices of Western imperialism which daily
arm the Pretoria racists. My delegation wishes to pay
tribute to all the victims of the policy of apartheid,
in particular to Lesotho, whose authorities have so far
displayed a consistent attitude.
8

74. The Retoria racists, treacherous as they are
stop Mnothing in order to have theirodious,inhumad
policy prevail. The Council must once again condemn
this policy, which is a vibtion
of inalienable, funclament:ll human rights, and take the necessary effective measures to overcome
the disastrous con.
SC~NIKCS of the cloture of the border. Immediate
;tction by the Organizution and its entire system, a$
well w by All Member States, is indispensable to
Ltssist Lesotho.
75 *

My

dt!lCgit~h~l

pt\yS

iI Well-deserved

tribute

themselves from their imminent doom, Recently.
t~,ey
staged a farce of the sham independence of Transkei
following the defeat in their series of maneuvres
such as the so-called “dialogue”,
“dktente”
and
“racial reconciliation”,
To put it bluntly, this is to
stick the label of “independence” on the notorious
“bantustan” and to put the shackles of crpclrt/~~~i~/
Perpetually on the Azanian people in a “legal form”
so as to lure the Azanian people into giving up their
struggle, undermine the unity of the African countries and thus attain the criminal aim of sustaining
the racist rule,

10 the

PWl~le of Lesotho for its courage, and appeals to it
llOt 11) yield t0 the blackmail.
Since the action taken
hy SOUth Africa is part of a thinly disguised policy of
bt~lCklll~li1 tl? hlY.X that country
to co-operate, the
COUllCil
POliCY

INUSt OllCt2 again
Of ki!lltllsli~$li~atiorl

cotldemn

~rp~~,‘fhpit/ and the

desig&

to strengthen

79. This fraud was SO clumsy that, immediately upon
its production, it was thoroughly exploded and
unanimously condemned by the African people and
the people all over the world. On 26 October last, the
day when the sham “independence” of Transkei was
proclaimed, the General Assembly, meeting in plenary
session, adopted resolution 31/6 A by an overwhelming
majjority Of 134 votes, strongly condemning the South
African authorities for their policy of bantustanization,
categorically rejecting the sham “independence”
of Transkei and declaring it invalid and calling upon all
Governments to deny any form of recognition to
Transkei and to refrain from having any dealings
with it.

it,

76. Mr. LA1 Yu-Ii (China) (intci’l7r’et~lri~/1 $YIUI
(‘hh!f’~(~I: ‘1%~ Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the S~LL~C~CII~S made by the Minister for
POWifill AI’fairs of I,csotho and the representatives
01’ OlkK
Al’ric:tn countries. In their statements, they
ildigflilllt~y
CS~OSCC~
end condemned
the South African
racist authorities 1’~. their cr*imes
of flagrantly
closing
their JWIIIL’I adjitccnt to Ihe southern part of Lesotho
UIItf ascrling gross prcss~.~rcon the Kingdom of Lesotho
after 0~ concoction of the sham independence of
I’r;mskei. ‘1%~ Chinese delegation feels greatly indignanl at the sorics of crimin;il activities committed by
ihc !ioIlth A.fricnn i\urhOrilies, expresses its admiration l’or the just position taken by the Government
i\nd pe~>plc 01 I.esotho in firmly opposing racism and
cotvnialism
in dei‘i;ulce of brute force, and gives
r’esolutc support to the just proposals and demands put
forwv;~d hy 1.esotho and other African countries.

80. In these circumstances, far from showing any
repentance after being sternly condemned by the overwhelming majority of countries in the world. the South
African authorities have gone further on their evil
course, openly declaring the closure of the border
between South Africa and the southern part of Lesotho
and despicably exerting pressure on the Kingdom of
Lesotho in an attempt to force Lesotho and other
African countries to submit to the schemes of the
South African authorities and recognize the sham
of Transkei. This is, of course. a
“independence”
sheer pipe-dream. Evidently, such an odious trick on
the part of the South African authorities constitutes
;I serious provocation not only to the people of Lesotho
but atso to the entire African people and all justiceupholding countries
and peoples throughout the world.
This can only arouse the people of Lesotho and the
rest of Africa to even stronger resistance and struggles.
81,

Furthermore, it tnust be pointed out that iit
the two super-Powers are locked in ever more
intense rivalry in southern Africa. One super-l)oWel
is doing its utmost to maintain its vested interests in
present

southern

7x. ‘1’1~~ Chinc:sc people’s great leader, Chairman
Mill) ‘]‘scr~~~~g,p”inLcJ out: “Make trouble, fail, make
~l*ollhl~ il&\iIl, fail iLg;\in.. . till their doom; that is the
and all reactionaries the
logic
ol
the
imp!riilliS~S
wl)~-ll[ l)~~el’ iI1 de;llillg with the people’s cause, and
the)/
will
IleVer
go ikgiiiust
this
logic”.
The handful of
are precisely acting
ri\CiStS, Vor'SiCr
:\Ild
others,
;lcclj~.l[ing to this [qvic. Wtiile ceasetcssly inlensifyi~~g
their violent rcprcssion of’ the liberation struggle of
ctlc pcl~ll~c ill slmherm Africa, they are stePPi% UP
tfjcil. scllef~les c)f pjli{ic;it
deception in order to save

Africa.

Casting

a

coVekIllS

eye

011

thiS

region, the other super-Power, under the banny*r of
“supporting
the national liberation nlOVement
., iS
trying
by hoOk
or by crook
to meddle
in the ~ibelatJ0~~
struggle of this region and undermine the mitikmt Llnib’
klmong the liberation organizations and amon& the
African countries in an attempt to take the Place of
the OM colonialism. However, neither Ihe evil dllillgs
on the part of the lacists and CdOniLllis~s
pot . the
conspiratorial schemes on the part of impcriallsm and
hegemonis,n
can check the forward Stride
of the
9

African people and the complete
struggle for national liberation.

victory

of theil

82. The Chinese Government and people strongly
condemn the South African authorities for engineering
the scheme of the sham “independence” of Transkei
and for their criminal activities of closing their border
with Lesotho and exerting gross pressure on Lesotho
and the rest of Africa; and we firmly support the
people of Lesotho and the rest of southern Africa
in their just struggle against colonialism and racism.
The Chinese delegation holds that the Security Council
should endorse General Assembly resolution 31/6 A
and, in the spirit of that resolution, sternly condemn
the Sotith African authorities for their scheme of
concocting the sham “independence” of Transkei and
their criminal activities against Lesotho and other
countries; enjoin the South African authorities to put
an immediate end to the aforementioned schemes and

criminal activities and call upon all Governments and
peoples to give firm support to the people of Lesotho
and other parts of southern Africa in their just struggle
against colonialism and racism until they win complete
victory.
83. In conclusion, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I should like to thank Mr. Kikhia of the Libyan
Arab Republic for his sincere and friendly sentiments
towards Mr. Huang Hua; I shall certainly convey them
to Mr. Huang Hua.

Notes
1 See Ofjiciol
Rccortls of the Gcr~ovrl
Asse~~~hly, Thirty-frst
Srssiou, P/er~r:v Matings,
29th meeting.
* A/31/197,
annex IV, Resolutions on political questions.

10
Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-April

198%2,200
