General Asaembly-Foarteenth Se11&ion

4,

pension of tests, no State will initiate or resume tests
of this kind,
Recognizing the anxiety caused by the contemplated
tests in the Sahara among all peoples, and more particularly those of Africa,
1. Expresses its grave concern over the intention of
the Government of France to conduct nuclear tests;
2. Requests France to refrain from such tests.
840th plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1380 (XIV). Prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the danger now exists that an increase in the number of States possessing nuclear
weapons may occur, aggravating international tension
and the difficulty of maintaining world peace, and thus
rendering more difficult the attainment of general disarmament agreement,
Convinced therefore that consideration of this danger
is appropriate within the framework of deliberations
on disarmament,
Noting the resolution of the United Nations Disarmament Commission of 10 September 1959, 1
Desiring to bring to the attention of the ten-nation
disarmament committee its conviction that consideration
should be given to this problem,
1. Suggests that the ten-nation disarmament committee, in the course of its deliberations, should consider
appropriate means whereby this danger may be averted,
including the feasibility of an international agreement,
subject to inspection and control, whereby the Powers
producing nuclear weapons would refrain from handing
over the control of such weapons to any nation not
possessing them and whereby the Powers not possessing
such weapons would refrain from manufacturing them ;
2. Invites the committee to include the results of its
deliberations on these matters in its report to the
Disarmament Commission.
841 st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.
1402 (XIV). Suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1252 B (XIII) of 4 November
1958,
Noting that the negotiations on the discontinuance of
nuclear weapons tests and on the establishment of an
appropriate international control system, which began at
Geneva on 31 October 1958, are still continuing,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the States concerned
for their efforts to reach an agreement relating to the
prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and including an
appropriate international control system;
2. Extresses the hope that these States will intensify
their efft ts to reach such an agreement at an early date:
3. [fr~ , the States concerned in these negotiations
to contim their present voluntary discontinuance of
1

-~

'-f'.:;tl".•(

~

p11,·1e-:r- ,ve3npn,- ·

4. Requests the States concerned to report to the
General Assembly the results of their negotiations.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.

B
The General Assembly,
Desiring to safeguard mankind from the increasing
hazards resulting from tests of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind the profound concern evinced by the
peoples of all countries regarding the testing of nuclear
and thermo-nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the endeavours at Geneva of the States
concerned to reach an agreement on the discontinuance
of these tests, and the progress so far achieved,
Noting with appreciation that the States concerned
have voluntarily suspended such tests, enabling progress
in the discussions at Geneva,
Considering that an agreement on the cessation of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests with effective international control is urgent,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the States concerned
for their patient and sincere efforts to reach agreement
on the discontinuance of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
tests with effective international control, and for the
progress hitherto achieved ;
•
2. Expresses further the hope that the States concerned will reach such agreement at an early date :
3. Appeals to the States concerned in the Geneva
discussions to continue their present voluntary suspension of tests, and to other States to desist from such
tests;
4. Requests the States concerned to report to the
Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly
the results of their negotiations.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.
1403 (XIV). Report of the Disarmament
Commission

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1252 D (XIII) of 4 November 1958,
Noting with approval the report of the Disarmament
Commission of 11 September 1959,6
1. Decides that the Disarmament Commission shall
continue to be composed of all Members of the United
Nations;
2. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission all
the documents, proposals and records of discussions
relating to disarmament at the fourteenth session of the
General Assembly:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
staff and services required by the Disarmament Commission and, in consultation with the Governments concerned, provide such facilities as may be re(!uired by
the ten-nation disarmament committee.
812nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.
6 See Official Records of the Gen-eral Assembly, Fourteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document A/4209.
