asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6938

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6938th meeting
Thursday, 21 March 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(S/2013/140)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26641 (E)

*1326641*

S/PV.6938

to progress on other crucial political and security
issues. Internal security challenges, in particular
intercommunal violence in several areas and the
activities of armed groups in Jonglei, Upper Nile and
Unity states, continue to be a source of instability and
pose grave threats to the civilian population. Land
disputes also remain a potential source of insecurity in
the country.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(S/2013/140)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Hilde Johnson, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/140, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Council today. I would like to briefly
revisit the main elements of the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council today (S/2013/140) and
then focus my remarks on the most recent operational
developments, as well as key political considerations
related to mandate implementation.
Since my last briefing to the Council by
videoconference on 28 November last year, South
Sudan’s transition towards a stable, viable State
continued at an uneven pace. During the period covered
by the report, South Sudan continued to face multiple
challenges, while progress was achieved in some areas.
Relations with the Sudan remained tense,
although the 8, 12 and 19 March agreements on the
implementation of the 27 September Cooperation
Agreements could significantly improve the situation in
the coming months. An easing of some of the economic
austerity measures, with a restart of oil production,
would definitely help create an environment conducive

2

Recent spates of violence in Jonglei and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal states have further highlighted the
importance of the protection of civilians mandate
assigned to the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS). In Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
some 5,000 civilians fleeing from intercommunal
violence in Wau, in December, sought refuge in the
UNMISS camp. Similarly, in Pibor county, Jonglei
state, hundreds of civilians sought protection in
UNMISS bases on many occasions when there were
clashes between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) and armed groups. The largest numbers were
around 3,000 on 27 January and 1,800 on 6 March.
It is important to note that, while the Pibor County
Commissioner had designated a safe area where he said
the SPLA would protect civilians, the population chose
to come to the two UNMISS bases in the town. We have
just received a message today about a similar message
in Gumuruk, south of Pibor, where civilians also sought
refuge with our contingents.
The situation in Jonglei state remains a source of
major concern and presents complex challenges for
both UNMISS and the Government. The Government
remains committed to finding a peaceful solution to the
threat posed by David Yau Yau’s armed group, but has
made it clear that the window for dialogue is closing
and that military operations may soon be launched.
Although the Government is committed to doign its
utmost to protect civilians during such operations, the
civilian population can be at risk from being caught in the
crossfire. We have stressed that any military response
to insecurity must secure the protection of civilians, in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.
Another source of concern is the intercommunal
tension created by the 8 February deadly attack on a
Lou Nuer community in the Walgak area, which was
migrating to a dry season grazing area. The deadly
attack, allegedly perpetrated by armed youth from the
Murle community, resulted in the killing of over 100
civilians and a number of escorting SPLA troops. Local

13-26641

S/PV.6938

and political leaders, including the Vice-President
and several ministers who visited the area, have been
engaged in efforts to convince the Lou Nuer youth not
to resort to revenge attacks but to allow the SPLA and
the police to address the problem. In the meantime,
UNMISS has conducted a human rights investigation
into the Wangar attack. A report into its findings will
be published later this month.
UNMISS has developed contingency plans for
possible Jonglei state scenarios. The Mission has
strengthened its troop presence and increased the
number of integrated civilian-military patrols to
identify the locations of potential attacks, and continues
to engage the vulnerable communities and support
efforts to find a peaceful solution. We also continue
to urge the Government to address the root causes of
violence and chronic instability in the State.
In relation to the violence that broke out in Wau,
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, in December, a number
of disturbing arbitrary detentions were registered.
I have raised this concern with national and state
authorities and urged that due process be respected.
All perpetrators should be held to account. I have also
called for intercommunal reconciliation.
Increased reports of threats to freedom of
expression and respect for human rights in South Sudan
are worrying. We have impressed upon the Government
that it must take immediate steps to reverse this trend
and have pressed for the investigation into the December
2012 killing of the columnist Isaiah Abraham to be
expedited and the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
On a positive note, the Minister of Information and
Broadcasting has committed to the United Nations plan
of action for freedom of expression and the protection of
journalists — initiated by UNESCO and supported by
UNMISS and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights — and has agreed to seek the Council of
Ministers’ approval for South Sudan to become a pilot
country.
While investigating the case of a South Sudanese
journalist under threat, two UNMISS human rights
officers were held and interrogated for several hours in
January. UNMISS immediately protested at the highest
levels, and measures are now being worked out between
UNMISS and the relevant security institutions to
prevent a recurrence of such incidents. President Salva
Kiir Mayardit has also pledged that he will take action

13-26641

against undisciplined elements within the security
organs.
Another welcome development is the establishment
by the Government of a high-level panel to address the
problem of arbitrary/prolonged detention. The panel is
chaired by the Chief Justice, and includes the SPLA
and the Ministers of Justice, National Security, the
Interior and Defence. Also positively, South Sudan
recently signed the African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights, but the Government should now fulfil
its commitment to the accession and ratification of this
and other key human rights instruments.
The persistent violence and instability in South
Sudan are deeply rooted. Historical animosities among
communities, dating from the civil, and old divisions
and power struggles among political protagonists
are pervasive. New tensions are emerging from old
wounds. These all need to be addressed. Hence, the
Government’s initiative to launch a process of national
reconciliation and healing is welcomed. It is essential,
however, that this important process be inclusive and
broadly owned by all stakeholders. To this end, the
United Nations system is working closely with all
stakeholders in supporting the preparations for the
reconciliation process.
The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains
challenging. There is a constant stream of refugees
arriving in South Sudan from Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile in the Sudan, with over 14,000 new arrivals
thus far in 2013. Meanwhile, humanitarian actors have
continued to report access issues, the presence of
weapons in the camps, and other impediments to their
work. The proliferation of weapons caused clashes
between the police and armed elements in Yida refugee
camp on 17 March. Returnees from the Sudan continue
to face difficulties with sustainable reintegration, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
Despite these many challenges, South Sudan
continues to lay the foundations for a viable and
democratic State. Progress has been made, and let me
go through a few key areas.
The democratic foundations of this new and
independent country have been established with a
proper legal framework for multiparty democracy and
elections and concomitant functioning institutions. The
work on reviewing the Transitional Constitution is now
also gaining momentum. On 26 February, the National
Legislative Assembly approved an amendment to the

3

S/PV.6938

Transitional Constitution that extended the mandate of
the National Constitutional Review Commission by two
years. The extension will ensure that the Commission
has sufficient time to conduct broad nationwide
consultations down to the county level, and implement
its mandate.
Police reform has continued through implementing
the action plan and scaling up the training of police
at all levels. The registration of all police personnel,
which should greatly facilitate the right-sizing, training
and transformation of the South Sudan National
Police Service (SSNPS), is now complete. To date,
the provisional number of registered police personnel
stands at 46,427, after the rescreening that revised
earlier figures. The SSNPS is now reconciling the
registered figures with the payroll for each State in
order to weed out ghost police officers.
Furthermore, in support of reform of the security
sector, reshuffle has taken place in the SPLA and the
SSNPS, replacing a number of senior military and
police officers with younger officers. This is part of an
overall modernization and professionalization effort.
UNMISS continues to provide training to the SSNPS
and has developed proposals for contributing to the
development of the capacity of the SPLA to protect
civilians. In January, countrywide consultations on
the draft national security policy were launched by the
Government. UNMISS is working with international
partners to provide technical and logistical support to
this process.
Meanwhile,
the
National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
Council has been established and a pilot disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme is
set to be launched at Mapel on 15 April. With progress
on disengagement from the border areas, it is hoped that
DDR and security sector reform will gather momentum.
The National Legislative Assembly has become more
assertive in carrying out its role with stronger checks
and balances, and more actively performing its oversight
functions, including its handling of audit reports and
budgets and the passage of critical legislation in a
number of key areas.
In the continued context of austerity, the
Government has taken positive steps to stabilize the
country’s macroeconomic situation, with reductions in
average monthly Government spending by more than

4

50 per cent. Non-oil revenues increased 10-fold, to
about 70 million South Sudanese pounds per month.
However, a large fiscal gap still remains and,
pending the resumption of oil flows, a multifaceted
donor support package will be required to bridge it. A
donors conference to address those issues is scheduled
to be held in Washington, D.C., on 16 and 17 April.
Even with the full and timely implementation of the
agreement on oil, the conference is very important. I
ask the Council to lend its full support to the success of
the conference.
I regret to inform members that, since my last
briefing to the Council, the United Nations operating
environment has become more challenging due to
a number of grave violations of the status-of-forces
agreement by the Government. We are addressing the
problem through interventions at the highest levels.
We are also launching a sensitization and training
programme for all security institutions.
As members are aware, the most egregious
violation occurred on 21 December, when SPLA forces
shot down an UNMISS helicopter, killing four Russian
crew members. We have engaged the Government on
the matter at the highest levels to urge a swift and
transparent investigation. We have been coordinating
closely with the Russian aviation company concerned
and with civil aviation authorities to facilitate the
investigations in accordance with International Civil
Aviation Organization rules. We have also regularly
updated the Russian Embassy in Uganda on the
investigation process. The Russian Ambassador has
expressed his Government’s appreciation to UNMISS
for its efforts in that regard.
Allow me to conclude by recalling that in both
resolutions 1996 (2011) and 2057 (2012), the Security
Council determined that the situation faced by South
Sudan continued to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region. That not only refers to
the situation between South Sudan and the Sudan. With
five other neighbours, the continuing proliferation
of weapons in South Sudan has serious implications
for regional security and stability. That continues
among not only armed militia groups, but also civilian
communities in South Sudan that feel vulnerable.
Furthermore, South Sudan remains afflicted by internal
security and political fault lines, which continue to
render the country fragile and which has potential
spillover effects. Every effort to mitigate that risk and to

13-26641

S/PV.6938

keep South Sudan on a path to stability and prosperity
will contribute to the stability of the whole region.
The international community’s continued support
is needed more than ever. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council for its support and its
valuable contribution to the work of UNMISS.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Johnson for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. D’Awol (South Sudan): Allow me, at the
outset, to thank you and your country, Mr. President,
for the good work done during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you success in
discharging your responsibilities. Similarly, we would
like to extend our profound gratitude to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for their continued
support and commitment to the Government and the
people of the South Sudan through the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We also welcome
this opportunity to share our views with the members
of the Security Council and to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2013/140). We also thank all
the States Members of the United Nations, including
members of the Council, for the contribution of troops,
civilian personnel and equipment to the Mission.
As the Secretary-General underlines in his report,
South Sudan has continued to build its national
institutions and to make meaningful progress on several
fronts, despite experiencing a considerable number of
internal and external challenges.
The extension of the mandate of the National
Constitutional Review Commission will allow for
meaningful participation by the largest number of our
citizens in the constitutional review process. That is a
critical ingredient for effective peacebuilding. We would
also like to inform the Council that the Government
has begun the necessary planning for the 2014 census
and the 2015 elections. We welcome the logistical and
technical support that UNMISS will provide for those
endeavours.
The Secretary-General also makes reference in his
report to President Kiir’s recent decisions with regard
to the leadership of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) and the South Sudan National Police Service.
Those changes are part of our Government’s efforts to

13-26641

engage in serious security sector reform. We welcome
the continued support of the international community
for that process.
The Government maintains its policy of seeking
peace with rebel militias, as a result of which many
groups have over the years been successfully absorbed
into the SPLA. The Government still faces a threat
from a group loyal to David Yau Yau, who, as noted in
the Secretary-General’s report, has attacked civilians
in Jonglei, as well as SPLA positions. An amnesty offer
nonetheless remains on the table. Through its support to
Murle leaders for their engagement with Murle youths,
the Government has invested tremendous energy in
pursuit of peace in Jonglei. We would like to express
our appreciation to UNMISS for its extensive support
for those efforts. There are no easy or immediate
solutions in Jonglei. Disarmament alone will not resolve
the underlying issues of traditional perceptions and
practices among the various traditional communities in
those areas.
We recognize that an inclusive, long-term
national reconciliation process is sorely needed,
and the Government has committed resources to
it. The Government welcomes and encourages
the continued support of the humanitarian and
non-governmental-organization community, both for
peacebuilding efforts and for new initiatives aimed at
addressing those underlying issues.
With regard to the regrettable incidents of
inter-communal violence in Western Bahr el-Ghazal
state, the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan is completely committed to a process of full
accountability. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, steps have been taken to ensure due process for
all detainees. UNMISS has also been granted access to
detainees in Wau county.
My Government once again expresses its
profound regret for the shooting down of an UNMISS
helicopter in December 2012. President Kiir reiterates
the Government’s apologies and condolences to the
Government and people of the Russian Federation, as
well as to the families of those killed. We expect to
complete our investigations into the matter in a timely
fashion, and will fully cooperate with the United
Nations Secretariat Board of Inquiry. The Republic of
South Sudan remains fully committed to guaranteeing
the safety, security and unrestricted freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel in the country.

5

S/PV.6938

We welcome the proposal of UNMISS to engage in the
sensitization and training of all security organs on the
UNMISS mandate, the status of forces agreement, the
privileges and immunities of United Nations personnel
and South Sudan’s obligations under international law.

Presidents of the two countries, South Sudan and the
Sudan. It is our sincere hope that the long-suffering
people of Abyei will at last have their problems resolved
and promptly be able to exercise their right of selfdetermination.

It is no secret that the relations between South
Sudan and the Sudan have not been satisfactory, despite
the fact that the Government of South Sudan has shown
flexibility in the post-independence negotiations in
Addis Ababa. On 12 March, however, the two countries
adopted the implementation matrix in Addis Ababa
under the auspices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan and South Sudan. The
matrix contains a clear road map for the implementation
of the previous agreements signed. Importantly, a
measurable breakthrough with regard to security
arrangements has been taken place. The two parties
agreed to withdraw their troops unconditionally to
their respective sides of the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone. The President of the Republic of South Sudan has
already issued an order instructing the army’s general
chief of staff to immediately draw troops away from the
buffer zone. Indeed, as I speak now, our armed forces
have started moving to the designated areas away from
the buffer zone.

As the world’s youngest nation, South Sudan
still faces many challenges. The first 18 months of
independence have not always been easy. Developing
the structures of Government, establishing State
authority and enforcing the rule of law is not the work of
one year or even of five years; it is a long-term process.
Since the independence of the Republic of South Sudan
from the Sudan, our nascent State has confronted
enormous tasks of nation-building and development.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s calls that urge
our development partners to provide the prerequisite
peacebuilding support for the efforts being undertaken
to stabilize the conflict-prone tri-state area of Unity,
Warrap and Lakes states. Significant investment by
other parties and continued support by UNMISS are
required in assisting the Government to project its
authority and to develop its capacity to govern those
volatile areas.

On the issue of the determination of the final status
of Abyei and the consideration of establishing the
Abyei Referendum Commission, the two parties agreed
that the matter should be dealt with at the level of the

6

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

13-26641
