developed countries, g1vmg due consideration to
questions of a social nature which directly condition econpmic development ;

( b) Stimulate its commissions and the specialized agencies to give similar urgent attention
to these problems;
( c) Include in its annual report to each reg_ular session of the General Assembly a special
chapter on the measures being taken to promote
economic development, together with the recommendations for the further improvement, if necessary, of such measures.

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

307 (IV). Economic development and
international economic and commercial policy
The General Assembly,
Considering that the tasks hitherto entrusted to
the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the specialized agencies in connexion
with the economic development of under-developed countries have been concentrated especially
on the study of problems connected with technical assistance and with the financing of economic
development,
Considering that experience has shown that
many aspects of international economic and commercial policy exercise a powerful influence on
the economic development of under-developed
countries,
Recommends that, in the Economic and Social
Council's forthcoming work and studies on economic development, further attention should be
paid to such questions of international economic
and commercial policy as may influence the process of development of the economies of underdeveloped countries, with a view to making recommendations to the General Assembly.
242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

308 (IV). Full employment
The General Assembly
1. Notes the discussions which have taken place
at the ninth session of the Economic and Social
Council on problems of employment and economic
stability, and the adoption of resolution 221
(IX)E 7 of the Council on 11 August 1949 and
the resolution 8 on unemployment adopted by the
International Labour Conference on 1 July 1949;

2. Approves the action of the Secretary-Gen,eral in inviting a group of experts to report on
national and international measures required to
achieve and maintain full employment;

employment in accordance with Articles 55 and
56 of the Charter, is a basic requirement for the
achievement of a stable and expanding world
economy;
4. That, in addition, action is needed to overcome unemployment and under-employment such
as that arising, particularly in under-developed
countries, among large numbers of people e!1gaged
in agricultural pursuits; and that, to this end,
it is necessary, inter alia, to stimulate the economic development oi under-developed countries;
5. That the objectives of international agreements for the furtherance of the production and
consumption of, and the expansion of international trade in, goods on as free as possible
a basis would be seriously impaired by failure to
take, or by delay in taking, action designed to
maintain full and productive employment especially in those countries which have an important
share in world trade; and
6. That a high and stable level of international
investment, particularly in the under-developed
areas of the world, would contribute materially
to the realization of those objectives;
N ates with satisfaction :

7. Declarations of various Governments of their
intention to deal promptly with unemployment,
an<l their recognition of the contribution which
such steps will make towards the maintenance of
world-wide economic stability; and that the measures they have already put into effect, or have
under study, for increasing purchasing power
and for promoting full employment include such
measures as the extension of unemployment insurance, the expansion of social services generally, public works programmes including low-cost
housing and natural resources development projects, measures affecting the level and methods
of taxation, incentives for the encouragement of
private capital investment; and
8. The intention of the Economic and Social
Council to study further the related questions of
measures to achieve full employment and to encourage international investment;

9. Recommends that each Government consider, as a matter of urgency, its international
responsibility under Articles 55 and 56 of the
Charter to take action, as the need arises, designed to promote and maintain full and productive employment, through measures appropriate to its political, economic and social institutions;
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council,
during its consideration of full employment and
economic development, to give attention to unemployment and under-employment, especially in
under-developed countries and particularly in
such critical fields as agriculture;

11. Decides that the world economic situation
be reviewed again at the next regular session of
tl1e General Assembly in the light of Articles 55
and 56 of the Charter.

Believes:
3. That national an<l international action by
Members, designed to promote ;md maintain full
1

256th plenary meeting,
75 ,\'o,•c111hcr fQf9.

See Official Records of the Economic and Social

8

Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions, page 2.

See International Labour Office, Industry and l,abour,

voltm1c II. No. 3, page 168.

28
