Reeolutlom adopted on the report, of the Sixth Committee

4. Declares further that the unlawful detention of
,passengers and crew in transit or otherwise engaged in

civil air travel is to be condemned as another form of
wrongful interference with free and uninterrupted air
travel;
S. Urges States to the territory of which a hijacked
aircraft is diverted to provide for the care iuid. safety
of its passengers and crew and to enable them to continue their journey as soon as practicable, and to return the aircraft and its cargo to the persons lawfully
entitled to possession;
6. Invites States to ratify or accede to the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed
on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September
1963,12 in confornuty with the Convention;
7. Requests concerted action on the part of States,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
towards suppressing all acts which jeopardize the safe
and orderly development of international civil air
transport;
8. Calls upon States to take joint and separate
action, in accordance with the Charter, in co-operation
with the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization to ensure that passengers, crew
and aircraft engaged in civil aviation are not used as a
means of extorting advantage of any kind; 1
9. Urges full support for the current efforts of the
International Civil Aviation Organization towards the
development and co-ordination, in accordance with its
competence, of effective measures in respect of interference with civil air travel;
10. Calls upon States to make every possible effort
to achieve a successful result at the diplomatic conference to convene at The Hague in December 1970
for the purpose of the adoption of a convention on the
unlawful seizure of aircraft, so that an effective convention may be brought into force at an early date.

1914th plenary meeting,
25 November 1970.
2669 (XXV). ProgreHive development and codlficadon of the rules of internadonal law
relating to international watercourses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1401 (XIV) of 21 November 19S9, by which it considered that it was

11'7

RecalUng that despite the great number of bilateral
treaties and other regional regulations, as well as the
Convention on the Regime of Navigable Waterways
of International Concern, signed at Barcelona on 20
April 1921,14 and the Convention relating to the Development of Hydraulic Power affecting more than
one State, signed at Geneva on 9 December 1923,111
the use of international rivers and lakes is still based
in part on general principles and rules of customary
law,
Noting that measures have been taken and valuable
work carried out by several international organs, both
governmental and non-governmental, in order to
further the development and codification of the law of
international watercourses,
Convinced of the necessity to promote, in accordance with Article 13 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the work on the progressive development and
codification of the law of international watercourses
and to concentrate this work within the framework
of the United Nations,
1. Recommends that the International Law Commission should, as a first step, take up the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses with a view to its progressive development and codification and, in the light of its scheduled
programme of work, should consider the practicability
of taking the necessary action as soon as the Commission deems it appropriate;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue the study initiated by the General
Assembly in resolution 1401 (XIV) in order to prepare a supplementary report on the legal problems
relating to the utilization and use of international
watercourses, taking into account the recent application in State practice and international adjudication
of the law of international watercourses and also intergovernmental and non-governmental studies of this
matter;
( b) To forward to the International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the item at
the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the
report prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1401 (XIV), as well as the text of the
present resolution and all other documentation necessary for the Commission's work.
1920th plenary meeting,
8 December 1970.

desirable to initiate preliminary studies on the legal
problems relating to the utilization and use of international rivers, and as a result of which useful legal
material was collected in the report submitted by the
Secretary-General on 15 April 1963,18
Considering that water, owing to the growth of
population and the increasing and multiplying needs
and demands of mankind, is of growing concern to
humanity, that the available fresh water resources
of the world are limited and that the preservation
and protection of those resources are of great importance to all nations,
Conscious of the importance of legal problems
relatinf to the use of international watercourses, inter
alia With regard to international water resources de-

velopment,

12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704 ( 1969), No. 10106.

llA/5409.

2697 (XXV). Need to consider au11estion• regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 on the
procedure of reviewing the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 2S52 (XXIV) of
12 December 1969 entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations",
H League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. VII (1921-1922),
No. 172.
111 League of Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. XXXVI (1925),
No. 90.5.

General Aanmbly-Twenty-fifth Sea1ion

128

duct of the fellowship programme in international law
sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the
Institute;
6. Notes with thanks the offer of the Government
of Ghana to provide facilities for the regional symposium to be held in Africa in 1971 ;
7. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme
and expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1971 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in
1972 and subsequent years;
9. Decides to include in the provisional a$enda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Umted Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law".
1926th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

Having heard the different views expressed during
the consideration of the item at its twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to communicate to him, before 1 July 1972,
their views and suggestions on the review of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to ~ubmit to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session a report containing the views and suggestions
of Member States communicated to him pursuant to
paragraph 1 above;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Need to
consider suggestions regarding the review of the
Charter of the United Nations".
1926th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2698 (XXV). United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in ~e Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of international Law, 1 0
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out
in 1971 the activities specified in his report, including
the provision of:
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) Current United Nations legal publications to
institutions in developing countries which have previously received United Nations legal publications
under the present Programme and to other institutions in developing countries for which requests for
such publications are made by the Member States
concerned;
2. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to provide assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country invited to
the regional symposium to be held in Africa and to
the regional training course to be organized in Latin
America;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to promote training and assistance in international trade law within the framework of the Programme, in order to meet the need, particularly on
the part of developing countries, for strengthening
legal expertise in this field;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in the Programme, especially as regards
its efforts to develop the teaching of international law;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation
in the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional symposia and training courses and in the con18 A/8130

2723 (XXV). Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
Considering the desirability of finding ways and
means of enhancing the effectiveness of the Court,
Bearing in mind that a study of the Court will in no
way impair its authority, but should seek to facilitate
the greatest possible contribution by the Court to the
advancement of the rule of law and the promotion
of justice among nations,
1. 1nvites Member States and States parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice to submit to the Secretary-General, by 1 July 1971, views
and suggestions concerning the role of the Court on
the basis of the questionnaire to be prepared by the
Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Court the records of the discussions and proposals
in the Sixth Committee on this item;
3. Invites the Court to state its views, should it so
desire;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive report in the light of the opinions expressed by States and the Court, should the Court so
desire;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Review of the
role of the International Court of Justice", with a view
to taking such appropriate measures as may seem desirable.
1931st plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.

and Corr.I.

•

•

•
