VI.

school curricula and their importance in furthering universal
understanding and friendship,
Convinced of the importance of physical education and
sports exchanges in promoting peace, mutual understanding,
co-operation and the development of friendly relations
among peoples,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General2 8
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 33/8;
2. Takes note also of the replies of Member States 29 to
the request addressed by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 33/8;
3. Invites Member States to develop sports activities
and physical education within the context of continuing
education and, in particular, to give priority to programmes
developed in the framework of a "sports for all" policy so
as to reach all sectors of the population, especially young
people who are not in school and the rural population;
4 .. Recommends that, in preparing programmes, special
attention should be given to the promotion of indigenous
forms of sport and physical training as well as to the adaptation of other forms of sport, especially through the use
of local materials, and to the reduction of their cost and
infrastructure requirements, so as to enable the largest possible number of persons to participate in these sports.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 198/

36/17.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ l 35 of 16 December 1977, in
which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of the
channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations,
Recalling its resolution 35/139 of 11 December I 980, in
which it requested the Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed by Governments, to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, for adoption, proposals for additional guidelines, consistent with the
guidelines already adopted in its resolution 32/135 and on
the basis of the draft additional guidelines contained in the
annex to its resolution 34/163 of I 7 December 1979, as well
as the suggestions of the Secretary-General in his reports
to the Assembly at its thirty-third, ,o thirty-fourth 31 and
thirty-fifth 32 sessions,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/25 of 2 May 1980 concerning co-ordination and information in the field of youth,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 10
September 1981, 33
Noting with appreciation that the report of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year 34 contains useful proposals for the improvement of channels of communicati?n 1?etween the United Nations and youth and youth
orgamzat1ons,
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies with regard to the
participation of youth in achieving the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Equally convinced of the valuable contributions that youth
can make in promoting co-operation among States and in
implementing the new international economic order and the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 1 "
Taking note also of the valuable contribution that the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization can make in the improvement of channels of
communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth organizations,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations for the proper information
of youth and youth organizations and their effective participation in the United Nations and the specialized agencies
at the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning
of channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth organizations form a basic prerequisite for the
successful preparation, celebration and follow-up of the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
I. Adopts the additional guidelines for the improvement
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations set forth in the
annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests Member States, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations to implement these
additional guidelines, together with the guidelines adopted
in General Assembly resolution 32/ l 35. in co-operation with
youth organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council and with other youth organizations
concerned;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to promote the implementation of the
additional guidelines. together with the guidelines adopted
in resolution 32/ l 35, during the preparation for and celebration of the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
reports of Member States, specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations as well as non-governmental youth organizations, to report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
49th plenary meeting
9 November /98/

ANNEX
Additional guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the llnited Nations and youth and youth
organizations
A

A/36/409.

29

Ibid., chap. VI.

JO

A/33/26).

31

A/34/199.
A/35/503.
33
A/36/427.
14
A/36/215, annex.
32

NAr!ON~I

I. Attention should be given to the expansion of advisory services on
youth activities provided by the United Nations to Governments at their
request.
2. Governments should consider the inclusion of youth representatives
in their national delegations to the General Assembly and to other relevant
United Nations meetings.
B

28

165

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

REGIONAi.

., . The regional commissions should review their relationships with
regional non-governmental youth organizations in order to facilitate cooperation with and among ,uch urgan izations.
4. The regional commissions should pay special attention to the question of the active participatinn nf youth in the process of development and
1
"

Resolution J.S/56. annex

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

166

should consider the need to co-operate closely with the international programmes of the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization for the provision of services for and by youth
with regard to employment.
5. In the context of paragraph 4 above, the executive secretaries of
the regional commissions, within their mandates, should consider the promotion and co-ordination within their respective regions of all activities
regarding the integration and participation of youth in development.
6. The regional commissions should consider the possibility of organizing regional workshops on questions relating to youth.
7. The regional commissions should, with the assistance of regional
liaison officers, strengthen their co-operation with youth organizations.

C.
8.

INTERNATIONAL

The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should continue

arrangements for the promotion and co-ordination of activities in the field
of youth and the integration of those activities into the over-all programmes
of social and economic development. This could be done by, inter alia.
regularly including the item concerning youth in its agenda or convening
ad hoe interagency meetings on youth, or both.
9. The practice of providing internships for youth should be expanded
in order to give a broad section of young people from all regions of the
world the opportunity of being acquainted with the United Nations and
thereby learning of its activities. Those internships should not be confined
to United Nations Headquarters.
10. The Joint United Nations Information Committee should take into
account the views of youth organizations representative of all regions of
the world on all phases of production of United Nations publications of
interest to youth and ensure the broadest possible circulation of such
publications.
11. The Secretary-General should continue to strengthen and promote
the relationship with, and assistance to, the Geneva informal meetings of
international non-governmental youth organizations as an important channel of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations.

36/18.

National experience in promoting the cooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/47 of 14 December 1978 on
national experience in promoting the co-operative movement and other relevant resolutions referred to in that
resolution,
Desiring to promote the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 36
Reaffirming that co-operatives play an important role in
the socio-economic development of developing countries,
Convinced that the exchange among countries of national
experience relating to the co-operative movement plays an
essential role in strengthening the co-operatives for the benefit of their members and in overcoming difficulties in the
development of various co-operatives,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement; 37
2. Invites the regional commissions and specialized
agencies concerned to make further efforts with a view to
promoting the co-operative movement as an effective instrument for the improvement of the well-being of the
population;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with Member States and relevant organizations of
the United Nations system, a comprehensive report on national experience in promoting the co-operative movement,
paying special attention, inter alia, to the following aspects:
36

Resolution 35/56, annex.
37
A/36/115.

(a) Role of co-operatives in over-all social and economic development, particularly in rural areas;
(b) Participation of peasants, including landless peasants, as well as of women and youth in co-operatives;
(c) Ability of co-operatives to increase the material
welfare of their members;
(d) Interrelationship between agrarian reform and agricultural co-operatives;
(e) Difficulties faced by countries in the establishment
and development of co-operatives and their experience in
overcoming them;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit,
through the Commission for Social Development and the
Economic and Social Council, the above-mentioned report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session for discussion under the item entitled "National experience in
achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the
purpose of social progress''.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 1981

36/19.

National experience in achieving far-reaching
social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress
The General Assembly.
Guided by the desire to promote a higher standard of life,

full employment and conditions for economic and social
progress and development,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, .ls
Mindful of the provisions of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order39 as well as the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, 40
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions 1581 A
(L) of 21 May 1971. 1667 (LII) of I June 1972 and 1746
(LIV) of 16 May 1973 concerning the importance of fundamental structural socio-economic changes for the
strengthening of national independence and the achievement
of the ultimate goals of social progress,
Recalling its resolutions 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974 and 3 l /38 of 30 November 1976, in which it reaffirmed
the importance for every State to exercise its inalienable
right to carry out fundamental social and economic changes
for the purpose of social progress and the necessity of studying national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal of
all obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples,
especially colonialism, racism, racial discrimination,
apartheid, military, political and economic intervention and
pressures, foreign aggression and occupation or alien domination as well as all forms of inequality and exploitation
of peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexistence and co-operation
among States as well as measures in the field of disarmament
create favourable international conditions for the socio-economic development of all countries, in particular developing
ones,

"Resolution 2542 (XXlY), annex.
0
'
Resolutions 3201 (S-YI) and 3202 (S-Yl).
0
•
Resolution 3281 (XXlX).
