104

31/123.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

International Year for Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its deep-rooted faith in human rights
and fundamental freedoms, the principles of peace, the
dignity and worth of the human person and the promotion of social justice, as proclaimed by the Charter of
the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 2856 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 proclaiming the Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons,
Recalling its resolution 3447 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 proclaiming the Declaration on the Rights of
Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 31/82 of 13 December 1976
on the implementation of the Declaration on the Rights
of Disabled Persons,
l. Proclaims the year 1981 International Year for
Disabled Persons, with the theme "full participation";
2. Decides to devote that year to the realization
of a set of objectives, including:
(a) Helping disabled persons in their physical and
psychological adjustment to society;
( b) Promoting all national and international efforts
to provide disabled persons with proper assistance,
training, care and guidance, to make available to them
opportunities for suitable work and to ensure their full
integration in society;
( c) Encouraging study and research projects designed to facilitate the practical participation of disabled
persons in daily life, for example by improving their
access to public buildings and transportation systems;
(d) Educating and informing the public of the
rights of disabled persons to participate in and contribute to various aspects of economic, social and political life;
( e) Promoting effective measures for the prevention
of disability and for the rehabilitation of disabled persons;
3. Invites all Member States and the organizations
concerned to give their attention to the establishment
of measures and programmes to implement the objectives of the International Year for Disabled Persons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate, in
consultation with Member States, specialized agencies
and the organizations concerned, and to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a draft
programme for the International Year for Disabled
Persons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "International
Year for Disabled Persons".
I 02nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,4 1 everyone has the right
to life, liberty and the security of person and the right
not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Considering that, in its resolution 3448 (XXX) of
9 December 1975, the General Assembly expressed its
profound distress at the constant and flagrant violations
of human rights which have taken place and continue
to take place in Chile, including the institutionalized
practice of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, arbitrary arrest, detention and
exile,
Reaffirming once more its condemnation of all forms
of torture and of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Considering that its previous appeals to the Chilean
authorities and, likewise, appeals by the Economic and
Social Council, the Commission on Human Rights, the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for the restoration and safeguarding of
basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile
have hitherto remained unheeded,
Bearing in mind resolutions 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975 42 and 3 (XXXII) of 19 February 197643
of the Commission on Human Rights,
Taking into account resolution 3 B (XXIX) of 31
August 197 644 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
Having considered the reports of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, 411
as well as the documents submitted by the Chilean
authorities, 46
Taking note of the statement by the Chilean authorities of 16 November 1976, brought to the attention of
the General Assembly by a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Chile, 47
Commending the Chairman and the members of the
Ad Hoe Working Group for the thorough and objective
manner in which the report was prepared, despite the
refusal of the Chilean authorities to permit the Group
to visit the country in accordance with its mandate,
Concluding that constant and flagrant violations of
basic human rights and fundamental freedoms continue
to take place in Chile,
1. Expresses its profound indignation that constant
and flagrant violations of human rights have taken
-n Resolution 217 A (III).

31/124.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assemhly,
Reiterating its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,

4 2 See Official Records of the

Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXIII,
sect. A.
43 Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768), chap.
XX, sect. A.
44 See E/CN.4/1218, chap. XVII, part A.
45 A/ 10285, annex; A/31/253, annex.
46 A/C.3/31/4-6 and A/C.3/31/6/Add.1.
4 7 A/C.3/31/11.
