S/PV.8652

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8652nd meeting

Wednesday, 30 October 2019, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Pandor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alduwaisan
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Janiak
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Clay
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi (S/2019/837)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34095 (E)
*1934095*

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi (S/2019/837)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/837, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I welcome
the opportunity that you have granted me, Madam
President, to brief the Security Council as it considers
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Burundi (S/2019/837). I would first like to congratulate
you, Madam, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to convey greetings to the other members
of the Council.
Today’s briefing is on the document entitled “Report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi”,
which was published on 24 October and has already
been submitted for the Council’s consideration. The
first part of my briefing concerns some observations
drawn from the report. The second part provides an
update of my work on the inter-Burundian dialogue. In
the third part, I will make some recommendations on
the need for the United Nations to maintain its presence
in Burundi.
2/21

30/10/2019

With regard to observations from the report, I
would like to note that, in many respects, the situation
in Burundi remains tense. During the reporting period,
an increase in the level of political intolerance and a
growing threat to civil and political freedoms were
observed. Fortunately, the Government responded
by establishing a framework for political dialogue,
bringing together political parties, local administrators
and representatives of the security forces. That
initiative should be encouraged and supported, as
should the life sentences given to four perpetrators
of the 18 August murder in Muyinga of a member of
the Congrès national pour la liberté, as well as the
ongoing discussions between the National Council for
Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule of Law
(CNARED) and the Government with regard to the
return of political leaders in exile.
The second observation is about the electoral
process, which, as Council members know, is managed
by the Independent National Electoral Commission.
It is hoped that process will be transparent. Poorly
organized and contested elections, as we all know, are
always a source of conflict.
The third observation pertains to the socioeconomic
situation. There is no need for an in-depth analysis: the
situation continues to deteriorate.
The fourth observation focuses on the security
situation, which, it must be admitted, has improved
throughout the country, although abuses and other
human rights violations continue to be reported here
and there. In any case, it is appropriate to encourage the
Government to meet its obligations to guarantee at all
costs the safety of all of its citizens and to put an end
to impunity.
The fifth, and last, observation is related to the
humanitarian situation, which also remains a matter of
concern. We must nevertheless welcome the voluntary
return of thousands of refugees to the country, while
ensuring that their return and reintegration are carried
out with dignity.
The inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of
the East African Community has still not taken place
four years after it was launched, undoubtedly due to a
lack of political will on the part of the parties as well
as, it must be said, firm commitment by States of the
subregion. However, the dialogue would have allowed
for an inclusive new Burundi in the future, thereby
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

avoiding the doubts and continual stumbling blocks
that we have seen in the past.
However, the twentieth Ordinary Summit of
Heads of State of the East African Community, held in
Arusha on 1 February, decided that the mediator would
undertake further consultations in order to convene
and conclude the dialogue. Unfortunately, nothing
has changed.
In the context of that uncertainty, I have once again
undertaken consultations with leaders of the region,
starting with President Yoweri Museveni, the mediator,
who met with me at his residence in Uganda on
23 August. During our talks, he unequivocally affirmed
to me his willingness to continue the mediation together
with President Kagame, Chair of the East African
Community, as well as the other Heads of State of the
region, but also with the support of the United Nations,
whose continuing critical support he requests.
Having completed those recent steps, it is the right
time for me to conclude my mandate as Special Envoy
for Burundi. In fact, last June I notified the SecretaryGeneral of my intention to leave. But my meeting with
the mediator, scheduled by him originally for 19 July
but which in the end took place in August, discouraged
me from officially announcing my decision. Today, I
confirm it.
I can say that, while we did not manage to conclude
the dialogue process in Burundi, the role of the United
Nations is far from having been insignificant. We
have indisputably helped to raise awareness among
the leaders of the region that stability in Burundi is
a crucial requirement for comprehensive peace in the
region as a whole.
With that important point that I have just made,
namely, the United Nations ongoing commitment to
Burundi, allow me to briefly describe, if only by way
of accountability, the main activities undertaken under
the mandate entrusted to me.
Since my appointment by the Secretary-General
on 5 May 2017 as Special Envoy for Burundi, I have
spared no effort to assist the facilitation and the region
in completing the inter-Burundian dialogue process. In
that regard, on several occasions, I made visits to the
region and consulted key leaders, including the mediator
and facilitator, as well as the Burundian stakeholders.
On many occasions, I also met with the authorities
of the African Union to raise their awareness and

S/PV. 8652

request their commitment to finding a consensusbased solution in Burundi. I also have approached some
African Heads of State, always for the same purpose.
In the two and a half years of my work, I was
received once by President Pierre Nkurunziza. More
exactly, it was the day after my appointment, on 27 June
2017. The hopes raised by that first meeting with the
Head of State of Burundi, particularly on issues
related to dialogue and cooperation with the United
Nations, including the signing of the status-of-mission
agreement, have unfortunately still not been fulfilled.
During my periodic visits to Burundi, I had
working sessions with the main political actors and
leaders, both from the opposition and the ruling party. I
also had meetings with representatives of civil society,
of religious denominations and of women’s and youth
organizations and of course with accredited diplomats
in the country. I met with members of CNARED
in Brussels to persuade them to participate in the
dialogue, which was the only way for them was to work
on the renewal and reconstruction of their country.
My Office in Bujumbura has established cooperative
relationships with all parties concerned, particularly
with representatives of the Government and of the
international community and the main political actors.
Within the joint technical working group set up
to support the facilitator’s efforts, my Office has
provided significant technical, logistical and financial
support, thereby contributing to the convening of
several consultations, including plenary sessions of the
dialogue, in Arusha and Entebbe.
The multifaceted support of my Office and my
personal engagement with the facilitator and the
mediator have often helped to remove certain political
and technical obstacles and made it possible to continue
the peace process in Burundi.
Since taking up office, I have had the opportunity to
report regularly to the Council on developments in the
situation in Burundi. I appreciated members’ comments,
advice and encouragement. As I conclude my mandate,
I would like to thank them in that regard and for their
assistance and constant and comprehensive support. I
thank the Secretary-General for the trust he has placed
in me throughout my term. I thank Ambassador Jürg
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to thank all
my colleagues, in particular the staff of the Office of
the Special Envoy in Bujumbura and of the Department

19-340953/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

of Political Affairs and Peacebuilding here in New
York. I thank the authorities and the people of Burundi.
In a word, I express my sincere gratitude to all those
who have facilitated my work over the past two years.
The President: I thank Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): On behalf of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
I thank the Security Council for inviting me to brief
it as well as for the excellent cooperation between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
In line with established practice, the following
statement has been approved by the members of the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, including the country
concerned, Burundi. I had the opportunity to provide
an overview of the configuration’s engagement with
Burundi to the Council during the informal interactive
dialogue held on 28 August. On that occasion. I
highlighted that the discussions in the configuration
reflect the shared commitment to continue supporting
Burundi leading up to 2020 elections and beyond with
a view to the consolidation of peace and promoting
inclusive socioeconomic development.
On 27 September, on the margins of the opening
of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,
I was received by His Excellency Ezéchiel Nibigira,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, for a bilateral
meeting. Our discussions centred on the next steps in
terms of peacebuilding activities in Burundi, including
my next visit to the country as Chair of the PBC
Burundi configuration. I said that the configuration
will continue serving as a platform for dialogue on
cooperation between Burundi and its international
partners in support of the implementation of Burundi’s
national development plan. I also highlighted the
importance of preventing a slowdown in socioeconomic
programmes as the 2020 elections draw closer.
Furthermore, I underscored the need for peaceful, free,
fair and inclusive elections and suggested that the PBC
can serve as a platform for identifying activities that
support an environment conducive to such a process.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs indicated that the
Ministry of the Interior of Burundi recently convened
meetings between the ruling party and the opposition
parties, including the Congrès national pour la liberté,
and that the Government issued a call for tolerance to
all political actors.
4/21

30/10/2019

On previous occasions I have underlined the
importance of ensuring that the PBC’s engagement
complements and is coherent with that of other actors,
including the Security Council, member States of the
region and the United Nations system as a whole. In
line with this approach, I continue engaging with key
interlocutors on developments in Burundi. I recently had
the privilege of exchanging thoughts with the Secretary
General of the East African Community, Ambassador
Libérat Mfumukeko; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita; and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel
Kafando, who is also in the Chamber today. I would like
to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to
the Special Envoy for our excellent working relationship
and for his support, advice and commitment.
Let me now turn to the developments in Burundi
that are relevant from a peacebuilding perspective, and
to what they mean for the configuration’s engagement.
First, the preparations for the 2020 general elections
continue to shape the political context in the country.
Burundian Government representatives have underlined
on several occasions that President Nkurunziza will
not stand as a candidate in the upcoming elections. The
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie, is
expected to choose its presidential candidate in early
2020. According to media reports, several politicians
belonging to opposition parties have recently returned
to Burundi for discussions on their repatriation and the
current electoral process. At the same time, reports
of alleged human rights violations and incidents of
damage to infrastructure belonging to political parties
have raised concerns over the democratic space ahead
of the elections.
During the configuration’s previous meeting, on
12 June, the Permanent Representative of Burundi,
Ambassador Albert Shingiro, informed PBC member
States about the advanced state of preparations for the
elections, including the Government’s adoption of the
Kayanza road map, the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, the adoption of
the electoral code in April and the publication of the
electoral calendar in June. The Burundi configuration
has further been informed of the passing of the 20192020 budget law, which provides for the financing of
the 2020 elections with domestic resources. In parallel,
the configuration can serve as a platform for identifying
assistance for activities falling outside the operational
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

budget for the elections that might contribute to
fostering an environment conducive to peaceful, free,
fair and inclusive elections.
Secondly, the voluntary return of Burundian
refugees from neighbouring countries is critical to
peacebuilding, particularly at the community level. At
the configuration’s most recent meeting, the Permanent
Representative of Burundi informed members of the
return of large numbers of Burundians to the country
from neighbouring Tanzania. Member States have
consistently called for these returns to be organized in
full respect of international law and underscored the
principles of voluntary, dignified and safe return. The
PBC has also served as a platform for highlighting the
persistent funding needs for supporting the voluntary
and dignified return of Burundians from neighbouring
countries, with the assistance of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
multi-agency efforts aimed at enabling the sustainable
integration of returnees.
Thirdly, socioeconomic cooperation remains key
to reducing vulnerabilities, strengthening resilience
and improving disaster preparedness and response
in Burundi. Cooperation in relation to implementing
the Ebola response plan has brought together the
Government of Burundi and technical and financial
partners, including international non-governmental
organizations, in a multi-sectoral, multi-partner
approach centred around a key concern for the
Burundian population. PBC member States have
indicated their wish for an intensification of dialogue
with the Government of Burundi at the strategic and
sector-specific levels in support of the implementation
of Burundi’s development priorities. The configuration
also continues to serve as a platform for bringing
partners, including the World Bank, together in pursuit
of common objectives spelled out in the relevant
strategic frameworks and in line with the national
development plan.
Finally, the effective and meaningful inclusion
of women and youth in public life and their full
participation in decision-making on the future of
their country is a crucial factor for sustaining peace.
The second iteration of the International Conference
of Women Leaders, convened by the First Lady
of Burundi, Mrs. Denise Nkurunziza, from 24 to
26 October, called on women to follow their destiny,
take courage and act, as the consolidation of peace is
their business. In line with the PBC’s gender strategy,

S/PV. 8652

member States have also expressed their support for
the empowerment of women in Burundi. The PBC can
play a further role — and should in fact intensify its
efforts — in support of initiatives aimed at preventing
conflict and mitigating tensions at the community
level. The importance of such initiatives in promoting
dialogue and reconciliation extends beyond the
electoral period, as it serves to strengthen resilience
and preserve the gains achieved through the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) supports projects
that strengthen local dialogue, social cohesion,
reconciliation, conflict resolution and prevention, the
empowerment of women and youth and the voluntary
reintegration of refugees. The total budget for
operational projects approved under the PBF is slightly
over $14 million. As the testimonies of Burundian women
mediators have made clear, support for the participation
of women in peace processes must take a broad approach
that includes the strengthening of women’s economic
autonomy through revenue-generating activities.
I intend to pursue my mandate for the PBC
Burundi configuration in line with the priorities and
recommendations that have received the support of
the member States of the configuration, including
possibilities for the PBC to accompany Burundi along
the path towards free, fair, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020, as well as the continuation of the
socioeconomic dialogue with the Government and its
international partners. In close cooperation with my
Burundian counterpart, I will continue to promote the
PBC as a platform for dialogue and exchange between
Burundi and a broad range of member States and
partners within the United Nations system and beyond.
In close cooperation with the Burundian authorities, I
am also preparing a visit to Burundi. As usual, I will
seek to engage with a broad range of interlocutors,
from Government representatives and political parties
to civil society, women and youth, economic actors and
international and regional partners.
Allow me to conclude with the following
observations and recommendations. First, I encourage
the United Nations to remain engaged in Burundi
through an integrated approach, drawing on the
strengths of each entity and striving towards policy
coherence in order to consolidate peacebuilding gains
and stay alert to the risks that jeopardize these gains.

19-340955/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

Secondly, the Government of Burundi, political
parties and other stakeholders, with the support of the
member States of the subregion, the African Union
and the United Nations, should work together in order
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
peaceful, free, fair and inclusive elections, including
efforts aimed at ensuring the full realization of all
human rights.
Thirdly, I call on all Member States to increase
their support for projects and initiatives aimed at
reducing violence and mitigating tension, including at
the community level, throughout the election cycle. I
will continue to encourage the configuration to serve as
a platform for identifying further possibilities to scale
up this support.
Fourthly, funding is urgently needed for the
2019 joint refugee return and reintegration plan. This
inter-agency response plan is designed to offer safe and
dignified repatriation to Burundian refugees returning
from the subregion and to promote their resilience
and sustainable reintegration. I call on Member States
to give maximum support to this comprehensive
plan, which is exemplary in leveraging synergies
among existing humanitarian and development plans,
including Burundi’s national development plan, with a
view to ensuring sustainable reintegration. Continued
assistance is equally needed to maintain humanitarian
standards in refugee camps in order to guarantee that
return remains an entirely voluntary decision.
Fifthly, through the configuration, I will pursue
efforts aimed at sustaining international support for the
implementation of the national development plan and at
assisting dialogue between the Government of Burundi
and its bilateral and multilateral partners around the
priorities identified in the plan.
I thank Council members for their interest and
continued support for the PBC.
The President: I thank Ambassador Lauber for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.
We thank the former President of Burkina Faso,
Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings on the
6/21

30/10/2019

evolving situation in Burundi and for their unwavering
commitment to the process.
South Africa takes this opportunity to express our
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Burundi for his tireless efforts aimed at
leading the supportive role of the United Nations in
the inter-Burundian dialogue being led by the East
African Community (EAC). We thank him for his role
in engaging with all the stakeholders in the Burundi
process and for working with all Burundian parties to
develop much-needed confidence-building measures
to improve the human rights and security situation in
the country. His work with the Government and the
East African Community leadership has fostered an
environment conducive to political dialogue and an allinclusive reconciliation process.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Burundi (S/2019/837), which reflects on
the most recent developments in the country. We take
note of the proposed suggestions on how best to enhance
an inclusive dialogue and the possible role of the United
Nations in the run-up to the general elections scheduled
for 20 May 2020. This would bolster the efforts of the
East African Community, which is charged with the
responsibility of overseeing the Burundi process.
South Africa continues to fully support the EACled process in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, with the support
of the African Union (AU) and the United Nations. We
welcome the recent engagement between President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, as the mediator of the
process, and Special Envoy Kafando on 23 August.
We note with interest the three-point non-paper, which
speaks to strengthening mediation efforts and injecting
much-needed momentum into the Burundi process. In
that regard, the work of former President Benjamin
Mkapa of Tanzania remains invaluable. We look forward
to the leadership of the East African Community and
the African Union in charting the course on Burundi
with the assistance of, and in coordination with, the
United Nations.
South Africa urges the Council to continue to
coordinate its positions with those of the AU Peace and
Security Council when dealing with African issues.
Africa has very clearly defined regional organizations
that deal systematically with issues related to African
peace and security. We maintain that it is only through
an inclusive dialogue that we can address any political
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

impasse in Burundi and that this requires that the
international community support the East African
Community initiatives. There should be an environment
conducive to dialogue among the key stakeholders in
the East African Community-led process.
As a guarantor of the Arusha Agreement and
as part of the legacy of former President Nelson
Mandela, we in South Africa will always stand ready
to support the Government and the people of Burundi
as they consolidate peace, as well as to assist with
the development of their country. We congratulate
the Government of Burundi on initiating a number of
preparatory processes for the elections, especially the
establishment of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the adoption of the Burundian electoral
code and the publication of the 2020 election calendar.
Furthermore, the establishment of new political parties
and the decision by the Government to set up nationwide
mixed committees to include the youth from all political
parties in a bid to avoid election-related violence is to be
commended. All parties must be permitted to canvass
support countrywide without hindrance. There should
be no no-go areas for any politician or political party.
South Africa welcomes the commitment by
President Pierre Nkurunziza not to stand as a candidate
for the presidential election in 2020, and we look
forward to seeing the Government and political parties
work together to hold inclusive and peaceful elections.
Burundians must be the beneficiaries of free and fair
elections that can deliver democracy and development
with the assistance of the region. We are encouraged by
the continued stable security situation in the country,
and we commend the decision of the Government of
Burundi to finance the elections with their national
budget as its sovereign responsibility. However, we
encourage Burundi to work closely with the East
African Community and the African Union to deliver
a truly conducive environment in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.
We
commend
Burundi’s
contribution
to
international peace and security through its deployment
of more than 6,000 Burundian men and women in
various peacekeeping operations, mostly in the Central
African Republic and Somalia. As a member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, Burundi
is to be congratulated on remaining committed to the
promotion of peace and security by contributing to
silencing the guns in Africa.

S/PV. 8652

South Africa remains gravely concerned at the dire
humanitarian situation in the country. Nearly 1.8 million
Burundians are need of humanitarian assistance, with a
large proportion suffering from malnutrition. We urge
the Security Council and the international community to
do more to alleviate the socioeconomic challenges and
the humanitarian situation facing the people of Burundi
and call on its partners to support the implementation
of the national development plan for the benefit of the
Burundian people.
We are encouraged by the ongoing voluntary
repatriation of Burundian refugees, which since
September 2017 has seen the voluntary repatriation
of 78,000 refugees to Burundi. The increased return
is a manifestation of a return to peace and stability
in the country, and we call on the international
community to provide assistance for their repatriation
and reintegration, as the humanitarian response plan
continues to remain severely underfunded.
In conclusion, we appeal to the Security Council and
the international community to support the Government
of Burundi and the East African Community mediation
process as it lays the foundation for an environment
that is conducive to the holding of democratic elections
and to support a peaceful transfer of power in order to
ensure peace and stability beyond 2020.
We thank Mr. Lauber and Mr. Kafando for their
work and for their briefings to the Council today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the Ambassador of Switzerland
for their briefings and, above all, for their work in
support of peace and reconciliation in Burundi.
France would also like to see the rule of law and
human rights respected in Burundi and for the country
to experience development and growth and benefit
from the current momentum in the Great Lakes region.
The 2020 elections will be a crucial moment; only the
organization of free elections will allow Burundi to
find its way back to stability. The electoral deadlines
must be prepared for by consensus, with the trust
of all political actors and the population. President
Nkurunziza’s commitment not to stand for re-election

19-340957/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

and the ongoing discussions with some political leaders
in exile contribute to reduced tensions, but the violence
against activists, the arbitrary arrest of journalists and
members of the opposition and the acts of vandalism
against the opposition party’s offices must be condemned
and stopped. France urges the Burundian authorities to
prosecute the perpetrators and do everything possible
to ensure that such acts are not repeated.
The guarantee of freedom of expression during
the campaign, the opening of political space and the
security of candidates and supporters of the various
parties would be welcome. Such technical measures as
electoral observation by citizens and transparency in
vote counting could also help to build that trust. Several
partners have indicated their willingness to support
Burundi in preparing the elections if it so wishes.
France strongly encourages the Burundian authorities
to take advantage of this opportunity.
In parallel, France remains concerned about the
persistence of human rights violations in the country
as well as violence, including sexual violence, and the
closure of the Human Rights Office in Burundi. We
encourage the Burundian authorities to fully respect
their international commitments in terms of protecting
human rights. These measures are also necessary for
holding inclusive and peaceful elections. In that regard,
France will continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation with great attention.
Beyond preparing the elections, and in the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement, political dialogue remains
necessary for the situation to be normalized. Such
a dialogue will also help to build confidence in the
electoral process and prevent elections from being held
in an atmosphere of tension.
France encourages the East African Community to
continue its mediation efforts and further calls on the
Burundian authorities to engage in dialogue with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. In the pivotal
period ahead, it is important that the United Nations
remain fully engaged. This heightened focus is justified
both by the pre-electoral monitoring and by the risk that
any deterioration of the situation in Burundi might pose
for the region. That is why the Security Council cannot
ignore the situation in the country.
The commitment of the Secretary-General and his
teams remains more necessary than ever before. We
fully support the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral. Accordingly, France urges Burundi to finalize
8/21

30/10/2019

without delay the agreement on the status of the mission
for the Office of the Special Envoy, as the SecretaryGeneral has requested.
I would conclude by saying that we regret the
Special Envoy’s departure and that we share his opinion
that the United Nations must continue its involvement
in Burundi, and by extending a personal warm thanks
to President Kafando.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Kafando for his two and a half years
of service promoting peace and stability in Burundi.
His office has played an important role in working
to stabilize the country and foster political dialogue.
We look forward to working with his successor to
support Burundi through credible elections and the
peaceful transfer of power. I thank Ambassador Lauber
for his briefing and his encouragement to continue
the dialogue.
The Security Council is charged with maintaining
international peace and security, but in so many cases
what that really means is investing in the conditions
that ultimately produce human flourishing. Simply
put, it means investing in the futures of countries and
their peoples.
The May 2020 elections are the key to Burundi’s
future. It is therefore critical that, as the representatives
of France and Switzerland and the President have said,
the elections be inclusive, free and fair. Women and
young adults, opposition and ruling party leaders, civil
society representatives, journalists, prominent political
activists and refugees displaced by political violence all
have an equal role to play.
We welcome President Nkurunziza’s recent
remarks affirming his commitment to peaceful
elections and encourage the Government to take
tangible steps towards this goal. One of those steps is
to allow international and domestic election observers
unfettered access to the election process.
An open and permissive political environment is
also critical to credible elections. Political candidates
from all parties should be free to campaign without
threat of reprisal or interference. We are concerned by
repeated attacks and harassment targeting members of
opposition parties and reports of politically motivated
violence and intimidation. For example, the recent
destruction of the regional political offices of the
Congrès national pour la liberté party will serve
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

only to repress opposition voices and undermine free
expression. The extrajudicial arrests, beatings, acts of
intimidation and kidnappings that have been reported
are unacceptable in a free society. We call on all political
parties and their supporters to campaign peacefully and
reject violence.
Those convictions proceed from our broader belief
that basic civic freedoms are essential to democracy.
We urge the Burundian Government to respect the
country’s international legal obligations regarding
rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
free association. Journalist, activist and civil society
organizations must be allowed to operate independently,
free from threats of intimidation and violence. All
Burundian citizens should be free to participate fully
and actively in the electoral process.
The voluntary return of Burundian refugees also
remains a top priority for the future stability of the
country and the region. These citizens are an integral
part of Burundi’s national fabric, and their active
participation in political and civil civic life is needed
now more than ever. We urge the Governments of
Burundi and Tanzania to work closely with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), countries of the region and international
non-governmental organizations to facilitate the
voluntary, dignified and safe repatriation of Burundian
nationals without threat or harassment.
While the United States urges Burundi to make
needed investments in its own future, we are investing
in that future as well. Every year we contribute more
than $50 million in bilateral aid, which touches the lives
of nearly every Burundian citizen by supporting the
health sector, economic growth and peacebuilding. We
also partner with the World Food Programme, UNHCR
and UNICEF to provide emergency assistance to
Burundian and Congolese refugees, including children.
We are encouraged by the remarkable progress that
Burundian authorities have made in the fight against
HIV and AIDS. While work remains to be done on
malaria and Ebola preparedness, significant strides
have been made, and we encourage the Government of
Burundi to continue those efforts.
Developments in Burundi directly affect the entire
Great Lakes region, which means that improving
Burundi’s human rights situation and holding free,
fair and inclusive elections will brighten not only the
future of Burundi but of all of Central and East Africa.

S/PV. 8652

The United States will continue to invest in this better
future, and we urge all Member States to do the same.
Mr. Polyanskiy (The Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Jürg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their detailed briefings.
I want to begin with a few words about the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837) presented to the
meeting today. I have to admit that we were stunned
at the conspicuous speed with which it was prepared.
The Secretariat’s willingness to incur extra costs is
particularly striking in the light of the current financial
difficulties of the United Nations, which the SecretaryGeneral has been anxiously pointing out to us. In future
we urge the Secretariat to adhere firmly to the Council’s
resolutions and not to permit this type of extravagance.
Turning to the substance of the report, we were
pleased that the security situation in Burundi has
essentially remained unchanged since the holding of the
informal interactive dialogue on Burundi at the end of
August. The situation has continued relatively calm and
is showing signs of stabilizing. The voluntary return
of refugees continues. In that regard, we welcomed the
signing in August of an intergovernmental agreement
with Tanzania on repatriating Burundian citizens
from there.
We note that the Burundian authorities are
continuing to take steps to prepare for the country’s
central political event, the forthcoming presidential,
parliamentary and regional elections to be held in
May 2020. The electoral timetable has been agreed
on and is being respected, funds for the elections have
been allocated from the national budget and the list of
political parties registered to participate is growing.
We welcomed the August and September meetings held
by Burundi’s First Vice-President and Minister of the
Interior with political-party and regional leaders on
the preparation for the elections. We were especially
pleased with the participation in the meetings of
representatives of opposition parties, including the
Congrès national pour la liberté. We also think that the
public awareness campaign being conducted by the Chair
of the Independent National Electoral Commission is
helpful, and we urge Burundi’s leadership to continue
such efforts.

19-340959/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

With respect to the incidents of violence detailed in
the report, I would like to point out that in the interests
of a more object portrayal of the situation, it would be
appropriate to cite and consider the relevant statistics
in the context of the situation rather than describing
individual violations of human rights, an approach that
would make the current trends seem less gloomy.
The primary reason for the dispute between
Burundi’s political forces long ago ceased to be an issue
with President Nkurunziza’s repeated announcements
that he will not stand as a candidate in the forthcoming
elections, while the ruling party, the Conseil national
pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense
de la démocratie, intends to announce its candidate
early in 2020. We are pleased that the Burundian
Government has taken steps to establish a dialogue
with the opposition, and in that regard we welcome
the meetings held in Nairobi and Bujumbura with
representatives of the exiled opposition platform, the
Conseil national pour le respect de l’Accord d’Arusha
pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et la
restauration de l’état de droit.
We once again call for respect for Burundi’s
sovereignty. The Russian Federation is categorically
opposed to interference in its domestic affairs and
especially in the context of elections. It is our belief
that what the Government of Burundi needs most right
now is support for its efforts on the socioeconomic
front. In that regard, we welcome the steps taken
based on the approach of the country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
implementation of Bujumbura’s 2018-2027 national
development plan. In our view, further progress in that
direction could help to restore economic assistance
to Burundi in full accord with the calls made at the
African Union Summits in Nouakchott in July 2018
and in Addis Ababa in February of this year, especially
given that our African colleagues consider the measures
taken to exert economic influence on Bujumbura to be
equivalent to sanctions.
In general, we continue to believe that the Security
Council’s continued intense focus on Burundi is
counterproductive and that it is high time it was taken
off the Council’s already overburdened agenda.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, for his detailed report on recent
10/21

30/10/2019

developments in Burundi. We also thank Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his informative briefing.
I am also pleased to see my brother Ambassador Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi, here
with us today.
We appreciate the efforts and work of the facilitator
and mediator for the conversations throughout the
inter-Burundian dialogue process and hope that
President Museveni of the East African Community
will continue his work.
Equatorial Guinea very much appreciates the
spirit of reconciliation and tolerance that is currently
evident in Burundi with the return home of exiled
political leaders under guarantees for their security.
To that should be added the approval of the Congrès
national pour la liberté, a new opposition party led by
Mr. Agathon Rwasa, as well as various negotiations
being conducted both inside and outside the country for
the return of political exiles and refugees. Together with
the release of more than 3,000 prisoners, among them
former insurgents during the violent demonstrations of
2015, as well as the return of more than 210,000 refugees
since 2016 with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, those facts
speak to the very positive evolution of the situation in
our brother country in Central Africa. In that regard, we
welcome the agreement signed with Tanzania. As the
African Union did at its thirty-second summit of Heads
of State and Government on 10 February, the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea therefore warmly welcomes
Burundi’s major efforts to establish and consolidate the
calm and political stability that currently reign in the
country, which have resulted in its election to the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and show
us that there is now a return to normality in Burundi
following the destabilization attempts in the wake of
the electoral process in 2015.
We welcomed the visit to Burundi on 31 August
by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa. We also consider the meetings held between
various sectors of the population, the Government,
political actors and members of civil society to be
productive, and we welcome their recommendations
to Burundi on improving relations with the United
Nations,
strengthening
and
invigorating
the
inter-Burundi dialogue and building peace through
preventive diplomacy. I would like to point out that
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

Burundi is a major troop contributor to peace missions,
having contributed more than 6,000 troops.
I also express our satisfaction at the high level of
political will shown by the Government of Burundi
in assuming 100 per cent of the costs of the electoral
process, demonstrating once again its commitment
to that process. Its willingness is also embodied by
the appointment of new members to the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the publication of
the electoral calendar on 28 June, which establishes
deadlines for the elections and addresses other
procedural matters. In that regard, we would like to
highlight that President Nkurunziza has decided not to
stand as a candidate in next year’s elections. We continue
to encourage the Government of Burundi to continue
leveraging and fostering inclusive dialogue among all
the parties involved and interested in the establishment
and strengthening of adequate mechanisms for the
peaceful, transparent, credible and inclusive holding of
elections in May 2020, in accordance with the Arusha
Agreement, the Kayanza road map and democratic
principles and values, whereby respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law prevails.
In conclusion, the international community
must continue to resolutely support the Government
and other parties directly involved in promoting
confidence-building measures in order to guarantee
an environment conducive to peaceful elections and
the fulfilment of commitments to the Constitution and
the Kayanza road map towards the peaceful transfer
of power in an atmosphere of national peace and
harmony, above all by providing financial support to
the Government for the reintegration of refugees who
are returning voluntarily and en masse to the country.
We believe that the positive evolution of events
points to the need to remove Burundi from the Security
Council’s agenda. Both the Government and the
people of Burundi deserve a vote of confidence from
the international community and the Council, and the
national sovereignty of Burundi must be respected.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful to the briefers for the
information presented today, and especially to Special
Envoy Kafando for his two and a half years of excellent
service in favour of peace and stability in Burundi.
We would like to begin by referring to the upcoming
electoral process, while underscoring the need for
the Government and all stakeholders in the country

S/PV. 8652

to foster an environment conducive to the peaceful
holding of elections, avoiding any risk of the elections
taking place in a climate of tension or distrust.
But, above all, any possibility of human rights
violations must be avoided, in particular the limitation
of the right to freedom of expression. We therefore note
with concern the increase in acts of violence and political
intolerance during the reporting period, including
physical violence, arbitrary arrests and the intimidation
of militants from political parties and journalists,
among others. In that regard, we urge the Government
of Burundi to make greater efforts to assure all citizens
of their right to freedom of expression and association,
especially with regard to political participation, and
to reinforce physical security for those who wish to
exercise their rights in a free and safe way. We urge it
to secure a framework for cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in order to protect human rights in the country.
We note that the socioeconomic situation has yet
to experience tangible improvement, with increases in
both the rate of inflation and the State budget deficit.
We therefore echo the call to keep our attention
focused on the country’s development, having as a
frame of reference the priorities identified in Burundi’s
national development plan, with the support of the
international community.
The number of malaria cases recorded in the country
is especially alarming, with 6.5 million reported in the
first eight months of the year, representing a significant
increase compared to the same period in 2018. The
number of deaths caused by cholera is also alarming.
We applaud Burundi’s efforts with respect to the
significant improvement in its preparedness levels to
mitigate possible outbreaks of the Ebola virus, as well
as the reduction of chronic malnutrition rates from
56 per cent to 54 per cent in less than two years.
With regard to the situation of refugees, and in line
with the Burundi regional refugee response plan of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we reiterate that all returns must be voluntary,
safe and dignified, while avoiding instances in which
refugees feel pressured or threatened. It is important
to highlight that the situation of Burundian refugees is
currently the least financed worldwide. We therefore
urge all stakeholders of the Tripartite Commission for
the Voluntary Repatriation of Burundian Refugees
to work arduously at its next meeting, to be held in

19-3409511/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

November, to promote initiatives that protect the rights
of both refugees and displaced persons.
We underscore the idea that all activities by
the United Nations and other regional entities and
international partners must reflect a clear understanding
of the challenges facing the people of Burundi and be
carried out in a way that strengthens the bonds of mutual
trust, respect and honest and transparent collaboration.
We stress the need to consolidate the considerable
progress achieved through the Arusha Agreement and
its centrality for stability in Burundi.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
peaceful, transparent and credible dialogue is the key
element to achieving the political, social and economic
stability that will strengthen democracy and build
lasting peace in Burundi.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to join others in thanking the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
for their very comprehensive briefings. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Burundi (S/2019/837). We join in his hope for Burundi to
be able to take its place in the region and the international
community. Allow me to also take this opportunity to
extend our appreciation to the Special Envoy for his
invaluable work over the past two and a half years. We
wish him the best in his future endeavours. I would like
to make the following pertinent points.
First, long-lasting peace in Burundi can be attained
only through mutual respect, inclusive dialogue and
accommodation in the best interests of Burundi and its
people, which includes inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community (EAC). We note the
Secretary-General’s proposal to foster an environment
conducive to political dialogue and to continue
supporting regional efforts. We adhere to his call for
the continuation of consultations among the Burundian
parties, the United Nations, the EAC, the African Union
and other partners. Dialogue is indeed necessary for the
building of trust, including the trust of the international
community. We join the Secretary-General in stressing
the importance of creating the conditions conducive
to the preparation of the upcoming elections in 2020.
All efforts should be taken to ensure transparent and
inclusive elections.
12/21

30/10/2019

Secondly,
Indonesia
calls
for
increased
humanitarian assistance to Burundi. It is worrisome
that there are still 1.8 million people currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. Around 116,000 Burundian
refugees were expected to return this year. Food
insecurity affects 47 per cent of households, 15 per cent
of which are experiencing severe food insecurity.
There have also been sharp increases in malaria
and cholera, with more than 6.5 million cases reported
in the first eight months of the year — a number that
represents a 125 per cent increase over last year. It is
heartbreaking that, despite these increases, the Burundi
regional refugee response plan is among the least-funded
appeals in the world. I urge countries to continue their
support and deliver on their commitments to Burundi.
Thirdly, we must ensure that Burundi does not
relapse into conflict, including beyond 2020. The
role the Peacebuilding Commission plays is crucial in
that regard. We welcome the recommendations of the
Peacebuilding Commission that encourage Burundi
to work together with the United Nations and other
partners to create an environment conducive to the
upcoming elections, and we call on all Member States to
increase their support to projects and initiatives aimed
at reducing violence and mitigating tension, including
at the community level. We also urge Member States to
give maximum support to the 2019 joint refugee return
and reintegration plan.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Special Envoy Michel Kafando for his valuable briefing
and for the important work that he has carried out in
recent years. We also thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber
of Switzerland for his briefing.
Peru highlights the progress that the Government
of Burundi has made in the preparatory processes for
the 2020 general elections, in particular its publication
of a detailed electoral calendar. We hope those actions
will be complemented by further ones to ensure that the
electoral process is inclusive, credible and transparent,
in accordance with the Arusha Agreement, and that the
measures will effectively restore the rule of law and
democratic institutions in the country. Peru believes
that, in order to do that, it is essential to banish all
forms of intolerance and broaden the political sphere
by involving the full and free participation of all
actors in the political life of the country, including the
political groups that are in exile. The success of those
efforts will depend to a large extent on assistance of
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

the international community, and in particular on the
monitoring and support that the African Union and the
East African Community are able to provide, as they
have a core responsibility in these processes.
On another note, Peru is concerned about the
continued reports of human rights violations in Burundi
and underscores the importance of establishing
independent investigative mechanisms. We also
call on the Government of Burundi to strengthen its
cooperation with the various United Nations human
rights protection mechanisms and with independent
civil society organizations. We are also concerned
about the delicate humanitarian situation in the country.
Although there has been progress made towards
preventing Ebola, there is an urgent need to undertake
an effective response with a subregional focus with
regard to the increase in reported cases of malaria and
cholera. In the same vein, the already-critical situation of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
is being exacerbated by food insecurity. We believe
that it is crucial to fully implement Burundi’s national
development plan for the period 2018 to 2027 and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2019 to 2023, which can act as relevant instruments
for Burundi’s medium- and long-term political stability
and socioeconomic development.
We would like to emphasize the important role
that the Peacebuilding Commission has played in the
dialogue process on the socioeconomic situation of the
country, particularly through its promotion of women
as authorities in mediation and resolution of local
conflicts. Both women and youth must play a greater
role in the country’s political processes.
I conclude by reaffirming Peru’s commitment
to achieving sustainable peace in Burundi in order
to create regional stability. We also call on financial
institutions and international donors to contribute to
the achievement of this objective.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
The current situation in Burundi is generally stable.
The preparations for the country’s 2020 elections have
been steadily advancing. The National Independent
Electoral Commission published the electoral calendar
in June, while in July it updated its list of representatives

S/PV. 8652

of civil society organizations that are involved in the
electoral preparations. Progress has been made in
terms of the return of Burundian refugees. The report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
(S/2019/837) published on 24 October shows that 8,000
Burundian refugees have voluntarily returned to the
country since 15 June. The overall security situation
in Burundi has continued to improve. The Government
and the people apparently have made achievements
in pursuing peace and seeking development. China
welcomes those developments.
The peace, stability and development of
Burundi depends on the support and assistance of
the international community. The Council and the
international community should play a constructive
role in helping Burundi achieve lasting peace and
stability. In view of the current situation, China would
like to emphasize the following three points.
First, we must respect the leadership of the
people and the Government of Burundi on the issue
of elections. Since the end of last year, in preparation
for the 2020 elections, the Burundian Government
has been actively engaged with the various parties
in the country to establish the National Independent
Electoral Commission and develop the electoral road
map, and it has repeatedly promised to raise funds
independently. These steps fully demonstrate the ability
and determination of the Government and the people of
Burundi to solve problems on their own. As elections
fall within the realm of the internal affairs of a country,
the international community should fully respect the
choice of the Government and the people of Burundi.
Secondly, we must continue to increase
humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the
country. We hope that the international community and
international partners will honour their commitments
in a timely fashion by helping the refugees return
to their homes and assisting the country as it
relaunches its socioeconomic development, in line
with the development plan drafted by the Burundian
Government. The relevant international organizations
and agencies should resume their economic cooperation
with, and development assistance to, Burundi as soon
as possible. China appreciates and supports the ongoing
constructive assistance the Peacebuilding Commission
and the country team are providing to Burundi.
Thirdly, the current situation in Burundi should
be viewed objectively and fairly. The Government of

19-3409513/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

Burundi has stated on many occasions that Burundi no
longer poses a threat to regional peace and security,
and therefore should not stay on the Council’s agenda.
The Council should heed the country’s views and make
necessary adjustments in a timely manner and based
on the latest developments, so that it can concentrate
its energy on emergency situations that endanger
international peace and security.
China has been actively supporting Burundi’s
political process and national reconstruction. Within
the limits of our ability, we have provided assistance
in many fields, such as agriculture, education and the
building of infrastructure. We stand ready to continue
contributing to peace, stability and sustainable
development in Burundi.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy
Kafando and Ambassador Lauber for their briefings
this afternoon. As Special Envoy Kafando’s briefing
was his last, I would like to thank and commend him
for his efforts and the work he accomplished, which
was often carried out under difficult conditions.
I would like to take this opportunity to address
the situation in Burundi in the lead-up to its 2020
presidential, legislative and local elections. We take
note of the latest developments with respect to the
authorities’ recent gestures of political outreach
towards the opposition, on the one hand, and the
measures that have been taken to prevent and combat
violence that could jeopardize the holding of a credible
electoral campaign, on the other hand. We also want
to highlight Burundi’s requests to various African
partners, the East African Community and the African
Union for support and training for the forthcoming
elections. Belgium welcomes those measures and
encourages the Burundian authorities to continue down
this road in order to ensure that the elections can be
credible, inclusive, peaceful and transparent. We also
hope it will be possible to make further progress in the
following areas.
First, we continue to encourage the entire
population of Burundi to participate peacefully in the
elections. While the release of political prisoners and
the gradual opening of the political and media space
may be important factors, lifting the legal proceedings
against the political and civil-society leaders who want
to return to Burundi would be a major step forward.
Secondly, although we commend the authorities for the
14/21

30/10/2019

recent measures taken to combat electoral violence, as I
said, we remain concerned about the violent incidents,
such as the one in Bubanza on 21 October, that have
occurred from time to time during this period in the
run-up to elections. Thirdly, it is also critical to ensure
that this pre-election period not be marred by hate
speech. Journalists, and the media generally, have
an important role to play in that regard. Their right
to information must not be limited, especially as the
elections approach.
I also want to touch on the human rights situation.
After reading the African Union’s latest monitoring
report, we are concerned. The report for September
details a growing number of abductions and abuses,
some of them brutal, by law enforcement personnel and
the Imbonerakure, whose arbitrary arrests, targeting no
fewer than 27 members of the Congrès national pour la
liberté, including all of the party leaders in Karuzi, are
very troubling. The party’s offices have also been set
fire to multiple times.
In conclusion, we note the latest developments and
the measures taken by the Burundian authorities. At
the same time, we must recognize that the road to the
2020 elections is still a long one. We therefore believe
it is essential to ensure that the Office of the Special
Representative can continue working with direct access
to the Burundian authorities at least until the elections
take place. The Office has an essential role to play and
we have taken note of the latest report (S/2019/837),
particularly its proposals on the activities of the Office
between now and the elections.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we remain
ready for dialogue, bilaterally or at the European level,
in order to support the Burundian authorities in holding
credible, inclusive, peaceful and transparent elections.
Ms. Janiak (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking the briefers for their valuable presentations.
I also want to take this opportunity to welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837),
which provides a valuable factual record of the current
situation in Burundi.
With regard to the political situation, Poland notes
some signs of positive change in the country in the past
few months, chiefly the registration of new political
parties and the Government’s efforts to enhance
dialogue with the opposition. Those are steps in the right
direction, in line with President Nkurunziza’s repeated
announcement that he will refrain from seeking a fourth
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

term in 2020, as he promised the Burundian people
in 2015. However, we are worried about the reported
increase in acts of political intolerance, vandalism and
intimidation against the opposition. We believe that
only inclusive political dialogue, held in good faith, can
restore trust among the parties.
As the electoral process approaches, Poland calls
on the Burundian authorities to open the political
space, ensure the freedom of the media and comply
with obligations relating to fundamental rights. In that
respect, we think it will be crucial to address the doubts
expressed by some members of the media in connection
with the recent adoption of a code of conduct for the
media during the electoral period. At the same time,
we recognize the need for all parties, at all levels, to
engage constructively in dialogue and to participate in
the electoral process.
Poland welcomes the fact that the security
situation across the country has improved and the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
has decreased, as the Secretary-General’s report
states. Nevertheless, Burundian society is still facing
serious challenges, including a difficult socioeconomic
situation and epidemics. We remain deeply concerned
about the continuing reports of human rights
violations. Poland urges the Government of Burundi
to significantly increase its engagement in addressing
hate speech and condemning all forms of intolerance
and violence in the country. While we note the efforts
that have been made so far, Poland emphasizes that it
is the obligation of the authorities to guarantee, protect
and promote fundamental rights, including freedom
of expression and freedom of assembly. We therefore
reiterate our call to the Burundian Government to take
concrete steps to restore cooperation with international
human rights mechanisms, particularly the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council’s Commission of
Inquiry on Burundi.
Bearing in mind the regional significance of the
situation in Burundi, Poland strongly supports all the
efforts made by the East African Community to date
and encourages its leaders to engage more closely in
discussions with the African Union and the United
Nations. The constant and focused commitment of
the region to achieving a regional consensus on the
situation in Burundi is a matter of priority.

S/PV. 8652

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Michel Kafando for his work as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi. His mission
must continue so that the gains made so far are not lost.
Poland also appreciates the efforts of the whole United
Nations team and the other international institutions
working on the ground to bring about a sustainable
improvement to the lives of the Burundian people. We
believe that fair and transparent elections in 2020, held
in an inclusive environment and in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement, can still be a significant step in the
political transformation of the country, and the people
of Burundi can count on our support in that regard.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
detailed briefing on developments in Burundi. We also
thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the generally stable
sociopolitical environment prevailing in Burundi and
the progress that has been made in the preparations for
elections, including the Independent National Electoral
Commission’s publication on 28 June of the electoral
timetable, which sets the date of the general elections
for 20 May 2020.
We believe that only a calm sociopolitical
environment and an inclusive process in a more open
political space can guarantee the credibility of the
election. In that connection, we welcome the efforts
made by the Burundian authorities to raise awareness
among the relevant stakeholders on best practices
to be observed during the 2020 general elections, as
evidenced by the meeting on 21 August organized
jointly by the First Vice-President of Burundi and the
Minister of the Interior, for the benefit of political
party leaders, local authorities and representatives of
the defence and security forces. We also encourage
all stakeholders to throw themselves into supporting
this positive momentum and urge them to join in the
inter-Burundian political dialogue once again in the
spirit of the Arusha Agreement. In that regard, my
country calls on the United Nations and the African
Union to continue to support the initiatives of the
East African Community with a view to revitalizing
the dialogue.

19-3409515/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

The issue of the voluntary repatriation of refugees
and the return of internally displaced persons to
their areas of origin is still one of the international
community’s core concerns. The fact is that despite
the combined efforts of the Burundian authorities, the
various humanitarian agencies and Burundi’s partners,
the number of refugees in neighbouring countries
remains high at 325,671, according to estimates by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) published on 30 September. My
delegation therefore welcomes the tripartite BurundiTanzania-UNHCR agreement, which according to
UNHCR has facilitated the voluntary repatriation from
Tanzania of at least 75,000 Burundian refugees since
its signing in 2017, and we urge donors to support the
initiative. We also reiterate our call for constructive
dialogue between the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Burundian
authorities with a view to a lasting resolution of
their disagreements.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the
significant contribution that Mr. Kafando has made to
the implementation of the political process for stability
in Burundi and thanks him for his personal commitment
and for all his efforts over the past two years.
Mr. Alduwaisan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their valuable briefings. Today I would like to address
three issues.

30/10/2019

a road map for the upcoming elections and creating the
Independent National Electoral Commission, as well as
its decisions to fully finance the 2020 elections from
the national budget and to publish an electoral calendar
on 28 June. The President’s announcement that he will
not seek re-election is an important demonstration that
the Government is serious about transferring power to a
new president and convening the presidential elections
a few months from now.
We commend the efforts of the African Union (AU)
and the East African Community (EAC) to achieve
a peaceful resolution of the political and security
situations in Burundi through an inclusive dialogue
based on the Arusha Agreement. We also hope that the
member States of the EAC will step up their efforts
and work with both the Government of Burundi and
regional and international organizations, represented
by the United Nations and the AU, to ensure the stability
in Burundi that we all wish for.
My second point is about the security situation
in Burundi, which in the past few months has been
relatively calm and is improving, despite various
continuing acts of violence and activities of armed
groups. We sincerely hope that it continues to improve
as it has since the beginning of the year. We also
hope that the Government will take advantage of this
improvement and the relative calm to intensify its
efforts with regard to bringing all the political actors to
the negotiating table in a national dialogue, given that
the presidential elections are fast approaching.

The first is the political situation. Since the
Security Council’s last official meeting on Burundi
in June (see S/PV.8550), the political state of affairs
in the Republic of Burundi has been improving. The
Government has been working to calm the situation
since the constitutional referendum was held on 17 May
2018, with the participation of most political parties.
We hope these positive developments will continue
until the vital presidential elections take place in 2020.
We also hope that the elections will include all sectors
of society with the participation of all political parties,
and that they will be free, fair, transparent and credible.
We also want to see the participation of civil-society
stakeholders, including young people and women.

My third focus is on the humanitarian situation and
the return of refugees. There has been improvement
in the humanitarian situation in Burundi compared
with the two previous years, and we have seen a
decrease in food insecurity. However, the situation is
still critical, owing to continuing acts of violence and
forced disappearances, in violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We call for an end
to such practices and for all perpetrators to be held
accountable. With regard to the return of refugees,
we commend the signing of the bilateral agreement
between Burundi and Tanzania on repatriating 280,000
Burundian refugees. The Government of Burundi
must intensify its efforts to ensure the socioeconomic
reintegration of returnees while providing the necessary
guarantees for the return of the remaining refugees.

I welcome the Government of Burundi’s efforts to
move the political process forward, including by adopting

In conclusion, social development and political
reform are the chief factors that any Government must

16/21

19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

S/PV. 8652

contend with in order to develop and advance its society
with a view to creating a secure future. The recent wave
of reforms and changes in Central Africa and the Great
Lakes region includes the successful elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the signing of a
peace agreement in the Central African Republic on
6 February and the Government of Burundi’s adoption
on 22 August 2018 of a 10-year national development
plan that extends to 2027 whose objectives are linked
to the Sustainable Development Goals. All those are
steps in the right direction towards achieving reform
and improving standards of living and the economic
situation for the people of Burundi, in particular, and
the peoples of the region, in general. We therefore hope
that the Government’s efforts will lead to the successful
holding of the upcoming elections and that the
development plan will result in economic development
and improved security, political and humanitarian
conditions in Burundi.

crucial. We call on the Government and its constituent
parties to continue to engage in dialogue with the
region and thereby send a clear signal of their continued
commitment to resolving the ongoing political crisis.
We also urge the Government to finalize the status-ofmission agreement with the Office of the Special Envoy.

Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Kafando for his two and a
half years of service in Burundi. Like others, we want to
pay tribute to the important work of the Special Envoy
and his office. The Office of the Special Envoy plays an
integral role in helping to develop confidence-building
measures and supporting efforts to create conditions
conducive to political dialogue. I also want to take
this opportunity to thank Ambassador Lauber for his
detailed briefing.

Turning to the refugee situation, we believe that
Burundian refugees should be able to return home,
but that must be done on a voluntary basis and while
ensuring that their ability to live in safety and dignity
on their return is assured. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
actors in Burundi must be allowed to monitor the
situation of returnees in Burundi, including their access
to necessary services and their continued protection.

I would like to welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/837), which provides a
valuable record of the current situation in Burundi.
The United Kingdom wants to underline once again,
as we and others in the Council have done before, the
importance of regular written reports to the Council on
the situation in Burundi that can inform our discussions.
As we look ahead to elections in Burundi in May next
year, the United Kingdom calls on all interested parties
in Burundi and the wider region to help ensure that
those elections are safe, credible and fully reflective of
the aspirations of the people. Citizens must have faith
in the electoral process if they are to accept the results
of an election. Well-organized and credible elections
are therefore vital for the stability of Burundi.
We encourage the East African Community to
redouble its efforts to push for an effective and inclusive
dialogue. A harmonized road map that all parties can
support and that preserves the gains of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi is

We note the overall improvement in the security
situation, but the continuing incidents of violence and
violations of human rights, some of which target political
opponents, are deeply concerning. The latest report of
the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi (A/HRC/42/49)
records continuing serious human rights violations
committed in a general climate of impunity and of
intensified suppression of civil liberties. That must stop.
We are also concerned about the operating climate for
the media, particularly with regard to the BBC and the
Voice of America. A free press is essential to Burundi’s
stability during the election process and beyond.

With elections taking place next year amid the
fragile political and humanitarian environment and
the implications for the broader security of the Great
Lakes region, the United Kingdom believes that the
situation in Burundi continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security. The United Kingdom
therefore firmly believes that Burundi must remain on
the Council’s agenda.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Michel
Kafando for his work and express deep appreciation
for his efforts, including his latest consultations with
leaders of the region in an effort to revitalize the
inter-Burundian dialogue led by the East African
Community. I wish President Kafando every success in
his future endeavours.
When one is at the end of the list of speakers, there
are a few advantages. One is the advantage of being
able to be brief, as colleagues have already addressed
the same speaking points. The second advantage is

19-3409517/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

that, when colleagues quote a report of the SecretaryGeneral, one can double check.
In that regard, I would like to return to what our
colleague from the Russian Federation said. He quoted
the report (S/2019/837) in saying that the overall security
situation has not deteriorated, and he was right. At the
same time, our colleagues from Belgium and Poland
cited attacks on members of political parties. I would
like to recall that they included acts of vandalism and
violent attacks against offices of the opposition party
Congrès national pour la liberté. One of its offices
was set ablaze in Nyabiraba, resulting in casualties.
Numerous other such incidents are addressed in the
report and were mentioned by colleagues.
In reading those findings, one cannot be but
worried that the unresolved political crisis and the
continuing volatile security situation in Burundi are
resulting in tensions that risk endangering regional
peace and stability. We are therefore of the opinion
that the Security Council needs to retain Burundi on
the agenda.
The 2020 elections will be crucial. Only the
inter-Burundi dialogue can lead to a road map that sets
the path leading to free, fair and inclusive elections.
That is essential for building trust among the population
and long-term stabilization. We therefore call on the
Burundian authorities to show clear commitment in that
regard. In that regard, I would like to revisit a sentence
in your statement, Madam President. You said that
there should be no no-go areas for political activities
and parties, and I would like to stress that point.
The crisis in Burundi can be resolved only with
regional actors. We therefore encourage them to take on
a constructive role in creating new momentum leading
to negotiations and dialogue. We are very concerned
about the deteriorating human rights situation and the
ongoing humanitarian crisis in Burundi. We encourage
the Burundian Government to cooperate with the
relevant international human rights mechanisms
and humanitarian actors to increase humanitarian
access and facilitate the transparent assessment of
humanitarian needs.
We appeal to all parties involved to respect the
principle of a voluntary safe and dignified return in
accordance with the tripartite agreement signed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Burundi and Tanzania.
18/21

30/10/2019

In conclusion, I would like to thank Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, under
the leadership of Ambassador Lauber, for its efforts to
improve the socioeconomic situation. Germany will
fully support those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation warmly congratulates you
personally, Madam President, and your country,
South Africa, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. Your
extensive wealth of experience and your country’s
commitment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law have been at the
heart of the success of your presidency, which began
resoundingly on 1 October. Let me also welcome the
presence among us of His Excellency Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
As the Council is undoubtedly aware, during the
exchange between the Secretary-General and our
Minister for Foreign Affairs on the margins of the
General Assembly on 27 September, the two came
together on a decision with regard to ending the Special
Envoy’s mandate in November. Accordingly, I would be
remiss were I not to thank the Special Envoy for having
provided his professionalism, diplomatic expertise and
wisdom to Burundi and the region in the context of the
peace process in Burundi. I can safely say today that
he ably accomplished his mission. He leaves behind a
peaceful, stable and definitively reconciled country.
For our part, we wish him happiness and success in all
his personal endeavours and pursuits for the benefit of
the international community in the future.
Likewise, I must thank His Excellency Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing and for all
he has done for Burundi with regard to the peacebuilding
process. We reassure him of our full cooperation.
Before beginning the substantial part of my
statement, I would like to note with regret that some
delegations here continue to use the langue of 2015
instead of evolving with the pace of events in Burundi.
I encourage them to leave behind the status quo and
follow the flow of what is now happening in the country.
My statement will focus on five points, namely,
the political situation, which will be predominately
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

influenced by the holding of the 2020 elections, the
security situation in the country, the humanitarian
situation, with particular emphasis on the return of
refugees, the human rights situation and cooperation
between Burundi and the United Nations, on the one
hand, and between Burundi and bilateral partners, on
the other.
The political situation in the country is being
shaped by preparations for the 2020 elections, which
are progressing satisfactorily. National mechanisms
dedicated to the holding of elections are already
operational. While not citing an exhaustive list of the
latter, I will cite in particular the following actions.
First, the Kayanza road map leading to the holding
of peaceful elections in 2020 was adopted following
very broad consultations within the Burundian political
class. Second, the National Independent Electoral
Commission (CENI) is already operational and is
regularly holding press conferences on the progress
of the electoral process in full transparency in the
presence of members of the international community
based in Bujumbura. Third, the revised electoral code
was adopted by the National Assembly in April by
105 to 108 votes. Fourth, the Government adopted the
decision to finance the entire operational budget for
the elections without recourse to external resources,
which, as the Council is aware, are often unpredictable
and contingent on other factors. The fifth action was
the Independent National Electoral Commission’s
publication of an electoral calendar detailing all
polls planned for 2020. Sixth was the Commission’s
announcement of a period of partial voter registration
for those who had been unable to register for the 2018
referendum. That partial registration for the electoral
rolls will take place from 9 to 12 December, just about
five weeks from now.
As the Council can see, Burundians are already
deep into the 2020 electoral process, and we continue
to take ownership of it both organizationally and
financially. While promising free, transparent and
peaceful elections, we would like to remind anyone
who tries to interfere without being expressly invited
that in Burundi as elsewhere in the world, electoral
processes are an internal affair that is exclusively a
matter for national sovereignty. Any outside support
must be provided only at the request of the Government
of Burundi and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. And no support gives
anyone the right to any such interference.

S/PV. 8652

With regard to promoting an atmosphere conducive
to the holding of peaceful and inclusive elections, among
other things I would like to point to the expansion of the
political space in the country through the approval of
new political parties and the promotion of freedom of
expression with the active support of the Government
of Burundi; second, to the lifting of the suspension
of opposition political parties that violated the law
governing the functioning of political parties; third, our
President’s numerous announcements of his decision to
voluntarily renounce his constitutional right to run in
the 2020 presidential elections; fourth, the reception
and reintegration of the large numbers of refugees
returning to Burundi; fifth, the return to the country of
opposition political leaders who fled the country in 2015,
most recently on 5 October; sixth, the continued efforts
to hold constructive political consultations within a
forum of political parties in a spirit of openness and
political tolerance, including at the levels of provinces
and communes; seventh, increasing messages from
political leaders to their followers focused on discipline,
social cohesion and political tolerance; eighth, the
Government’s decision to create joint committees at the
national level, including young people from all political
parties, with a view to preventing violence during the
elections; ninth, the commitment by political parties to
consult regularly through the forum of political parties
on all the problems facing the country; tenth, public
statements by State officials deploring and condemning
various isolated cases of violence and promoting social
cohesion and peaceful coexistence; and lastly the
release by presidential pardon at the beginning of the
year of more than 2,000 prisoners, including young
rioters and insurgents of 2015.
Still on the subject of elections, I would like to
inform the Council that at the summit of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, attended by 120 member
States in Baku on 25 and 26 October, the Heads of
State and Government of the Movement called for the
holding of free, transparent, inclusive and peaceful
elections in Burundi in 2020. They congratulated the
Government of Burundi on the steps it has already
taken in preparing for these elections and welcomed
its sovereign decision to finance the entire electoral
process from the country’s national resources.
At the continental level, the Summit of Heads of
State of the African Union, held on 10 and 11 February
in Addis Ababa, congratulated the Government
of Burundi on starting preparatory processes for

19-3409519/21

S/PV.8652

The situation in Burundi

the 2020 elections, particularly the creation of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and a
truth and reconciliation commission. It also welcomed
the announcement by President Nkurunziza that he
would not stand in the 2020 elections and urged the
Government and the political parties to work together
to ensure the smooth conduct of the elections.
With regard to security, as stated in paragraph 58
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837), the
Government of Burundi has made significant efforts
to improve security conditions in the country. The
situation in Burundi is stable, calm and under control
throughout the country, with the notable exception of a
few isolated cases of common criminality such as occur
in other countries. From north to south, west to east and
in the centre, day and night, Burundian citizens enjoy
their civil and political rights in peace. Officials of the
United Nations and of subregional organizations who
have recently visited the country have seen with their
own eyes how peace and security have been restored
in Burundi. Major efforts are under way throughout
the country to preserve this longed-for peace, first and
foremost by promoting Burundians’ love of country
and attachment to the intrinsic principles and values
that our nation was built on.
A plan has been developed for securitizing the 2020
electoral process and training programmes in several
areas related to the elections are being implemented,
with a view to preparing for their overall security. The
restoration of peace, stability and trust in the country
is transforming the national landscape. Today all
Burundians, in their rich diversity, feel safe, protected
and able to freely participate in the political process
without fear or restriction. Political and social discourse
is conducted with mutual respect and tolerance and
acceptance of those different from ourselves.
In terms of collective security, we continue to
participate actively in the fight against terrorism and
in peace operations, with approximately 6,000 troops
in contingents on the ground, primarily in Somalia
and the Central African Republic. Our participation in
peacekeeping around the world is our way of repaying
the international community, which has always
supported us during difficult periods in our history.
The full value of our substantial contribution to peace
operations and the fight against terrorism should be
recognized and appreciated in that regard.
20/21

30/10/2019

In terms of development, the greatest challenge
facing Burundi today is the fight against poverty, the
common enemy of all Burundians of all political and
social stripes. It was in that context that the Government
of Burundi developed and finalized our new 10-year
national development plan, and we are seeking the
support of our traditional and non-traditional partners
in helping us to implement the plan. The United Nations,
through its country team and the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, can serve as a bridge
between Burundi and its partners in mobilizing the
resources needed to complement our national efforts to
implement Burundi’s new development strategy.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the mass voluntary returns of Burundian
refugees who fled the country in 2015. Beyond the
several thousand Burundians who are returning
without assistance from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, between 1 August 2017 and
29 October — that is, yesterday — 79,375 refugees,
belonging to 26,739 households, were voluntarily
repatriated to Burundi from Tanzania, Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The most recent
group, composed of 252 refugees from 134 households,
arrived yesterday in Kobero in Muyinga province, on
our northern border with Tanzania. Such mass voluntary
returns are clear evidence that peace, harmony, trust
and stability have been restored to the country, despite
the comments of some foreign actors who continue
deliberately to inflate the number of refugees still in
exile in order to keep Burundi in artificial crisis mode
and to maintain jobs.
Turning to the human rights situation, the
Government of Burundi is continuing its efforts to
improve the situation and the promotion of human
rights through a number of national mechanisms that
have been established, in particular the Independent
National Human Rights Commission. We cooperate
closely with international mechanisms accepted by all,
such as the Universal Periodic Review, which reviews
the human rights situation in each Member State
without singling out States. Most recommendations of
the Universal Periodic Review are being implemented
by the Government of Burundi. As an example,
the Government regularly carries out impartial,
independent and effective investigations into proven
cases of alleged human rights violations reported to it
so that all perpetrators without exception are rapidly
19-34095

30/10/2019

The situation in Burundi

brought to justice and punished in accordance with
the law.
Regarding the rebuilding of trust between
Burundi and our bilateral partners, the Government
of Burundi is striving to resume peaceful relations
with our development partners, in particular those that
have wavered since 2015. We hope to encourage our
traditional and non-traditional partners to focus on
the future of Burundi and to move forward together,
putting aside the short-lived misunderstanding in
2015. It is now time to rebuild trust among us, to
review things that did not work and to put them right
in a spirit of mutual trust. We must acknowledge the
political realities and prevent any relapse. Continued
confrontations are counterproductive in all areas and
for all parties. For its part, the Government of Burundi
reaffirms its readiness to improve bilateral relations
with its development partners. Against that backdrop,
the country’s highest authorities have recently again
dispatched ambassadors to those countries where
bilateral relations were disrupted following 2015.
With regard to our relationship with the United
Nations — and this is an extremely important
point — we welcome the role played by the United
Nations country team in Burundi in assisting national
efforts to implement the national development plan, the
Sustainable Development Goals and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2019 to 2023.
The Government of Burundi commits to working
constructively with the United Nations country team

S/PV. 8652

in Burundi so as to achieve lasting socioeconomic
development in the interests of all Burundians.
However, we remain convinced that having the
situation in Burundi on the Security Council agenda
is inappropriate and violates the Charter of the United
Nations. The current political and security situation in
the country does not represent a threat to international
peace and security, which would justify Burundi
remaining on the Security Council agenda. We reiterate
our legitimate call for Burundi to be removed from the
Council agenda. The arbitrary retention of Burundi on
the Council’s agenda is likely to set a bad precedent.
The holding of unnecessary meetings on Burundi,
which are not justified by the reality on the ground, will
destabilize the country rather than promote peace and
calm. Some troublemakers take advantage of that to
commit crimes in the days leading up to each Security
Council meeting.
In conclusion, Burundi reiterates its commitment to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and its determination to strengthen
democracy, consolidate peace and security and
achieve balanced, inclusive and lasting socioeconomic
development in the interests of the Burundian people.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

19-3409521/21
