A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/192
9 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/192. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, as well as its resolution 48/138
of 20 December 1993,
Conscious of the need effectively to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to minorities,
as set out in the Declaration,
Welcoming Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/22 of 1 March 1994 on the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, 1/ in which the Commission, inter alia,
requested the Secretary-General to present an analytical report at its next session,
Noting that resolution 1994/4 of 19 August 1994 of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities 2/ is to be considered by the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-first
session,

1/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2/
95-77155

See E/CN.4/1995/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1994/56, chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/49/192
Page 2

Aware of the provisions of article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 3/
concerning the rights of persons belonging to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an increasingly important role to play regarding the
protection of minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of and giving effect to the Declaration,
Concerned by the growing frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts concerning minorities in
many countries, and their often tragic consequences,
Affirming that effective measures and the creation of favourable conditions for the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, ensuring
effective non-discrimination and equality for all, contribute to the prevention and peaceful solution of human
rights problems and situations involving minorities,
Considering that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities contribute to political and social stability and peace and enrich the cultural
heritage of society as a whole of the States in which such persons live,
Noting the work of the High Commissioner for National Minorities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to minorities may exercise fully
and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and in full equality before
the law in accordance with the Declaration,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 4/
Mindful of the recommendations contained in section II, paragraphs 25 to 27, of the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 5/
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, including through the facilitation
of their full participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social, religious and cultural life of society and
in the economic progress and development in their country;
3.
Urges States to take, as appropriate, all the necessary constitutional, legislative, administrative
and other measures to promote and give effect to the principles contained in the Declaration;

3/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

4/

A/49/415 and Add.1.

5/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/192
Page 3

4.
Appeals to States to make bilateral and multilateral efforts, as appropriate, in order to protect
the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their countries, in
accordance with the Declaration;
5.
Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to examine, as a matter of priority, ways and
means to promote and protect effectively the rights of persons belonging to minorities, as set out in the
Declaration;
6.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to provide through the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat, at the request of Governments concerned and as part of the programme of advisory services and
technical assistance of the Centre, qualified expertise on minority issues and human rights, as well as on the
prevention and resolution of disputes, to assist in existing or potential situations involving minorities;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General, in the implementation of the present resolution, to provide
human and financial resources for the advisory services and technical assistance of the Centre for Human Rights,
within existing resources;
8.
Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to promote, within his
mandate, the implementation of the principles contained in the Declaration and to continue to engage in a
dialogue with Governments concerned for that purpose;
9.
Urges all treaty bodies and special representatives, special rapporteurs and working groups of
the Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities to give due regard, within their respective mandates, to the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to minorities;
10.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue the dissemination of information on the Declaration
and the promotion of understanding thereof;
11.
Encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue to contribute to
the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities;
12.
Calls upon States and the Secretary-General to give due regard to the Declaration in training
programmes for officials;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution under the item entitled "Human rights questions".

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
