S/2019/609

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 26 July 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 10 of its resolution 2454 (2019), the Security Council requested
the Secretariat to assess the progress achieved on the key benchmarks it established
on arms embargo measures in the Central African Republic. Those benchmarks were
detailed in presidential statement S/PRST/2019/3, wherein the Security Council noted
that they could serve as a basis to assess the contribution and relevance of the arms
embargo to support the relevant aspects of the security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process and the
management of weapons and ammunition. The Security Council further noted that
those benchmarks could also promote greater understanding among the Central
African Republic authorities of the arms embargo, in particular its exemption
provisions, and contribute to closer collaboration between Central African Republic
authorities and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013). In the
same presidential statement, the Security Council also expressed its readiness to
review the arms embargo measures on the Government of the Central African
Republic, through, inter alia, suspension or progressive lifting of these measures, in
the light of progress achieved on the benchmarks.
The present letter, submitted pursuant to resolution 2454 (2019), reflects the
consultations of the Secretariat with the Central African Republic authorit ies, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Mine Action Service, the Panel of
Experts on the Central African Republic, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the Bangui based diplomatic community and civil society in the Central African Republic.
Context
Since my letter dated 31 July 2018 to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/752), the Government of the Central African Republic and other national
actors have continued to call for the lifting of the arms embargo, which they consider
essential for arming the Central African Armed Forces, which have been
progressively deploying throughout the country. In November, the President of the
National Assembly sent a letter to the Council and the Committee requesting that the
arms embargo be lifted. On 14 December, a similar declaration, signed by the
presidents of several national institutions of the Central African Republic, was
submitted to MINUSCA for onward transmission to the Council and the Committee.

19-12669 (E)

010819

*1912669*

S/2019/609

Those requests argued that the national context had changed since the embargo was
first established and that the Government had made progress in the dialogue with
armed groups and in security sector reform. They emphasized the importance of
arming armed forces so that they could protect civilians. Central African Republic
authorities, some members of the diplomatic community, and the civil organizations
that met with the assessment team echoed those points. 1
During this period, the political situation in the Central African Republic was
also marked by a major milestone in the context of the peace process. On 6 February
2019, the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic (see S/2019/145) was signed in Bangui by the Government and 14 armed
groups. The Agreement provides the unique momentum necessary for an inclusive
peace process and framework aimed at supporting the ongoing efforts of the Central
African Republic authorities to bring the country back to the path of sustainable
stability and recovery and to create the conditions for the progressive redeploym ent
of State authority throughout the territory in order to facilitate the implementation of
the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme,
security sector reform, including through the redeployment of defence and inter nal
security forces (such as the armed forces, the police, the gendarmeries, water and
forests, corrections and customs) and the fight against impunity.
The Central African Republic authorities have demonstrated their commitment
to implementing the key provisions of the Political Agreement. This includes the
formation of an inclusive Government, the operationalization of the Political
Agreement’s follow-up and security mechanisms at the national and local levels and
the establishment of an inclusive commission comprising the signatory parties, which
is tasked with reviewing conflict-related issues of justice and submitting its
recommendations to the future Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation. The Central African Republic authorities have also established the
legal framework and the operational concept for the creation of the Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité, a transitional security arrangement provided for in the Political
Agreement. These units will comprise members of the nationa l defence and security
forces as well as eligible members of armed groups who have disarmed, demobilized
and undergone human rights vetting. They are intended to contribute to security for
transhumance corridors and mining sites. The operationalization of these units is
taking place in the context of ongoing efforts to move forward with the
implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme as well as the reform and reoperationalization of inclusive
and professional defence and internal security forces.
As indicated in my last report (S/2019/498), while military confrontation has
subsided since the Political Agreement, armed groups have continued to show a lac k
of adherence to its security provisions. In this context, the guarantors and facilitators
of the Political Agreement have continued to engage closely with armed groups,
including by responding to the killing on 21 May 2019 by Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation fighters of 39 persons, mostly civilians, in several villages near Paoua.
As a result, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation publicly condemned the attack,
handed over to the Government three suspected perpetrators of the attack, reiterated
its commitment to peace and reconciliation and withdrew from its bases in Bohong,
Bokaya and Létélé. On 31 May and again on 18 June, the Central African Republic
authorities, MINUSCA, the African Union and ECCAS conducted joint missions to
Koui, Ouham-Pendé prefecture, to engage the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
__________________
1

2/13

See also the final communiqué of the forty-eighth ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, held in Kinshasa from
26 to 31 May, where the States members of the Committee also supported the call of the Central
African Republic authorities for the lifting of the arms embargo.
19-12669

S/2019/609

leader, Abbas Sidiki, and seek his commitment to starting the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of members of his armed group so that they could
participate in the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité, as well as to hand over to justice
the remaining suspected perpetrators of the attack.
In a related development, the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique and
the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique have shown s ome signs of
commitment to the Political Agreement. On 18 May, 108 members of the armed forces
were able to be redeployed to Kaga Bandoro, Nana-Grebizi prefecture. Despite initial
resistance, the Mouvement patriotique leader welcomed the deployment of the armed
forces and contributed food for a welcoming ceremony. On 19 June, in Ndélé,
Bamingui-Bangoran prefecture, the Front populaire issued a communiqué to affirm
the dismantling of all illegal barriers and the release of public buildings in the areas
under its control in accordance with the provisions of the Political Agreement. The
communiqué also stated that the Front Populaire intended to reaffirm and consolidate
the fundamental principles of peace and national reconciliation and asked the
guarantors to immediately implement the transitional security arrangement provisions
of the Political Agreement.
Developments in cross-border collaboration between the Central African
Republic and its neighbours were also noteworthy. On 6 April, local authorities in
Chad and the Central African Republic agreed to the partial reopening of the border
in Bembéré, which had been closed since 2015. They also agreed to the creation of
mechanisms to improve security collaboration and reduce transhumance -related
violence, including by accelerating the deployment of Central African armed and
internal security forces and judiciary to the border. On 6 and 7 May, the Cameroon Central African Republic mixed commission on cooperation held its first meeting
since 2010 to discuss cross-border security and cooperation in areas such as trade,
culture and technology. Regional countries, including through the respective mixed
commissions, have an important role to play in stemming the flow of weapons and
ammunition to the various armed groups, which, the assessment team was told, are
far more heavily armed (and with larger-calibre weapons) than the Central African
Republic defence and security forces. The Republic of the Congo -Central African
Republic mixed commission is also scheduled to meet from 1 to 3 August in Bangui.
Arms embargo
Since July 2018, the provisions of the arms embargo and its exemption
provisions have remained unchanged. Currently, the Committee ’s sanctions list
contains the names of 11 individuals and 2 entities and was last updated on 18 April
2019.
Under the arms embargo exemption provisions, the Government of the Central
African Republic may submit requests to the Committee to receive arms and related
materiel, and support has been provided to the Government in th is regard. I note that
MINUSCA continues to play an essential support role in assisting the Central African
Republic authorities with their exemption requests, over and above the other tasks of
the Mission.
Since the imposition of the arms embargo on 3 December 2013, the Government
has submitted a total of 15 exemption requests, of which 14 have been approved by
the Committee, with one remaining under consideration. Since my letter of 31 July
2018, the Government of the Central African Republic has submi tted two additional
exemption requests, both of which were approved by the Committee.
Since the imposition of the embargo, the Government of the Central African
Republic has also submitted a total of 10 notifications, three of which were submitted
since my letter of 31 July 2018. Since the imposition of the arms embargo, the
19-12669

3/13

S/2019/609

Committee has received a total of 62 exemption requests and 66 notifications from
Member States and international organizations (including MINUSCA, the United
Nations Development Programme and the European Union). Of these totals, 8
exemption requests and 22 notifications were submitted since my letter of 31 July
2018 by Member States and international organizations to the Committee for its
consideration.
This brings the total number of weapons and ammunition approved by the
Committee since 2015, to approximately 10,000 weapons and 16,000,000 rounds of
ammunition. The armed forces remain the primary recipient of weapons and
ammunition, followed by the internal security forces (police an d gendarmerie).
Since August 2018, the Committee convened one meeting on the arms embargo
in January 2019, with the participation via videoconference of the Minister of
Defence of the Central African Republic, which strengthened the dialogue between
the Committee and the Government and facilitated a better understanding of the
regime, including its notification and exemption procedures. I also note that the Chair
of the Committee visited the Central African Republic from 1 to 4 October 2018,
which provided another opportunity for closer dialogue between the authorities of the
Central African Republic and the Committee on the arms embargo measures.
Progress achieved on the benchmarks
The present section provides the Security Council with an update on the
progress against each of the five key benchmarks enumerated in S/PRST/2019/3, for
the Security Council to assess and adjust, as appropriate, the arms embargo in the
Central African Republic.
Benchmark (a). Progress on the effective implementation, by the Government of
the Central African Republic, and within sustainable budgetary resources, of the
national programme for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, and in particular the socioeconomic reintegration of former
members of armed groups and the integration of vetted former members of
armed groups into all uniformed personnel.
The Central African Republic authorities, with the support of international
partners, have undertaken several disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiatives since 2015, including a pilot programme, 2 which informed the
establishment of the national programme for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation in April 2017. The eligibility criteria of the national
programme is in line with the agreement on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration principles made on 10 May 2015 during the Bangui Forum. These
initiatives were complemented by a community violence reduction programme.
The Government has put in place the legal framework, institutional mechanisms
and financial support to enable the operationalization of its national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which was developed in consultation
with the armed groups. This national programme aims to disarm and demobilize 5,000
ex-combatants from the armed groups and 1,500 children associated with the armed
__________________
2

4/13

The pilot programme planned for the participation of 560 combatants from all 14 armed groups
in 7 locations. At the end of this pilot process, 438 combatants, including 18 women, were
disarmed and demobilized from 12 of the 14 armed groups (with the exception of the Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain and Révolution et justice, Sayo Branch) and 309 weapons,
7,257 rounds of ammunition and 499 pieces of explosives were collected. Of those disarmed and
demobilized, 198 ex-combatants, including 18 women, were processed for socioeconomic
reintegration while 232 (including six women) were integrated into the armed forces. Three
failed the vetting exercise, one was declared unfit and four failed to appear. The socioeconomic
reintegration of the demobilized combatants has been completed.
19-12669

S/2019/609

groups and fighting forces and repatriate an estimated 500 ex-combatants. To promote
the political, strategic, technical and operational dimensions of the programme, the
Government established a strategic committee on national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, security sector reform and national
reconciliation, chaired by the President, Faustin Archange Touadera; a technical
committee for coordination of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation/security sector reform/national reconciliation; and the Unité d ’execution
and the Advisory and Monitoring Committee for National Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, 3 and appointed a special coordinator
under the authority of President Touadera. The national programme, which is
estimated to cost $45 million, is almost fully funded with sup port from ECCAS, the
World Bank, the United States of America, France, MINUSCA and the Government.
On 17 December 2018, the President officially launched the national programme
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation in Paoua (Ou hamPendé prefecture, in the north-western part of the country). Between 18 December
2018 and 18 January 2019, 137 combatants (including two women) were disarmed
and demobilized, including 61 from Révolution et justice, Sayo Branch (including
one woman), 58 from Révolution et justice, Belanga Branch (including one woman)
and 18 from anti-balaka. A total of 103 weapons, 93 grenades, 7 rockets, 2 mortars
and 3,199 rounds of ammunition were collected.
Owing to the peace talks between the Government and the armed groups,
disarmament and demobilization activities were put on hold at the end of January
2019. On 30 May, disarmament and demobilization activities resumed in Paoua,
where 90 additional combatants (including two women) 4 eligible for the national
programme for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation were
disarmed and demobilized. While the assessment team was in Bangui, another round
of disarmament and demobilization activities commenced in the west of the country
from 30 June, addressing combatants from Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, the
Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC), the Union des forces
républicaines-fondamentales (UFR-F) and anti-balaka.
In terms of socioeconomic reintegration, the Government has si gned contracts
worth approximately $12 million with IOM 5 and ACTED (an international
non-governmental organization) 6 to provide socioeconomic reintegration for 1,000
ex-combatants and to undertake community support projects. The planned year -long
socioeconomic integration activities, which are fully funded by the World Bank,
benefited from lessons learned from the pilot disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, resulting in the strengthening of the Unité d ’execution with
additional reintegration expertise. IOM has also established five training centres in
Paoua (two centres), Bavara, Taley and Bozoum, in line with the programme it signed
with the Government.
In April 2019, socioeconomic reintegration commenced, in Paoua, for the 137
ex-combatants (including two women) 7 disarmed between December 2018 and
January 2019. Meanwhile, data profiling for the 90 ex-combatants disarmed in May
and June has been completed in preparation for their participation in socioeconomic
__________________
3

This Committee also includes representatives from the 14 armed groups.
Eighty-nine of these were from Révolution et justice, Sayo/Luther Branch, and one from
Révolution et justice, Belanga Branch.
5
Those contracts were for Paoua and Ndelé.
6
To cover areas in Bouar, Koui, Bria, and Birao.
7
Sixty-two of the 137 had expressed their candidacy for integration into the armed forces, the
police and the gendarmerie. While waiting for their candidacies to be processed, they were
offered, and they accepted, inclusion in the socio-reintegration programme.
4

19-12669

5/13

S/2019/609

reintegration activities. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation started to disarm and
demobilize its combatants in Mambéré-Kadéï on 29 June and is scheduled to continue
to do so in Nana-Mambéré and Ouham-Pendé in July. FDPC and Révolution et justice
(RJ) completed the disarmament of their combatants in June and July. As at 26 July,
494 combatants from anti-balaka/Ngaissona, anti-balaka/Mokom, RJ-Sayo, RJ-Belanga,
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, FDPC and UFR-F have disarmed and demobilized
and are preparing for their socioeconomic reintegration in the framework of the
national programme, or, alternatively, the integration into the Unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité or the defence and security forces.
The implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration programme is also taking the Political Agreement into account. As
a result of the formation of the new Government, there are currently two Ministers
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration issues, one of whom was appointed
from the armed groups. Two meetings of the Advisory and Monitoring Committee
have been held (on 30 April and 17 May 2019), during which it was stressed that
members of armed groups seeking entry into the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité
will be subject to disarmament and demobilization as well as human rights vetting.
Armed groups agreed to submit their lists of eligible combatants (in line with the
Political Agreement). Almost all the armed groups submitted lists, although they are
still incomplete. During the assessment mission, the team had the opportunity to
discuss the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme with armed group representatives who have taken up ministerial positions
in the Government. These representatives noted their support of the Government’s
approach and plans for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration,
while providing input on implementation challenges, such as the need for greater
awareness-raising of the programme among members of the armed groups, and the
need for the programme to be expedited.
Complementary to the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the Government also established a community violence reduction
programme, 8 which has become very important as a stabilization tool in local conflict
situations. Community violence reduction focuses on elements of armed groups who
are not eligible for the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and other community members, including women and youth. The national
community violence reduction strategy was developed by the Government with the
support of MINUSCA and in consultation with the United Nations country team and
other national and international stakeholders. Although the national strategy has yet
to be formally endorsed, it serves as a framework for implementation, which is taking
place in nine locations across the country with the support of MINUSCA and in
partnership with the United Nations Office for Project Services an d IOM.
With the financial support of MINUSCA, the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund, Canada and the United States, a total of 22,000 beneficiaries have participated
in the community violence reduction programme. From July 2018 to May 2019, 6,850
beneficiaries, including 1,462 women, were engaged in community violence
reduction activities undertaken with the support of MINUSCA.
The Government is in the consultation and conceptual design phase of the
integration of vetted former members of the armed groups into all uniformed
personnel. In February 2018, following the Bangui Forum, the Presidency of the
Central African Republic established the Groupe de réflexion stratégique sur la
question d’intégration des éléments des groupes armés dans les forces de défe nse et
__________________
8

6/13

The community violence reduction programme provides short-term training, income-generating
activities and seminars to promote social cohesion and reconciliation, as well as a programme for
the rehabilitation of community infrastructure.
19-12669

S/2019/609

de sécurité intérieure. The group is chaired by the Inspector General of the Central
African Republic Armed Forces and is composed of 20 members, representing all
components of the Central African Republic security and defence forces, as well as
the national security sector reform pillar, MINUSCA and the European Union
Military Training Mission. The group is responsible for developing proposals to
address the issue of integrating ex-combatants into Central African Republic defence
and security forces.
On 18 June and 24 August 2018, the strategic committee on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, security sector reform and national
reconciliation endorsed different proposals comprising the strategy of the Groupe de
réflexion stratégique. The endorsed strategy consists of (a) the limited integration of
individuals from the 14 armed groups who will be disarmed and demobilized and who
meet strict eligibility criteria; 9 (b) an integration quota of 10 per cent (1,087) for
eligible and demobilized former combatants within the framework of the planned
recruitment of 10,873 new personnel to the Central African Republic defence and
security forces over a five-year period (2019–2023); (c) the political integration of
some armed group leaders; and (d) socioeconomic reintegration for the majority of
their elements. This strategy was presented to the armed groups at the two Advisory
and Monitoring Committee meetings referred to above.
On 18 January 2019, following the endorsement of the str ategy, President
Touadera requested the establishment of a comité de suivi-évaluation de l’intégration
d’ex-combattants dans les forces de défense et de sécurité. The Committee held a
workshop in February 2019 that resulted in the formulation of detailed p roposals on
integration mechanisms, criteria, quotas and rank harmonization. 10
On 29 March and 7 April, respectively, President Touadera issued two decrees
to establish the legal framework for the establishment of the Unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité. Those decrees specified that disarmament, demobilization and vetting are
preconditions for the integration of armed groups; that only members of the internal
security forces within the Unités spéciales are authorized to carry out arrests; and that
the military code of justice applies to all defence and security forces in the Unités
spéciales, while a separate regulatory framework will be developed for former
members of armed groups. The decrees also specified that guarding mining sites is
among the tasks of the Unités spéciales. The concept of the Unités spéciales proposes
the establishment of a 2,000-strong force, with 660 members deployed in each of the
three defence zones outside of the Bangui autonomous zone. Sixty per cent of the
Unités spéciales is foreseen to come from the armed groups, with the rest from the
defence and security forces.
The Government also appointed three armed group leaders as military advisers
to the Prime Minister on the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité, and the Chief of
Staff of the armed forces has put in place a working group to reinforce coordination
on the operationalization of the Unités spéciales. On 4 July the Prime Minister issued
__________________

The eligibility criteria are as follows: the candidates must speak and write French and Sango; be
18 to 25 years old, hold Central African citizenship, be of good health and physically fit and
undergo human rights vetting.
10
A workshop was held from 4 to 15 February 2019 with the aim of drafting a reference document
for the promotion of peace, reconciliation and social cohesion through the integration and
harmonization of ranks. While considering specific cases of integration, the document presents
three options for integration and harmonization of ranks, as well as the associated challenges and
opportunities. Option 1 proposed the integration and harmonization of 5 to 10 per cent per
category into the armed forces and the gendarmerie. Option 2 proposed the integration and
harmonization of 10 per cent of the total number of ex-combatants as commissioned and
non-commissioned officers, to be integrated in all corps. Option 3 proposed integration by unit
for the armed forces and the gendarmerie.
9

19-12669

7/13

S/2019/609

a decree to establish the Comité stratégique de pilotage des unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité to establish the political and strategic orientations for the implementation
and operations of the Unités spéciales. The Government intends to launch training
activities in Bouar in August 2019 for deployment of the first Unités spéciales in
October. The Government also plans to launch the Unités spéciales in the central
region as soon as the armed groups in those areas are ready for disarmament and
demobilization.
With the support of the European Union Military Training Mission, the
Government also intends to deploy 90 armed forces and internal security forces
trainers for the Unités spéciales, 30 trainers per deployed unit. 11 The budget required
for the Unités spéciales is $15 million, which is being provided by the Government
(which will cover the salaries of the defence and security forces in the Unités
spéciales), the Peacebuilding Fund ($3 million for the initial operations) and the
European Union ($5.6 million for the first year with additional funds to be mobilized
for the programme, as well as the funding of the deployment of 45 African Union
observers).
Benchmark (b). The establishment, by the Government of the Central African
Republic, of a planning document detailing the needs of the Central African
Republic authorities in terms of weapons and ammunition storage facilities and
in terms of training and vetting of defence and security forces for the
management of these weapons and ammunition and facilities, as well as working
effectively towards the increase in adequate storage and management capacity
and towards the effective training of Central African Republic defence and
security forces, consistent with the final needs of the Central African Republic
authorities identified in the planning document.
While the assessment team was in Bangui, the Government provided it with a
copy of its planning document, which details the needs of the Central African
Republic with respect to weapons and ammunitions storage facilities, the training of
personnel assigned to the management of weapons and ammunition and vetting
procedures for those personnel. The document covers the needs of the Ministry of
Defence, the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Water and Forestry, the Ministry
of Finance and Budget (for Customs) and the Ministry of Mines. The planning
document contains the weapons and ammunition storage requirements for each of
these entities, broken down by defence and security forces, location, organizational
units and personnel. As stated in the planning document, the formulation of these
storage needs is based on existing laws and national plans applicable to the respective
entities. The Government has also submitted this document to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013).
The Government stressed that the planning document is guided by the principle
that a storage-focused approach should be replaced by an approach that prioritizes
management of weapons and ammunition by trained and vetted personnel in line wit h
a transparent institutional and regulatory framework. Such a transformation in
approach will depend on acquiring sufficiently trained personnel as well as the
projected storage facilities. The document also takes into account the importance of
acquiring property titles to build new storage capacities.
Based on the initial review of this document by the assessment team in
consultation with Central African Republic authorities, the Government has projected
through 2023 an overall future requirement of 295 storage facilities of different
__________________
11

8/13

The Government has appointed 20 members of the armed forces, 5 police officers and 5
gendarmes to train the first Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité in sector West. The European
Union Military Training Mission will conduct a two-week train-the-trainer course for these
appointed officials, which is expected to begin at the end of July.
19-12669

S/2019/609

armoury classes for 28,826 weapons. For the armed forces, a total of 75 armouries
are planned for a projected 11,024 weapons. For the police, a total of 67 armouries
are projected for 7,142 weapons (including non-lethal weapons), while for the
gendarmerie, a total of 120 armouries are projected for 9,121 weapons (including
non-lethal weapons). The Ministry of Water and Forestry requires storage for a
projected 641 weapons. This Ministry will develop eight storage facilities o f its own,
the rest of its storage needs being accommodated within the planned capacities of the
Ministry of the Interior (police and gendarmerie). The Ministry of Mines has
projected storage needs for 600 weapons, which are also planned to be accommodated
within the overall capacity of the Ministry of the Interior. The Ministry of Finance
and Budget has projected that customs officials will require 25 armouries for storage
of 298 weapons.
In the planning document, a minimum future requirement of 9,492,56 2 rounds
of ammunition is projected to be required until 2023. 12 This is broken down to include
8,417,132 rounds of ammunition (with supply requirements itemized down to the unit
level) for the armed forces, 324,600 for the police, 618,580 for the gendarmer ie,
83,190 for the Ministry of Water and Forestry, 33,600 for the Ministry of Mines, and
15,460 for the Ministry of Finance and Budget. The Government informed the
assessment team that, owing to time and capacity constraints, it has not yet
determined the requirements for ammunition storage capacity in the different defence
zones according to the projected deployments of the armed forces. The Ministry of
the Interior also has yet to estimate the ammunition supply requirements for each of
the gendarmerie and police units to be deployed. For the other ministries, given the
smaller volumes of ammunition involved, a breakdown of ammunition storage needs
was not provided since, in their plans, such ammunition stocks could easily be
accommodated within the projected weapons storage facilities.
The planning document also contains a projected overall requirement of 1,180
trained and vetted personnel responsible for weapons and ammunition storage and
management. In terms of training needs, the armed forces require 3 68 specialized
personnel for weapons management and 192 for ammunition management. The police
require 190, while the gendarmerie needs 247, the Ministry of Water and Forestry
needs 64, the Ministry of Mines needs 68 and Customs needs 51. According to the
planning document, personnel trained in weapons and ammunition management must
also be entered in the human resources database for close monitoring.
The Central African Republic authorities decided to adopt a standardized
procedure across all defence and security forces for the authorization of personnel
dedicated to the management of weapons and ammunition, which involves a vetting
process. The Ministers of Defence, the Interior and Finance and Budget (for Customs)
respectively have the capacity to provide these authorizations. Given limited capacity
at the Ministries of Mines, and Water and Forestry, those ministries will delegate the
issuance of these authorizations to the Ministry of the Interior.
Since 2014, the Central African Republic authorities, with the support of
international partners, have been able to rehabilitate and build physical storage
infrastructure for weapons and ammunition. From 2015 to 2018, the Mine Action
Service built 17 armouries and rehabilitated 32 others in different regions, while 3
armouries were rehabilitated through the budget of the Ministry of Defence.
The assessment team was afforded an opportunity to observe, in Bangui, the
preparation of 20 temporary storage kits (10 containers for 9,600 weapons and 10
containers for 15 million rounds of ammunition). These temporary storage kits are
financed by the Ministry of Defence and are planned for deployment in the three
__________________
12

19-12669

The projected ammunition is predominantly for small arms and light weapons.
9/13

S/2019/609

different zones of defence. The assessment team also travelled to Bouar, where it
observed that the Mine Action Service, in support of the national defence plan, is
finalizing the construction of an armoury with a 600 -weapon capacity, two armouries
with a 220-weapon capacity and an armoury built for the training centre with a
capacity of 600 weapons. In addition, an ammunition storage facility is under
construction that will store 4 million rounds of ammunition and 3,200 kg of explosive
material.
The Government believes that these current facilities can provide its defence
and security forces with overall storage capacity for more than 23,150 weapons and
22.5 million rounds of ammunition. The Government is therefore confident that it has
the capacity to store additional weapons, including the second delivery of weapons
from the Russian Federation, as approved by the Committee in January 2019. In terms
of training, more than 300 personnel of the Central African Republic national defence
and security forces have received capacity-building and training from the Mine
Action Service/MINUSCA, China, Equatorial Guinea, Egypt, the European Union,
France, Morocco, Rwanda, the Russian Federation and the United States, including
on weapons and ammunition management.
The Government informed the assessment team that lack of control over its
territory and lack of funding impede progress on this benchmark. The lack of specific
infrastructure also constrains the ability of trained personnel to fully utilize their
training in weapons and ammunition management. The Government is requesting
international support to complement its efforts in meeting this benchmark, in
particular for the establishment of a school on weapons and ammunition management
that may be used by the different ministries. Such a school could contribute to the
dissemination of common standards across the defence and security forces.
Benchmark (c). The finalization, by the Government of the Central African
Republic, of an arms registration and management protocol for Central African
Republic defence and security forces, covering small arms, light weapons and
ammunition, including hunting weapons and ammunition, delivered to the
Central African Republic authorities, and the establishment of a system of
individual receipt of weapons and of a system for applying individual
accountability measures in case of loss, theft, or diversion of weapons, as well as
working effectively towards proficiency in arms registration and management
and towards investigating when weapons were inappropriately managed, in line
with national law.
The Government informed the assessment team that it had developed interim
protocols to manage the recent deliveries of weapons approved by the Committee. It
also indicated that it will commence work on a standardized registration and
management protocol for its defence and security forces based on the experience of
those recent deliveries. The defence and security forces have developed, or, as in the
case of the police and gendarmerie, are in the process of completing, directives on
arms registration and management which detail overall responsibility for the weapons
and ammunition for these institutions. Those directives also outline the policies and
principles for the management of weapons and ammunition at the respective defence
and security forces, as well as internal controls and security for armouries. The
Government informed the assessment team that it will develop further procedures to
operationalize the directives.
Those directives, however, do specify the procedure for the individual receipt
of weapons. In terms of individual accountability, the Government pointed out that,
in the event of loss or theft of weapons, the penal code, the military justice code and
the military disciplinary rules will apply, as appropriate. For example, article 110 of
the 2017 military justice code provides that a sentence of 2 to 20 years may be
10/13

19-12669

S/2019/609

imposed for the loss or misuse of weapons, ammunition, vehicles, funds or material
provided for the use of the military. The individual penalty may include life
imprisonment, depending on the value of the material lost or misused. In its visit to
Bouar, the assessment team also observed that an individualized system was in place
for the drawing from and returning of weapons to the armoury on a daily basis.
Benchmark (d). The completion, by the Government of the Central African
Republic, of the operationalization of the Commission nationale de lutte contre
la prolifération des armes légères et de petit calibre and the beginning of the
work of the Commission.
The Commission was established by presidential decree on 14 February 2017.
Since then, its organization and functioning, the appointment of a president and
executive secretary, the nomination of eight officers, and a budget allocation for its
permanent technical secretariat have been completed. The eight officers have
assumed their functions and are funded by their respective parent institutions, while
5 of the 15 support staff have been recruited (a number deemed sufficient for the
Commission at this time). A budget allocation of 40 million CFA francs
(approximately $69,000) has been placed at the disposal of the Commission. The
Commission informed the assessment team that it expects to receive an annual budget
allocation of 1 billion CFA francs (approximately $1.7 million) from the Government
over the next five years. By the end of 2018, the Commission had also acquired a
headquarters equipped with 10 computers and other office furniture.
A road map for the operationalization of the Commission was established in July
2017. Within the road map, a baseline report on the management of weapons and
ammunition was completed in 2017 and a national strategy for the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons for the period 2019–2023 was
developed and subsequently validated by the strategic committee on 18 January 2018.
To implement this national strategy, the Commission has developed a draft national
action plan, which still needs to be endorsed by its plenary assembly and approved
by the strategic committee.
Benchmark (e). The establishment, by the Government of the Central African
Republic, of a protocol for the collection and destruction or transfer to the
Central African Republic armed forces and internal security forces of surplus,
unregistered or illicitly held weapons and ammunition seized by the Central
African Republic authorities with the aim, in particular, of fighting against the
illicit dissemination of weapons and ammunition into the Central African
Republic, and working effectively towards implementing such a protocol.
A protocol for the collection and destruction of or transfer to the Central African
Republic armed forces and internal security forces of surplus, unregistered or illicitly
held weapons and ammunition seized by the Central African Republic authorities has
yet to be completed. The work required for the protocol is included in the draft
national action plan of the Commission. Nevertheless, the Commission has started
work towards this priority with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). A workshop was held on the development of such a protocol
from 22 to 28 June 2019, in Bangui, and the basis of a draft protocol established.
In lieu of the protocol, the Central African Republic has some legal frameworks
related to the obligations of this benchmark. Those legal frameworks need to be
updated in accordance with the international agreements and conventions that the
country has signed, so that the country’s laws are in line with international standards
and obligations related to the management and storage of weapons and ammunition.
The assessment team was informed that an interministerial working group under the
auspices of the Commission, with the support of the European Union and UNODC,
has been established to complete these updates. The United Nations Regional Office
19-12669

11/13

S/2019/609

for Central Africa and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, in coordination with ECCAS, are a lso providing support to
national and regional capacities for small arms control within the framework of the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
In addition, the Government informed the assessment team of existing
administrative practices, including in the context of judicial proceedings to manage
weapons seizure, collection, destruction or transfers. In the case of seizures by the
armed forces, administrative procedure requires that a report be made to the Chief of
Staff of the armed forces, followed by the registration of the weapons at the central
armoury before the weapons are returned to the unit that seized them and placed under
the responsibility of the unit armourer.
The Government and the Mine Action Service also informed the a ssessment
team that a concept note had been drafted to support the Commission in developing a
national arms management database and undertaking the marking of weapons for a
certain number of weapons with the adopted arms marking system and trained
personnel. The concept note has been validated by the Commission but will require
financial support from donors to proceed to the programme development and
implementation stages.
Conclusion
The Government and its partners have demonstrated commitment to achieving
the necessary progress against the benchmarks. They should be encouraged to
continue their efforts, although the needs of the Government are significant and
considerable challenges remain. The above evaluation of progress against th e
benchmarks identifies the areas where the Government can most immediately benefit
from transparent, coherent and coordinated assistance from partners. International
partners have a critical role to play in providing financial, technical and other
assistance to help the Government to make further progress on the benchmarks.
There is a perception, both in the Government and on the part of some of its
partners, that the process of securing approvals for weapons and ammunition through
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) and, thereafter, the
delivery of those weapons and ammunition, is cumbersome and time -consuming,
which has negative operational consequences. The assessment tea m was informed
that while the Government, within the provisions of the arms embargo, can receive
weapons and ammunition for its forces and the armed groups cannot, the armed
groups continue to receive weapons trafficked illegally through regional countries .
These include new and higher-calibre weapons than those possessed by the
Government. This disparity in weaponry contributes to a perception in the country
that the arms embargo is prejudiced against the Government and is limiting its ability
to effectively extend State authority and protect its population. The armed groups, in
the meantime, continue to operate with impunity in certain regions, with
consequences not only for the civilian population but also the staff of international
and non-governmental organizations. Such a perception, regrettably, may also have
political consequences, especially as the country prepares for its upcoming elections
and continues its implementation of the peace agreement.
The effectiveness of the arms embargo on the armed groups should also be
closely monitored by the Security Council, together with progress on the five
established benchmarks. In this regard, greater efforts should be undertaken to
enhance the effectiveness of the arms embargo on the armed groups. Suppliers and
facilitators of the illegal transfer of arms to the armed groups in the Central African
Republic should be identified and designated by the Committee for targeted sanctions.
In this regard, the Panel of Experts has an important role to play in tracing seized
12/13

19-12669

S/2019/609

weapons and identifying their sources (individuals and entities) of financing,
production and supply, including trafficking routes, in collaboration with other
sanctions expert panels, as appropriate. Priority should be given to investigating the
armed groups in possession of higher-calibre weapons.
The region has an essential role to play in the effective implementation of the
arms embargo against the Central African Republic. It is important that all bilateral
commissions with neighbouring countries are re-established and focus on ending the
illicit trafficking of weapons into the Central African Republic as a matter of priority.
The recent re-establishment of the bilateral commission with Cameroon is a welcome
development in this respect and other neighbouring countries need to follow suit. The
re-establishment of the trilateral force with Chad and the Sudan could also contribute
towards the implementation of the arms embargo. It is also important that the Central
African Republic have the requisite capacity to adequately contribute to these
mechanisms.

19-12669

13/13
