S/2023/299

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 May 2023
Original: English

Letter dated 27 April 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached agreement, reached during the second
round of peace talks between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional which concluded on 10 March 2023 in Mexico City, known as
“the Mexico Agreement” (see annex). The parties have requested me to circulate the
substantive agreements reached in their dialogues to the Security Council.
I would be grateful, therefore, if you would bring the present document and its
annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
António Guterres

23-08472 (E)

080523

*2308472*

110523

S/2023/299

Annex to the letter dated 27 April 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Spanish]
Agreement No. 6

Mexico Agreement
New Agenda for peace talks between the Government of the
Republic of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(National Liberation Army)
We, the Government of the Republic of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional – ELN (National Liberation Army), with a view to resolving the armed
conflict that has been under way for six decades, eradicating violence as a means of
addressing political, economic and social conflicts, reaching an agreement on
democratic transformations and advancing towards national reconciliation, hereby
agree to the new agenda for peace talks:
Preamble: for a shared vision of peace for Colombia
The peace talks panel and this new agenda are a continuation of the process
launched in 2012, which is now unfolding in the midst of a deeper structural crisis
marked by the incidence of drug trafficking mafia networks, political corruption and
an ongoing economic model in need of change, exacerbated by other factors related
to the global crisis that imperil life on the planet.
Political, social, economic, environmental and cultural transformations will be
required to resolve the historical internal conflict that is the focus of our peace talks.
Achieving this goal requires the development of a national covenant strong enough
to elicit the commitment of all sectors of our society.
Most people no longer believe in those who, whether by their action or inaction,
have exacerbated the crisis. Our era is defined by the disenchantment of millions of
young people with and subsequent mobilization against the traditional political class;
the strength of women who have courageously confronted institutional mistreatment,
inequity and exclusion; the voices of urban and rural communities clamouring for
reforms that have not been made or that have been deferred over time; as well as the
dissatisfaction of the black and indigenous communities, the main victims of forced
displacement and other forms of violence. There is also a large segment of the country
which, while not participating in these mobilizations, is yearning for change and is
waiting for the opportunity to make its voice heard.
The build-up of crises and dissatisfaction led to a period of intense social and
political mobilization, when various groups, armed with hope, worked together until
they forged a mandate for change, embraced by the Government and ELN. From this
perspective, as the core of a shared vision of what peace should be, we, the parties to
this process, see the need for a broad national agreement to be reached by an alliance
of political, economic and social forces, movements and organizations, the media and
different groups and voices of the people, which should drive the changes needed in
Colombian society.
Multiple social and economic actors are willing to contribute to peacebuilding.
We are also being accompanied by an international community that is increasingly
aware of and committed to the sustained efforts being made in Colombia to resolve
the conflict.
2/9

23-08472

S/2023/299

We will incorporate into our work perspectives informed by gender, women’s
rights, the LGBTIQ+ community, ethnic peoples and the protection of Mother Earth,
taking into consideration the initiatives and experiences of society, as well as the
recommendations and instruments of national and international entities aimed at
increasing women’s participation in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
The political solution to the conflict is based on the commitments of all public
authorities, institutions and officials to develop a peace policy for the State that will
not be altered by any subsequent Government, and that captures the principles of the
international responsibility of the State, respect for what has been agreed before the
international community, honouring of commitments and compliance with signed
agreements. We are also committed to protecting the role of the gua rantor countries
to ensure that they do not incur any injury, damage or aggression for participating in
this process.
Consequently, we call upon all sectors of our society, without exception, to
participate democratically in the process for reaching an agreement on the
transformations required by the regions and the country as a whole, and to embark on
a transitional process that will lead us to full democracy: national sovereignty,
comprehensive peace, eradication of all forms of corruption, protection of our Mother
Earth, elimination of the current system of exploitation and depredation, and creation
of the conditions for social and economic equity, which are the lodestar of those of us
working to achieve these national goals.
Agenda
1.

Participation of society in peacebuilding
The goal under this item is to design the process for the participation of society,
based on the identification of social subjects and political actors to participate in a
deliberative and proactive exercise, with a view to identifying the main problems
affecting the nation, as well as the methodologies and scenarios to be used in the
process. The various movements, communities, social and political sectors and unions
shall participate. The process shall encompass the local, regional and national levels,
and shall be focused on topics related to democracy and transformations for peace.
The participation of society in peacebuilding shall be reflected in the following
actions:

23-08472

1.1

Development of a path to building a political and social alliance for the
conclusion of a broad national agreement.

1.2

Identification of the causes of the fundamental problems facing the
country and proposal of initiatives and processes leading to
transformations for peace.

1.3

Conduct of a democratic and action-oriented exercise involving the
mobilization of society around planning, decision-making and effective
implementation of agreements in the regions and nationwide.

1.4

Conduct of a dynamic and action-oriented, inclusive, pluralistic and
binding exercise for the articulation of a shared vision of peace conducive
to national and regional transformations.

1.5

Establishment of a method for strengthening the active and effective
participation of women and historically excluded, discriminated and
underprivileged groups – children, adolescents, young people, older
persons, ethnic peoples, peasants, workers, persons deprived of liberty, the
diaspora, the LGBTIQ+ community and persons with disabilities – in
building democracy for peace.
3/9

S/2023/299

2.

Democracy for peace
The goal under this item is to promote dialogue among the various social actors
convened, and to identify and examine the main causes of the political, social,
environmental and armed conflict, in order to formulate comprehensive solutions.
This agenda item calls for the following actions:

3.

2.1

Reviewing and promoting the participation of members of society in the
making of decisions about issues affecting them, which can translate into
effective public policy instruments in urban and rural territories.

2.2

Examining, through a democratic lens, the economic model, political
system and doctrines that hinder unity and national reconciliation.

2.3

Assessing how political, social and environmental conflicts are handled
from a peacebuilding perspective.

2.4

Reviewing the regulatory framework and guarantees concerning public
demonstrations, and the handling of the legal situation of persons accused
or convicted in connection with demonstrations and social protest.

2.5

Encouraging the participation of society in building people power.

Transformations for peace
The goal under this item is to reach an agreement on policies and a
comprehensive plan to bring about transformations by carrying out specific project s
at the national and territorial levels, with the participation of society, which makes it
possible to have a peaceful, democratic and sovereign Colombia where equity and
social justice reign and the use of weapons to prevent or spur such transformations is
rendered unnecessary.
Transformations for peace shall include:

4/9

3.1

Proposals formulated by society and based on the outcomes of item 2 of
this agenda (Democracy for peace).

3.2

Public policies for addressing poverty, social exclusion, corruption and
environmental degradation, in the pursuit of equity.

3.3

Comprehensive alternative development plans in urban and rural
territories, including life plans and plans for the development of ethnic
communities, which constitute economic, productive and sustainable
options for the benefit of communities.

3.4

Environmental and territorial policies, plans and programmes that resolve
the historical agrarian conflict, for the sustainable and productive recovery
of urban and rural territories and the restoration and protection of Mother
Earth.

3.5

Social contracts that consolidate agreements and education and
communication to foster a culture of peace.

3.6

A comprehensive transformation plan to be articulated and aligned with
national development plans.

23-08472

S/2023/299

4.

Victims
The goal under this item is to recognize all victims, their suffering and their
rights based on:
4.1

The assumption of responsibilities dictated by the truth as established by
all.

4.2

The memory of the lives and struggles of all those affected by the conflict.

4.3

Justice

4.4

Full collective and/or individual redress.

4.5

Guarantees of non-repetition and remembrance.

4.6

Assumption that the environment is a victim.

Taken as a whole, the aforementioned elements make it possible for
responsibilities to be acknowledged and assumed, in the light of international law, in
order to bring about reconciliation in society, taking into account the particular
relevance of recommendations arising therefrom.
5.

End of the armed conflict
The goal under this item is to resolve the armed conflict and eradicate violence
from political life.
With a view to concluding agreements, the following points will be addressed:

6.

5.1

Resolution of the legal situation of ELN and its members, including those
who have been prosecuted and convicted.

5.2

Establishment of the conditions and guarantees for security and political
activity by ELN.

5.3

Eradication of all forms of paramilitary activity, in order to prevent
conflict from recurring.

5.4

Development of humanitarian dynamics and activities.

5.5

Establishment of a bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities with a
view to creating conditions for resolving the armed conflict.

5.6

Conclusion of an agreement on the weapons of ELN, in the light of the
new circumstances created by this process, in line with the strategy to put
an end to violence and neutralize weapons build-up and warmongering.

5.7

Institutional and procedural adjustments required by both parties for the
implementation of this item on resolving the armed conflict.

General plan for the implementation of the agreements between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN
The objective of the general implementation plan is to implement the
agreements concluded and contained in this agenda, in order to effect the changes that
will facilitate the transition from armed conflict to peace, taking into account the
following:
6.1

23-08472

This general implementation plan shall be composed of the specific plans
for each agenda item and shall have a programme and schedule for its
implementation.

5/9

S/2023/299

6.2

The general plan for the implementation of the agreements shall include
monitoring, follow-up, verification and adjustment mechanisms in which
society, the international community, the National Government and ELN
shall participate.

6.3

The plan shall encompass the legal, political, social, economic,
humanitarian, environmental and diplomatic dimensions.

6.4

The plan and the agreements it contains shall be subject to democratic
approval, with society participating in the peace process from the
beginning to the end.

6.5 Partial agreements shall be implemented in the short, medium or long term,
as appropriate.
Design of the process
1.

The delegations and the panel
The peace talks panel shall be composed mainly of the two signatory parties:
the State of Colombia, represented by the National Government, and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional – ELN. Each party shall be responsible for appointing its
delegates, advisors, consultants and technical observers.
The following countries, organizations and institutions shall also be on the panel
and have been invited by agreement between the parties to participate as guarantors:
Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Norway, Mexico and Venezuela; and as permanent accompanying
partners: the Episcopal Conference of Colombia and the Special Representative of
the United Nations Secretary-General in Colombia. Being accompanied in this
manner creates an environment conducive to the convening and holding of the talks.

2.

The guarantors
The guarantor countries shall be part of the panel upon invitation and acceptance
of the parties. Their functions shall be as follows:

3.

2.1

Acting as depositaries of and witnesses to the agreements and monitoring
their implementation, based on the principles of independence, objectivity,
equidistance, impartiality and confidentiality.

2.2

Defending the perspective of the right to peace and non-interference, and
supporting the parties in complying with the agreements and their
commitments.

2.3

Providing their good offices in situations of crisis or controversy, helping
to clarify differences and demanding, as far as possible, responsibility,
consistency and compliance with what has been agreed, hence promoting
the defence of the agreements and of the advances made.

Accompanying institutions and organizations
Given the good offices and importance of being accompanied, both the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in Colombia and the
Episcopal Conference of Colombia, as well as the guarantors, shall serve as
depositaries of and witnesses to the agreements and shall support specific actions
agreed upon by the parties, while maintaining due confidentiality.

4.

Group of accompanying countries
Regarding the talks between the Government of Colombia and ELN, Germany,
Spain, Sweden and Switzerland shall participate as the group of accompanying,

6/9

23-08472

S/2023/299

support and cooperation countries (GPAAC). Their functions shall be listed in the
annex.
5.

Functioning and methodology of the panel and development of the new agenda

5.1

The panel
5.1.1 The parties shall be governed by bilateralism, consultation and joint
implementation of agreements in making their decisions on the panel and in
conducting their activities, in a rigorous and expeditious manner.
5.1.2 Bilateralism shall include talks on the panel and fulfilment of the agreements
and implementation plans, insofar as both parties undertake to fulfil them.
Bilateralism and co-responsibility do not mean symmetry; burdens cannot be
distributed equally between the two parties.
5.1.3 The parties, their delegates and the guarantor and permanent accompanying
countries shall maintain confidentiality in respect of the issues that they have
agreed to keep confidential, for security of and trust in the process.
5.1.4 Each party shall have the autonomy to appoint its delegates, counsellors,
advisors and technical observers, who shall be accredited to the other party
without there being any ground for objection whatsoever.
5.1.5 The recognition of the nature and political legitimacy of the panel and its parties
must be reflected in each of the actions and in the actual content of the
agreements. The delegations shall seek to resolve their differences through
dialogue for the building of what has been agreed upon.
5.1.6 The conclusions reached by the panel shall be expressed in agreements,
protocols, declarations and minutes.
5.1.7 The parties shall use all internal consultation mechanisms to resolve any crisis
that occurs during the meetings of the peace talks panel. If the crisis is not
resolved and the dialogue is at risk of breaking down, the parties shall request
the assistance of the guarantors and accompanying organizations.
5.1.8 During the talks, the State of Colombia shall suspend all criminal prosecution
measures against ELN delegates, and in the event that the talks break down,
until the full return of the ELN delegation.

5.2

Development of the new agenda
5.2.1 The agreements shall transcend the explicit will of the present Government and
become State mandates.
5.2.2 The new agenda is a whole and a road map for the conduct of the talks and the
negotiation of the agreements, which shall always reflect territorial dynamics
and the reality of the country. The talks shall be conducted in the order of the
signed agenda, unless changes are mutually agreed upon.
5.2.3 Partial agreements shall be implemented immediately and must be formulated
in line with a general agreement. Agreements concluded to address urgent
realities in the territories must be meant to have a lasting, deeply rooted and
continuous impact. In other words, they must not be sporadic or simply for show.
Regionalization, sectorization and territorialization shall always be taken into
consideration in the formulation, contents and methods of implementation of the
agreements. Continuous and definite advances are necessary for the panel to
maintain trust and credibility in Colombian society.

23-08472

7/9

S/2023/299

5.2.4 The heart of the process is the participation of society in the definition and
execution of the transformations necessary for peace. Consequently, the first
three items of this agenda are closely linked. The main protagonist and
beneficiary of these agreements should be the population as a whole, including
people affected by structural violence, and not just the direct victims of the
armed conflict.
5.2.5 Neither the Government of Colombia nor ELN shall use the mechanisms of
armed force to put pressure on the panel or to influence its participants. None
of the parties shall use the resources, mediums or forums of the peace process
for strengthening its military.
5.2.6 As a matter of priority, communication for peace must be established in order
to report on the course of the process in a rigorous, timely and balanced manner
using the agreed instruments, and to keep confidential all matters that have been
designated as confidential. Participatory communication shall also be used to
call upon society to participate in and support the agenda and the agreements
concluded.
5.2.7 Education for peace shall be based on the participation of members of society
and their interaction with the panel in transforming the armed conflict, creating
a climate conducive to peace and building a culture of peace.
Mexico City, Inter-American Conference on Social Security, 10 March 2023.
Signed by,
Delegation of the Government of the
Republic of Colombia
José Otty Patiño Hormaza
Head of delegation
Iván Danilo Rueda Rodríguez
High Commissioner for Peace

Delegation of the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional – ELN
Pablo Beltrán
Head of delegation
Aureliano Carbonell

Iván Cepeda Castro

Bernardo Tellez

Olga Lilia Silva López

Silvana Guerrero

Nigeria Rentería Lozano

Manuel Gustavo Martínez

María José Pizarro Rodríguez

María Consuelo Tapias

José Félix Lafaurie Rivera

Tomás García Laviana

Orlando Romero Reyes

Isabel Torres

Dayana Paola Urzola Domicó
Rodrigo Botero García
Adelaida Jiménez Cortés
Horacio Guerrero García
Álvaro Matallana Eslava
Mabel Lorena Lara Dinas
Carlos Alfonso Rosero
Rosmery Quintero Castro
María Jimena Duzán Saénz
8/9

23-08472

S/2023/299

As witnesses and depositaries:
Guarantor countries
Glivânia Maria de Oliveira
Federative Republic of Brazil
Javier Caamaño Cairo
Republic of Cuba
Jon Otto Brødholt
Kingdom of Norway

Raúl Vergara Meneses
Republic of Chile
Roberto de León Huerta
United Mexican States
Carlos Martínez Mendoza
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Permanent accompanying partners
Carlos G. Ruiz Massieu
Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General

23-08472

Msgr. Héctor Fabio Henao Gaviria
Delegate for Church-State Relations
Episcopal Conference of Colombia

9/9
