S/2016/255

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 17 March 2016 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council
I wish to refer to the open debate on “Maintenance of international peace and
security: prevention and resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes Region ”,
scheduled to be held during the meeting of the Security Council on 21 March 2016.
Following consultations between the Department of Political Affairs of the
United Nations Secretariat and the Permanent Mission of Angola to the United
Nations, I have the honour to transmit herewith the Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework 2016-2017 (see annex), which shall be officially launched during the
open debate.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
I invite you and the members of the Council to welcome the Regional
Strategic Framework during the open debate.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-04363 (E)

280316

*1604363*

S/2016/255

Annex
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017
In support of the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region

2/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

Contents
Page

16-04363

Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Structure and background of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

Political context of the Regional Strategic Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Foundations of the Regional Strategic Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Regional conflict analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Regional socioeconomic situation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Road map of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region for
2015-2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Theory of change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Guiding principles for priority regional interventions under the Regional Strategic
Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

The six pillars of the Regional Strategic Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

1.

Sustainable management of natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

2.

Economic integration, cross-border trade and food and nutrition security . . . . . . . .

15

3.

Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

4.

Youth and adolescents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

5.

Gender and sexual and gender-based violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

6.

Justice and conflict prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

3/26

S/2016/255

Abbreviations

4/26

ADF

Allied Democratic Forces

AIDS

acquired immune deficiency syndrome

COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa

EAC

East African Community

ECGLC

Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries

FDLR

Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda

FNL

National Liberation Forces

HDI

human development index

HIV

human immunodeficiency virus

ICGLR

International Conference on the Great Lakes Region

NEET

not in education, employment or training (youth)

SADC

Southern African Development Community

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

16-04363

S/2016/255

Structure and background of the Great Lakes Regional
Strategic Framework
1.
The Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework reflects the United Nation s
development approach to the implementation of the Peace, Secur ity and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, 1
a strategic tool for the promotion of stability, signed on 24 February 2013.
2.
In May 2014, the resident coordinators in the Great Lakes region met in Kigali
to discuss the appropriate response by United Nations country teams to the crises in
the region. They launched a process for the preparation of a joint regional strategy.
In March 2015, while the initiative continued within the whole region, the approach
was further focused on the core area of conflict. namely, the eastern border area
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and
the United Republic of Tanzania.
3.
The Regional Strategic Framework was validated at a meeting held on
7 December 2015 in Nairobi, convened by the Special Envoy of the Secretary General for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, and the Chair of the regional
United Nations Development Group for Africa, Abdoulaye Mar Dieye. The
validation meeting brought together the resident coordinators of the five countries,
the regional United Nations Development Group and representatives of regional
organizations.
4.
The Regional Strategic Framework as set out herein will serve as the reference
document for the development action of the United Nations in the region. The
Framework first outlines the political context for the action of the United Nations
country teams and describes the following three foundations, upon which the
Framework is constructed:
• Key findings of a regional conflict analysis
• A regional socioeconomic analysis
• The road map of the Special Envoy of the Secretary General for the Great
Lakes Region for the period 2015-17
5.
The theory of change underpinning the Regional Strategic Framework
identifies the rationale for intervention under following six pillars:
• Sustainable management of natural resources
• Economic integration, cross-border trade and food and nutrition security
• Mobility
• Youth and adolescents
• Gender and sexual and gender-based violence
• Justice and conflict prevention
6.
It is anticipated that a two-year implementation plan (for 2016-2017) and the
budget for the Regional Strategic Framework will be finalized in early 2016,
__________________
1

16-04363

S/2013/131, annex.

5/26

S/2016/255

following consultations with partners. Under each pillar of the strategy, a clear
distinction will be made between:
(a) Activities to be undertaken by United Nations country teams within their
respective United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks that have regional
implications;
(b) Issues that are cross-border, involving the interaction of two or more
country teams, which must agree on what needs to be done;
(c) Initiatives that are subregional and that will require regional organization
and resource mobilization, justified on a case-by-case basis, where this adds value.

Political context of the Regional Strategic Framework
7.
The progress of the peace process in the Great Lakes region has been slow and
marked by a sluggish pace of neutralization of armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which, together with looming electoral
processes in several countries that are signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
raises key concerns about the potential for fresh violence in specific countries. This
could result in significant violations of human rights and an increase in widespread
displacement of people in neighbouring countries. Indeed, this has already occurred
in Burundi, where controversial elections were held in July 2015. Long-term,
durable peace and security will require a comprehensive approach which cuts the
economic lifelines of armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. Such an approach should also address comprehensively the
drivers of conflict, as outlined in the conflict analysis . The United Nations family
and other international actors are beginning to set a new agenda linking peace and
security initiatives with development activities, which constitutes the essence of this
regional strategic framework.

Foundations of the Regional Strategic Framework
Regional conflict analysis
8.
The eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be
plagued by recurrent insurrections, long after the signing of a peace accord in Sun
City, South Africa, in 2003. Additionally, economic competition between
populations and local administrations within individual countries, as well as
competition among countries, has contributed to the fuelling of fresh cycles of
violence and criminalization of armed groups practising community -based
self-defence. Taking advantage of this structural instability, regional armed groups,
such as the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) and the National Liberation Forces (FNL) have
established strongholds in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
From there, they have carried out criminal operations aimed at destabilizing
countries in the region.
9.
The countries mainly affected by the armed groups are Uganda (ADF),
Rwanda (FDLR) and Burundi (FNL). However, each transnational problematic has

6/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

specific characteristics owing to its deep linkage with local socioeconomic tensions
and conflicts in the home country. These complex and intricately structured
localized and regional conflicts have also facilitated the emergence of criminal
networks. The criminals take advantage of the political tensions subsisting between
several of the Great Lakes countries to pursue illegal exploitation and illicit
trafficking of natural resources.
10. The signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework are divided
into a number of different, and often overlapping subregional bodies: the East
African Community (EAC), comprising Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania; the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), including Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa
and the United Republic of Tanzania); and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), comprising Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic,
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan,
the Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
11. Both the East African Community and the Southern African Development
Community have developed separate economic integration schemes. While regional
bodies and member States of the Great Lakes region are building tax barriers and
separate development plans, local economies remain deeply integrated. Low
employment opportunities, combined with a weak civil administration and the
absence of a harmonized system of taxation, contributes to the attractiveness to the
youth of alternative sources of income, derived from criminal activities.
12. Taking advantage of weak judicial systems and widespread impunity, armed
groups in the region perpetrate human rights abuses, such as sexual and gender based violence. People are motivated by political gr ievances that are often
expressed through ethnically motivated hatred. Furthermore, exposure to violence
over generations has resulted in a breakdown of social norms and taboos. The
spinoff is that violent behaviour is now perceived as “normal”, with unending cycles
of intergenerational violence persisting at all levels of the society (namely, the
household, the community and the government). The absence of effective judicial
cooperation among the key countries has fuelled impunity. Armed groups,
high-profile indicted war criminals and those guilty of genocide have enjoyed
protection and freedom of movement within the region.
13. Despite the complexities and diversity of the drivers of conflict, the local
contexts and the actors impacting the Great Lakes re gion, there also exist potential
means of building peace. While it is necessary to differentiate among the various
areas of conflict and the specific regional actors involved (FDLR, ADF and FNL),
there are similarities between the drivers of the conflicts in each hotspot. In all
areas, the local conflicts are motivated by competition for land and economic
competition among local ethnic groups. Despite the tensions and conflicts among
several ethnic groups, strong ties do exist between some of them on opposite sides
of the border areas in every hotspot. This presents an opportunity to build the
confidence of citizens and civil society in the Great Lakes region.
14. Besides limited access to land, another shared challenge in all the hotspots is
the low level of employment opportunities. Access to effective and quality social
services, such as education, health and social safety nets, is another major
challenge. This accounts for the attractiveness of belonging to militias and other
violent groups, as well as of engaging in other illegal activities. Notwithstanding,

16-04363

7/26

S/2016/255

the presence of a civil society deeply involved in the prevention of conflicts in all of
the hotspots shows that despite the specificity of the conflict in each area, there is a
common basis for response by the population.
15. Even if local economies are deeply integrated and interdependent, armed
groups, businessmen and politicians use ethnic grievances and economic
competition to increase their control over the illicit export of natural resources as
well as over roads and other physical networks. While po or governance and weak
implementation of the rule of law is common in all the hot spots, local initiatives to
build effective governance and accountability do exist.

Regional socioeconomic situation analysis
16. Human development index (HDI) values for all five countries in the Great
Lakes region are very low. With rankings of 186 and 180, respectively, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi are at the bottom of the list of
187 countries ranked by the United Nations Development Programme (U NDP) on
the basis of their HDI indicators. Neither has moved up for the last five years.
Among those five countries, Rwanda has shown the greatest improvement. The
United Republic of Tanzania has also made some progress towards improving
human development since 2008.
17. Wide income disparities among sections of the population hinder human
development in the region. The levels of income inequality in Central and East
Africa are high (the Gini index for Central Africa is 45.0). The landscape of
inequality in the Great Lakes region has not changed, although inequality decreased
slightly in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania between 2000 and 2012 .
Poverty is characterized predominantly by its rural nature, widespread informality
and feminization. Unemployment is high, especially among youth. Approximately
one third of young people in the labour-force age bracket are without work and the
proportion is growing. Less than 10 per cent of the working population in most of
the countries of Eastern and Central Africa is formally employed. On the positive
side, the Great Lakes countries have achieved remarkable results in primary school
enrolment within the last generation. Nevertheless, completion rates in the region
are the lowest in the world.
18. All five countries in the region are among the 20 fastest growing African
economies. Rwanda ranks second after Sierra Leone, with an average annual growth
of over 8 per cent (over the period 2008-2013). Uganda, which occupies sixteenth
place on the list of 20 and last place among the five countries in the Great Lakes
region, grew at an average annual rate of just less than 6 per cent (over the period
2008-2013). 2
19. The Great Lakes region is rich in natural resources. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo alone, natural resources are estimated to be worth 24 trillion
United States dollars. The eastern part of that country, which is the centre of the
conflict in the Great Lakes region, has one of the greatest concentrations of precious
minerals and metals in the world. Most of those minerals are used in the
__________________
2

8/26

See Economic Commission for Africa, African Union, African Development Bank Group and
UNDP, MDG Report 2014: Assessing Progress in Africa toward the Millennium Development
Goals (Addis Ababa, 2014).

16-04363

S/2016/255

manufacture of a range of high-tech devices, such as mobile phones, laptops and
spacecraft. They are therefore in high demand and their market value is very high.
Natural resources have become a major driver of the conflict in the region,
especially in light of the fragility of States and their inability to exercise appropriate
authority over non-state actors. The value of the illegal production of and trade in
minerals and natural resources is estimated to be at l east 1.25 billion United States
dollars per year, yielding over 15 per cent of profits.
20. In the Great Lakes region, over 75 per cent of the 170 million inhabitants of
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania live in the core Great Lakes area, which makes it one of the
world’s most densely populated areas.
21. Close to 4 million displaced persons across the Great Lakes region are waiting
for the opportunity to return or integrate, many of them hav ing left their homes
decades ago to escape conflicts and poverty. Solutions can come only through a
regional perspective and with the offer to those displaced of viable choices . The
United Republic of Tanzania has recently offered residency to over 160,000 longterm refugees, which is encouraging evidence that the regional approach to
confronting the plight of refugees and displaced persons can work.

Conclusions of the analysis
22. The conflict and socioeconomic analyses speak to the vital importance of
addressing cross-border issues linked to the border of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The root causes of conflict in one country are frequently to
be found in a neighbouring one, with events in one country often triggering
reactions and repercussions in another. There are huge flows of natural resources
across national boundaries and strong flows of migrants and refugees, as well as
fugitives from international justice.
23. The conflicts feed off and reinforce each other. The success of national-level
initiatives will be enhanced when they are implemented as part of a regional focus,
with simultaneous and/or complementary action across the countries involved . The
trends and patterns of conflict demonstrate the centrality of border areas as the main
theatres where risks manifest themselves and proliferate. However, opportunities for
peacebuilding also exist in these border areas, which can be tapped to enable the
building of confidence, creation of trust and establishment of the momentum for
peaceful settlement of conflicts, thereby contributing to the successful
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Although,
traditionally, United Nations country teams act at the country level, the regional
analysis makes clear that there is also a need for measures complementary to
existing country-based programmes, at a subregional level.
24. At the political level, the Secretary-General has established the Office of his
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region to ensure that regional political and
security issues are addressed in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the United Nations country teams of the region. Based on an
analysis of the political and security situation and the status of implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, the Special Envoy has drawn up a
road map for the period 2015-2017. He has underlined that the new rise in regional

16-04363

9/26

S/2016/255

tensions in recent months and the upsurge of violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi demonstrate that the progress on the Framework
could be reversible.

Road map of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region for 2015-2017
25. The Special Envoy has identified nine priorities for the period 2015 -2017.
A number of those priorities have a development dimension. Addressing those
priorities will form part of the Regional Strategic Framework.
26.

The priorities of the Special Envoy encompass:
1.

Support efforts to neutralize negative forces through relevant Security
Council resolutions

2.

Facilitate confidence-building efforts in the region

3.

Promote peaceful, inclusive and transparent elections in support of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework

4.

Strengthen the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and the Technical Support Committee of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism

5.

Facilitate durable solutions to the issues confronted by refugees and
internally displaced persons in the region:
• Support the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in addressing the plight of Rwandan refugees in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
• Tripartite discussions; a regional approach to the refugee situation in
the Great Lakes region
• Land and property rights for returning refugees and internally displaced
persons
• Humanitarian assistance in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo: grass-roots initiatives to facilitate intercommunal dialogue and
local integration

6.

Facilitate socioeconomic development so as to consolidate peace gains
and advance regional economic integration:
• Facilitate regional development initiatives and, in particular, support
for cross-border regional projects
• Boost private sector investment; organize, with the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the private sector conference,
including the finalization of the investment opportunities brief
• Improve management of natural resources, including promotion of
transparency in the region’s mining sector; improvement of governance
and productivity within the artisanal mining sector and the taxation and
incentives regimes for mineral production, marketing and export

10/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

7.

Mobilize the region’s active forces, women, youth and civil society, to
facilitate the building of the constituencies under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and promotion of a shared vision for peace and
prosperity in the region:
• Empower women as economic agents: support cross-border trading;
ensure that women benefit equally from natural resources and
agriculture-based initiatives
• International Conference on the Great Lakes Region sexual and gender based violence training facility in Kampala
• Legislative and judicial means to address the culture of impunity for
perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence
• Promote citizenship through civil society engagement within the
framework of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
• Youth employment projects
• Scale up the most imaginative youth programmes in the region

8.

Facilitate regional initiatives to fight impunity, improve accountability
and advance regional judicial cooperation so as to strengthen the rule of
law:
• National or regional legal initiatives, such as specialized mixed
chambers and commissions
• National vetting mechanisms to remove those responsible for human
rights violations from security forces
• Comprehensive regional strategies with the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region for judicial cooperation, particularly on sexual
and gender-based violence, corruption and illegal exploitation of
natural resources

9.

Provide leadership and coordination to the international community in its
support for the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, including through the mobilization of resources and
strengthened donor and partner relations:
• Quick-impact projects for women and youth

Theory of change
27. It is important that the United Nations act in an integrated manner in support
of the mandate of the Special Envoy. It is simply not possible, however, to address
the causes of conflict and help to ensure that the countries of the region move onto a
positive development trajectory, including addressing human development deficits,
without addressing the root causes, which are regional in nature. The requirement
for a regional approach underlies the regional analysis. The Regional Strategic
Framework recognizes that securing peace, safety, security, stability and economic
growth in the region requires multifaceted efforts which address interlinked risks, in
an integrated and comprehensive manner across regional borders , as part of the
development process. Inasmuch as the drivers of conflict pass from one country to

16-04363

11/26

S/2016/255

the next, concerted cross-border action is necessary. The Regional Strategic
Framework is premised on the understanding that the homogeneous nature of the
drivers of peace, as identified in the conflict analysis, forms a basis for significant
engagement towards promoting peace and development through cross -border action.
United Nations country teams can take advantage of this homogeneity in
undertaking sustainable cross- border initiatives.
28. As a means of laying the groundwork for this regional strategic framework,
the United Nations country teams have undertaken a mapping of their existing
programmes in areas in which the identified conflict dynamics and hu man
development deficits may be addressed. They have also reviewed the actions of
partners. This assessment has enabled the United Nations country teams to identify
a series of regional approaches constituting a significant United Nations regional
value addition, which will be complementary to the work of other key local,
national and international partners. The regional approaches of the United Nations
country teams will build on existing country teams’ national programmes, as
encapsulated in United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and
programmes and country programme documents which articulate complementary
measures at a subregional level.
29. Within the theory of change underlying the Regional Strategic Framework of
the United Nations country teams six interconnected building blocks or pillars of the
regional approaches needed to contribute to the long -term goal of peace and security
in the Great Lakes region are established, based on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework:
• Sustainable natural resource management
• Economic integration, cross-border trade and food and nutrition security
• Mobility
• Youth and adolescents
• Gender and sexual and gender-based violence
• Justice and conflict prevention

Guiding principles for priority regional interventions under
the Regional Strategic Framework
30. Under each of the six pillars, three areas of complementary subregional
intervention are described. These interventions must abide by the following guiding
principles:
• Support the vision of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
of “Creating a region characterized by deeply entrenched values, principles
and norms on democracy, good governance and observance of human rights ”.
Programmatic interventions will prioritize respect for human rights and
promotion of good governance, including enhancement of capacities, on both
the demand and the supply side, to contribute to an environment that is
politically and socially cohesive and accountable and that offers improved
service delivery to its people.

12/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

• Take into account the needs of youth and seek to empower young people.
• Aim to ensure that the management of natural resources and biodiversity is
sustainable and benefits communities.
• Ensure that gender mainstreaming and empowerment of women exist, gender
mainstreaming being a core priority of the United Nations . Mainstreaming
gender means far more than checking boxes: it means making gender central
to design and implementation. Integrating gender into all aspects of planning
and programming will have a transformational effect upon the Great Lakes
region.
• Ensure that health, HIV/AIDS, education and human rights issues are taken
into consideration, including through further regional and national adherence
to agreed human rights principles, norms and standards, in view of their
linkages to peace and security concerns in the region.
• Ensure the conflict sensitivity of all programmes and address conflict drivers
as identified in the conflict analysis
• Ensure private sector partnerships and investment
• Support the implementation of adopted regional protocols relevant to the
Regional Strategic Framework, including protocols of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, namely: the Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance; the Protocol on Judicial Cooperation; the Protocol for
the Prevention and the Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, War Crimes and
Crimes Against Humanity and All Forms of Discrimination; the Protocol
Against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources; the Protocol on the
Protection and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons; the Protocol on the
Property Rights of Returning Persons; and the Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence Against Women and Children.
The Strategic Framework will support other relevant instruments, including the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) Protocol on Free
Movement and Coherent Legal Migration Policy; the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Protocol on the Control of Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Region (2001); the SADC Protocol on Gender and
Development (2008); the SADC Protocol on Mutual Legal Assistanc e in Criminal
Matters (2002); the East African Community (EAC) Protocol on Peace and Security
(2012); the EAC Protocol on Environment and Natural Resources Management
(2006); the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, their Ammunition and all Parts and Components that can be used for their
Manufacture, Repair or Assembly (the Kinshasa Convention) (2010); and the
Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and
Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and Bordering States
(2004; entry into force, 2006).

16-04363

13/26

S/2016/255

The six pillars of the regional strategic framework
1.

Sustainable management of natural resources
31. The conflict analysis identifies the unregulated competition over the extraction
of natural resources, most of which remains illegal, as a key root cause of the
conflict in the cross-border region encompassing Burundi, the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The
value of the illegal production and trade of minerals and natural resources is
estimated to be at least US$ 1.25 billion per year. The strategy will therefore seek to
ensure that illegal production is transformed into legal, regulated and transparent
production.
32. Effecting this shift should result in significant earnings, both for the state and
for communities. There should also be a more sustainable use of natural resources
through which natural wealth can be translated into development outcomes. A
necessary precondition for this is transparent and accountable management of those
natural resources. To this end, the strategy will seek to enable the main actors not
only to build among themselves the capacity to negotiate on and value those natural
assets, but also to develop both strong public finance management capacity and
strong public investment management capacity.
33. As gold exports account for 50 per cent of the illegal flow of resources from
the region, focus on this element is likely to have the greatest impact. Only 2 per
cent of those revenues show up as taxable production. If illegal extraction and flow
of resources were to be transformed into legitimate trade, income would increase
exponentially, with the attendant ability of the state to provide the population with
better services.
34. Similarly, gradual replacement of illegal charcoal production and illegal
regional trade in this product, with more efficient alternative clean sources of
energy, should have an equally transformative effect in terms of the conservation of
natural resources and a reduction in the influence of illegal armed groups.
Sustainable use of natural resources will also depend significantly on the securing
of land and property rights.
Outcomes
1.

Sustainable use of natural resources will enrich the state and lead to
tangible improved community livelihoods (income).

2.

There will be justice and fairness in landownership and property rights,
because of inclusive and peaceful land management. This will enable
those persons in particular who were previously displaced by conflict to
come on board.

Primary beneficiaries
Artisanal miners (250,000), displaced persons (up to 3 million), communities
whose members live in and around national parks, including in return areas,
and all those affected by activities of armed groups.

14/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

Priority regional interventions
1.

Developing regional natural resources management and sustainable
livelihoods in and around the Virunga National Park (in the border area
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda),
and other regional and national parks in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and their immediate cross-border surroundings, in a context
of transnational cooperation. Special emphasis to be placed on
sustainable production, gradual elimination of current illegal regional
trade and gradual replacement of charcoal production by more efficient
and alternative sources of clean energy, including the showcasing of
examples of sustainable resource management. Restoring already
degraded forests and other natural resources, including harmonizing
cross-border environmental laws, protocols and regulations guiding
sustainable use. In particular, the following actions will be critical
elements of regional intervention:

2.

Promoting environment-friendly regional gold production and trade
which is equitably and transparently taxed, traced and certified. This will
serve to cut the lifelines that sustain illegal armed militias and other
transnational criminal groups.

3.

Securing land and property rights for communities’ economic recovery,
agricultural production and investment and creating an enabling
environment for refugees’ return to and reintegration within the region.
Increase the capacity of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region secretariat to address the root causes of land-related conflict in
the region’s natural resource sector. Strengthening regional cooperation
among civil society organizations and in research institutions as well as
the capacity of key actors in land dispute mediation (including women,
the youth, traditional chiefs and parliamentarians). The documentation
and dissemination of best practices in land conflict resolution and
community resettlement will be prioritized. In addition, this regional
intervention will formalize and regulate natural resource exploitation and
trade, particularly artisanal gold-mining, artisanal timber logging and
charcoal production.

Regional intervention in the three priority areas will be deve loped and
implemented in close cooperation with the International Conference, local
governments and the communities.

2.

Economic integration, cross-border trade and food and
nutrition security
35. There is inadequacy in respect of economic cooperation and regulation, which
could support sustainable exploitation of natural resources for the benefit of local
communities. Competition between SADC and EAC needs to be shifted to a
positive cooperation trajectory through the reinvigoration of COMESA and the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL). Through technical
support provided to COMESA and CEPGL, issues associated with some of the
building blocks needed to bridge divides will be addressed. The potentially positive
role of the private sector in the region will be harnessed through a process of

16-04363

15/26

S/2016/255

partnering with key actors, ensuring appropriate facilitation of cross -border
investment and the establishment of growth poles. The issue of the food and
nutrition security of border communities in the Great Lakes region needs to be
addressed through focusing on enabling small farmers and herders to access modern
technologies and sustainable agricultural practices for increased productivity and
the building of resilience to climate-related shocks and conditions.
Outcome
1.

Increased trade among border communities in the countries in the Great
Lakes region.

2.

Improved food and nutrition security in border communities in the Great
Lakes region.

Primary beneficiaries
Regional interventions under the pillar will specifically benefit border
communities, women, youth groups and other members of civil society,
particularly the North and South Kivu communities on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo side, and border communities in B urundi, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The Economic Community of
the Great Lakes Countries (ECGLC), including its permanent executive
secretariat, will benefit, as well as economic institutions of the countries in the
Great Lakes region. Among these will be ministries of economic development
and trade, which promote and support the regional economic integration
process. The regional institutions of EAC, SADC and COMESA will also
benefit.
Priority regional interventions
1.

Support to the permanent executive secretariat of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries on systems and processes for
addressing trade and non-trade barriers and promoting economic
integration among countries in the Great Lakes region.
Analysing bottlenecks, developing common commercial and trade
standards, promoting participation of women and youth in cross -border
trade, and commodity analysis for employment/trade potential;
improving border markets and standardization of border procedures;
subregional information systems; aid for trade/trade facilitation support.
This regional intervention focused on ECGLC will include
complementary support measures to COMESA, SADC and EAC
institutions, as well as national ministries of economic development and
trade.

2.

Promote regional private sector access to finance and other support
services.
Initiatives will focus on enterprises and cooperatives operating in cross border zones in the area of natural resources and agricultural
commodities — extraction and harvesting (actions to be coordinated with
pillar 1): inter alia, rules and regulations, and policies for the private
sector’s adoption of voluntary guidelines and certification processes (for

16/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

natural resources), addressing labour, human rights and environmen tal
considerations; attaining certification for natural resources; technical and
capacity support provided to local producers to enable them to access
regional value chains; promotion of legal and transparent investment
across sectors covering mines, agriculture and small-scale energy
production, together with the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region; regional regulatory framework for artisanal mining.
Preparation of investor-friendly briefs, championing of improvement in
the investment environment, including through the successful Private
Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes Region, led by the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region and held in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February 2016; provisio n of
tools and institutional capacity support, such as through consultations
with the public, corporate natural resource policies and conflict and
grievance resolution mechanisms and working with private sector
enterprises in security risk management.
3.

Promote border communities’ access to agricultural technology and
provide capacity support for increased agricultural productivity and
output, and building regional resilience to climate-related shocks and
conditions.
Capacity support: advocacy activities, raising awareness and sharing of
best practices regionally — with farmers and herders in border areas,
with respect to using environmentally sound practices and agricultural
techniques; promotion regionally of “purchase for progress”-type
interventions; analytical studies aimed at identifying regional or
transboundary land dynamics and constraints and opportunities for
smallholders in accessing land in and around cities, and support for
development of regional strategies to address this; support for acce ss by
border communities to new agricultural technology, including high -yield
varieties, efficient plant material and sustainable agricultural practices.

3.

Mobility
36. Mobility of persons, workers, goods and capital is a key component of
regional economic integration. However, forced displacement is both a key driver
and consequence of violent conflict. It leads to regional instability and insecurity
and other significant humanitarian challenges, and human rights violations, as well
as a lack of socioeconomic improvement.
Outcome
37. The mobility pillar will seek to strengthen regional stability by taking a more
regional approach to understanding and addressing the causes of displacement.
Humanitarian, political and development partners will be brought together to find
durable solutions to displacement in the Great Lakes region by building on ongoing
initiatives, such as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR)/World Bank forced displacement study and the Internatio nal
Conference on the Great Lakes Region high-level Regional Consultation Meeting
on Land and Property Rights of Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees. Greater

16-04363

17/26

S/2016/255

social and economic integration and strengthened community resilience can support
the orderly movement of persons, goods and livestock across and within borders.
Community-based protection will be supported by early recovery and development
initiatives which contribute to an improved protective environment in safe return
areas.
38. Harmonization and strengthening of immigration and asylum procedures will
reduce the illegal movement of people in the region, since harmonization
strengthens the capacity of national migration authorities to manage orderly
movement of persons across borders. Regional and local tensions are reduced as
durable and innovative solutions for protracted displacement are found .
Strengthening the exchange of information, including information on disease
surveillance, and provision of harmonized health services across borders c an help
de-legitimize negative attitudes and foster integration. Promoting effective
education services for children and young people ensures that they are equipped for
such movements and sustainable livelihoods will also be critical.
Primary beneficiaries
Primary beneficiaries of the priority regional interventions will be refugees,
internally displaced persons, returnees, migrants and border communities
Priority regional interventions
1.

Durable solutions
Working together with national, regional and international development and
humanitarian partners to encourage integrated, durable and innovative
solutions for the internally displaced and refugees, including local integration,
voluntary repatriation in conditions assuring safety and dignity and
resettlement/relocation. Voluntary repatriation of refugees is conducted within
the framework of relevant tripartite agreements entailing building community based resilience and fostering a socioeconomic environment conducive to
lasting returns. This will include access to justice, addressing sexual and
gender-based violence, and strengthening education policies and strategies for
refugees and internally displaced persons. The UNHCR Regional Refugee
Coordinator will assure regional coordination of comprehensive solutions,
including managing regional data on refugees and asylum seekers. Partners
will also form a working group in which they work together to implement the
recommendations contained in the 2015 report of the World Bank and UNHCR
entitled “Forced displacement in the Great Lakes region: a development
approach”. This effort will also bring together national partners to share
experiences on challenges, obstacles and good practices for lasting solutions to
displacement in the Great Lakes region.

2.

Regional border management programme
This includes strengthened government management capacity and asylum
procedures; improved information collection and information technology
structures; joint border patrols, strengthened integrated border management,
including fair and efficient asylum procedures, and adequate reception for
asylum seekers; systems and tools for the identification and referral for
psychosocial support of vulnerable migrants such as victims of tra fficking,

18/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

stranded migrants, unaccompanied minors and migrants who have been
exploited or abused in other ways; systems for screening migrants in detention
to assure protection and access to asylum systems when needed: identification
of asylum seekers, provision of adequate counselling on legal options,
including consular assistance for migrants who are not asylum seekers:
facilitation of labour migration; monitoring of disease, livestock and crops and
pest control.
3.

Identification, protection and solutions for victims of trafficking through
agreed protocols in the region
This will include enhanced capacity of government and partners to provide
comprehensive case management covering all dimensions, such as mental
health and psychosocial support, through to community reintegration and
livelihoods. Particular attention will be paid to the specific needs of women
and children, with proper training to ensure that staff in contact with them are
providing age- and gender-appropriate care. The presence of wellness centres
at border crossings will also be promoted to ensure community resilience to
health risks associated with mobility, particularly HIV, through revitalizing the
cross-border Great Lakes Initiative on AIDS and expanding it to include other
diseases such as tuberculosis as well as provision of psychosocial support.

4.

Youth and adolescents
39. Youth and adolescents have been major victims of intergenerational conflict
and have limited educational and livelihoods opportunities. Focus in this pillar will
be on empowering young people. It is believed that through promotion of the most
innovative youth employment initiatives at a regional level, the recruitment of
young people into armed gangs, militias and other delinquent groups can be
significantly reduced and the exploitation of the youth and adolescents reined back.
Sexual and reproductive health services, including for HIV/AIDS prevention, care
and treatment, will be stepped up to ensure improved health. Cross -border
exchanges between young people will be promoted as a means of fostering the
sharing of perspectives on common youth problems in the region.
Outcome
40. The strategy is expected to trigger investment in youth and adolescents as a
key path towards harnessing the demographic and peace dividend in the five core
countries of the Great Lakes region. There should also be increased capacity among
girls and boys to improve their skills, which will enable them to be active
participants in processes of consolidation of peace and social cohesion through a
strengthening of youth engagement and adolescent development. This will include
working with the authorities to ensure that mechanisms are in place for allowing
youth voices to be heard and taken seriously in local decision-making as it affects
them. There will also be a need to guarantee the youth access to information,
training and increased economic opportunities so that they can become more
independent and more motivated as stakeholders in the process of peace
consolidation.

16-04363

19/26

S/2016/255

41. The participatory approach to implementation of regional interventions will
promote exchange programmes and networking among beneficiaries, as well as
common interests, heritage, peace and security. In the context of community -based
protection and peaceful coexistence, and in order to reduce vulnerability to forced
and voluntary recruitment and other forms of exploitation, education, vocational and
recreational activities, including sports programmes, are needed. This pillar
therefore envisages a society where adolescents and young people are healthy,
educated, safe, skilled and employed and drive regional deve lopment and peace and
security.
Primary beneficiaries
Marginalized adolescents and young people aged 10 -24 in the border areas of
the five countries, especially in mobile populations (e.g., migrants, refugees,
internally displaced persons and cross-border traders), sex workers and
exploited children forced into sex work, young people in urban slums and
cross-border towns who are not in education, employment or training, children
formerly associated with armed forces or groups, and gang members.
Priority regional interventions
1.

Youth employment and livelihoods
The interventions seek to increase young people’s economic self-sufficiency,
to be attained through financial and functional literacy, development of
entrepreneurial skills, and provision of hands-on working experiences and
coaching. More specifically:
• Youth cooperatives in border communities will be established to produce
value added products from locally available resources such as agricultural
and mineral products.
• A youth entrepreneurship, training and innovation centre and a youth
entrepreneurship fund will be set up in the subregion to allow trained young
people to function competitively, equipped with their business ideas, as well
as in the promotion of peace and security.
• Partnerships will be developed with both the private and public sectors, as
well as donor agencies, in support of youth skills-building in order to allow
the youth to participate in construction and infrastructure development
projects and environmentally safe mining in the region.
• Youth businesses which provide badly needed safe services at the border
crossings (information technology, food, accommodations and provision of
other consumables) will be supported.
• Operations research on the effectiveness of the different employment and
business schemes will be conducted as a means of guiding an overall
regional youth employment scheme.
• The countries’ educational curricula will be reviewed to ensure that they
adhere to principles of conflict sensitivity, cultural tolerance and inclusion,
as well as to enable the strengthening of educational services, so as to
promote equity and relevance to the economic and cultural realities of local
communities.

20/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

2.

Innovative engagement of youth
The innovative engagement of various categories of youth aims at infusing
young people with a respect for the values of peace and security, democracy,
accountability and development, and equipping them with effective
participation, leadership and advocacy skills. These will have both preventive
and rehabilitative dimensions and will build on what is offered through
existing innovative channels such as:
• Cross-border exchanges between national youth forums.
• Encouraging youth engagement with local authorities.
• Collaboration with U-Report and United Nations Pulse Lab Kampala
(Uganda, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi), focusing on
advocacy and channelling of the voices of youth in the Great Lakes region,
including feedback.
• Reaching young people through provision of citizenship development,
peacebuilding and conflict resolution materials and disseminating them
through interpersonal or other innovative communication channels, including
digital drums and Internet.org.
• Pilot “Youth Centres for Peace” (Rwanda/Goma) and “Youth for Peace”
(Rwanda/Democratic Republic of the Congo/Burundi) will also be replicated
at the cross-border areas; youth centres will be transformed into innovation
hubs and will be used to increase digital literacy among young people in the
border areas, the intention being to expand to the region.

3.

Healthy development and protection of adolescents
Establish youth peer educator networks for different categories of young
people at risk (for example, children formerly associated with militias and
other criminal groups, sex workers, those living with HIV, cross -border traders
and those in business and entrepreneurship programmes). They will be
equipped with knowledge on sexual and reproductive health and HIV
prevention, and with reproductive health commodities, such as male and
female condoms, which will be distributed to fellow youth after they have
been educated.
Other cross-border activities and services will include:
• Establishment of integrated sexual and reproductive health/HIV services in
cross-border locations where large numbers of young people at risk
congregate.
• Integration of services in youth entrepreneurship and skills development
projects.
• Provision of information about citizenship, peacebuilding, human rights and
life skills through innovative social media platforms.
• Setting up of prevention and cross-border response and cooperation
interventions and systems to prevent trafficking, gender-based violence and
other forms of violence against children and adolescents.

16-04363

21/26

S/2016/255

• Strengthening civil registration and vital statistics as a means of determining
age so as to protect adolescents.
• Establishment of cross-border community-based programmes for prevention
of young peoples’ participation in armed groups, harmful practices and gang
activities as well as rehabilitative programmes: these activities will focus on
practical steps for preventing at-risk children from joining such groups and
cross-country legal measures.
• Strengthening of regional and intergovernmental mechanisms that have a role
to play in harnessing social service delivery at the country level.

5.

Gender and sexual and gender-based violence
42. Action is needed to address the unprecedented levels of violence against
women and girls, who suffer from grave discrimination in the Great Lakes region.
The link between women’s participation in peace and security-related decisionmaking and better outcomes, both for peace and for gender equality, is grounded in
political interest theory, where organized representation of interests is assumed to
produce policy outcomes of value to the interest group in question . The United
Nations country teams anticipate that gender equality, gender justice and sustained
peacebuilding can flow from women’s participation and leadership in conflict
resolution and recovery processes under certain conditions, which the United
Nations seeks to support through this strategic framework.
43. The regional interventions will seek to influence power dynamics: the power
of domestic constituencies for gender equality in peace and security policy to
influence national, community and cross-border decision makers and hold them to
account. Unless women’s voices and representation are placed at the centre of
reform efforts the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework will not consolidate
its transformational potential. Research demonstrates that women’s active
participation in economic life makes peacebuilding and recovery efforts more
sustainable and effective, particularly as women are more likely to invest their
income in family and community welfare. Female-headed households usually have a
greater dependency burden than do male-headed households, mainly because they
have less access to the “peace dividends” of revived livelihoods or public services
and are frequently unable to reclaim the property of a departed or deceased spouse.
In order to break the cycle of poverty, this Strategic Fr amework will seek to address
such exclusion in the Great Lakes region.
Outcome
A peaceful and stable region free from sexual and gender -based violence, in
which women and girls are empowered to participate in peacebuilding and
economic growth and enjoy equitable access to the benefits of sustainable
development.
Primary beneficiaries
Female internally displaced persons and refugees, survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence, women in post-conflict communities, women leaders in

22/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

conflict and post-conflict countries and national institutions responsible for
security, justice, trade and the economy.
Priority regional interventions
1.

Implementation of commitments under the Kampala Declaration to address
impunity for gender based crimes at the country level
This includes the institution of special mechanisms to fast -track sexual and
gender-based violence cases, including the setting up of special courts,
strengthening of the institutions responsible for justice and security, and
supporting data collection and monitoring and reporting on progress. Ensure
synergy between the training activities of the Kampala training centre and
implementation of the commitments by institutions at the country level.

2.

Enhance women’s visibility and participation in decision-making
and peacebuilding
This will entail visibility of the priorities and rights of women in conflict affected countries, and capacity-building to enable them to actively engage in
policy, development and peacebuilding, as well as engagement of women’s
organizations in service delivery and advocacy at the community level .

3.

Increase women’s economic empowerment and resilience
Through support for the Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region, the programme seeks to launch the women’s Empowerment
Principles as part of the UN-Women/United Nations Global Compact
partnership; strengthening policy, the operational framework and women ’s
capacity for cross-border trade, empowering rural women victims of armed
conflict in situations of food insecurity and promoting universal access to
reproductive health services.

6.

Justice and conflict prevention
44. The inability of the international community to bring the perpetrators of gross
human rights violations to justice and to effectively support measures of conflict
prevention has led to a spiral of increasing conflict and sexual and gender -based
violence which have plagued the Great Lakes region for over a generation. The
Regional Strategic Framework plans to reverse that trend by ending the culture of
impunity. The proposed transformational and integrated approach will require
strengthening of the mechanisms of justice (traditional and formal), enhancing
capacity of local governance institutions to deliver services, addressing the
occurrence of violence and holding perpetrators to account (in both traditional and
formal ways). There will also be a need to create opportunities for peace dividends,
rebuilding civic trust and community resilience. Regional government commitments
will need to evidence a respect for human rights. The strategy seeks to realize
tangible improvements as an essential contribution to the restoration of trust
between citizens and governments, which has been eroded.

16-04363

23/26

S/2016/255

Outcome
An increased focus on accountability and strengthened infrastructures for
peace and human rights across the region.
Primary beneficiaries
Governments and national/subnational institutions, local communities and
authorities, civil society and community-based organizations, traditional,
religious, youth and women’s associations in border areas in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania; justice officials, including law enforce ment officials,
prosecutors, judges, legal professionals and border agencies. Along with
citizens seeking justice and reconciliation across the region.
45. As the foundation for effective regional intervention, there will be a focus on
improved risk and vulnerability analyses, including use of real-time data, to provide
policymakers and planners at the regional and national levels with early warning
information which triggers more effective regional response mechanisms for
preventing escalation of conflict. Capacities for enhanced regional analysis and
early warning, which will allow the United Nations country teams to react quickly
to defuse and put in place timely responses to potential conflict, will be
strengthened at the country level and anchored regionally to enable regional
analysis of conflict and vulnerability. This will build on existing work, including
perception surveys conducted by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative in the Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to provide a better understanding of populations ’
perceptions and expectations regarding issues of peace, justice and security.
Political economy analysis — particularly of the security sector — will also be
deepened.
Priority regional interventions
1.

Strengthening formal and informal institutions, mechanisms and capacities
for conflict prevention management and resolution and peacebuilding by
working on cross-border initiatives and allied efforts at the regional level —
including the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and civil
society organizations
Empowering and strengthening communities’ and civil society
organizations’ capacities for peacebuilding to address local-level crossborder conflicts through capacity-building on conflict prevention
management, mediation and dispute resolution as well as peacebuilding
and reconciliation initiatives, with particular emphasis on the
strengthening of existing and/or the establishment of local infrastructures
for peace, strengthening dialogue and trust among cross-border
communities; strengthening cross-border initiatives in community
policing, involving citizens in crime prevention, but also increasing
confidence and cooperation between communities and the police and
border agencies, strengthening United Nations country team-supported
national access to justice and community security programmes in border
and cross-border communities, including pilot mobile courts, community

24/26

16-04363

S/2016/255

policing and a focus on improving the quality of traditional justice
mechanisms.
Key border posts and crossings will be identified and provided with
support towards strengthening their capacities to better secure
themselves (in line with the African Union Strategy for Enhancing
Border Management in Africa), including exploring the feasibility of
joint border crossings through which to facilitate cooperation between
border agencies. Specific interventions could include co -location and
joint efforts in investigations, information-sharing, patrols, training (on
issues relating to trafficking, smuggling of weapons and other priority
subjects) and measures for strengthening detection and interdiction
capacities. There will be periodic joint meetings, including cross -border
communities (e.g., local authorities, border agencies and local
communities). There will also be mechanisms for promoting dialogue
and cooperation between cross-border communities. This will be
conducted in close collaboration and coordination with pillar 3
interventions, with their focus on protection and migration. Pillar 6
interventions will view this issue through a “security sector and rule of
law”-type lens.
2.

Strengthen regional efforts to increase controls over the supply side of small
arms and light weapons
Small arms and light weapons are a major contributor to the conflict in
the Great Lakes region. Working in partnership with the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and the Regional
Centre on Small Arms in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and
Bordering States to ensure a harmonized regional approach to stockpile
management practices and particularly leakages from state stockpiles;
adequate marking and record keeping; collection of illicit and unwanted
weapons, destruction of collected arms and surplus weapons. The
regional intervention will also utilize International Small Arms Control
Standards in conducting assessments of existing small arms controls in
countries in the region and identifying and prioritizing support needs, in
order to move all countries in the region closer to compliance with
international standards and ensuring harmonization of national controls
and legislation.

3.

Enhanced judicial cooperation, including law enforcement, border officials,
prosecution services, judicial bodies and the legal profession
Improved cooperation at the provincial, national and regional levels,
between Governments, justice institutions and communities, particularly
in cross-border areas, promotion of consensus and political space, to
allow member States to jointly explore the way forward. This may
include use of judicial institutions. Regional judicial cooperation and
criminal justice reform will use the convening or facilitation powers of
the United Nations, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Union and other regional bodies, including
SADC/EAC (as well as regional justice organizations, including the Pan
African Lawyers Union, the Chief Justices’ Forum, the SADC and East

16-04363

25/26

S/2016/255

African Lawyers’ Associations) to provide the space within which to
explore and improve judicial cooperation (within the framework of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region protocols) so as to
build consensus; explore good practices including South -to-South best
practices, as well as potential local solutions through which to punish
perpetrators, deter future perpetration of crimes and heal divisions
between communities. These consultations will seek to develop an
agreeable road map of initiatives for application of the International
Conference Protocol on Judicial Cooperation at the national level,
regional cooperation focused on the interministerial committee on human
rights treaty reporting, cooperation between human rights institutions,
regional interventions in issues concerning gender-based violence,
natural resources, and accountability and corruption, including money laundering and financial crimes. Intervention in support of national rule
of law institutions in investigating, prosecuting and adjudicating grave
human rights violations would be included, where necessary, with regard
to the investigation of international crimes requiring regional cooperation
(notably in the Democratic Republic of the Congo).

Conclusion
46. Progress achieved under the six priority pillars of regional intervention should
facilitate a powerful advance towards sustainable peace. In the present situation in
the Great Lakes region, however, we can expect that some of the changes being
pursued will be resisted.
47. International criminal networks, which are profiting from the illegal trade in
natural resources, will put up a strong show of resistance. Those accused of human
rights violations will use local groups for protection and to sabotage the justice
systems.
48. For true gender equity to be achieved, embedded cultural norms will need to
be addressed.
49. Yet, it is essential to move ahead if we are to lay the groundwork for recovery
and strengthen the moderate centre which supports peace. Success depends on the
capacity to support goodwill and on the tangible follow-through on their
commitment of the countries in the region.
50. The Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework has been elaborated in
response to the often-stated needs and priorities of governments, leaders and
communities. It is intended to serve as a reference document, underpinned by the
conviction that coherent action at the regional level, focusing on the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo border area, and early successes, will
demonstrate, particularly at this moment of fragility, that it is possible to progress
along a development path. The Regional Strategic Framework will build the
confidence necessary for key countries to fulfil their commitments.

26/26

16-04363
