A /77/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

78th plenary meeting

Monday, 12 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 10
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on
HIV/AIDS
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/877)
Statement by the President
The President: First, let me extend my heartfelt
condolences to all whose lives have been affected or
upended by the AIDS epidemic and who have lost their
loved ones to the disease.
Today we gather for an important purpose — to assess
the progress in the implementation of the declarations
on HIV and AIDS. AIDS response is critical to our
work in this Hall because it is indissociable from the
realization of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs).
Pandemic
prevention,
preparedness
and
response — whether in addressing AIDS or the
coronavirus disease — are a cornerstone of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That is our
promising agenda, in the fulfilment of which we are
lagging behind. However, there is reason for optimism.
Data show that the global AIDS response has led to
remarkable results. A diagnosis that was once a death
sentence has, through both science and solidarity,
been transformed into a manageable chronic health
condition. Due to antiretroviral treatment and the use

of pre-exposure prophylaxis, the last two decades have
seen infections decrease by 50 per cent and deaths
decline by 70 per cent. That life-saving progress stands
tall as a testament to the power of multilateralism and
international cooperation.
While the progress is exceptional, it is also uneven.
The most significant improvements on all fronts of the
pandemic happen in countries that choose to invest in
their HIV and AIDS responses. In those places, HIV
treatment and educational material are readily and
freely available. In others, not only are they difficult to
acquire, but they also remain a serious taboo. What is
causing those contrasts? The answer lies with familiar
culprits: faltering political will, persistent gender
inequality, insufficient funding, fragile public health
systems and the failure to redress inequalities.
The AIDS epidemic is a public health crisis, but
the crux of the issue is, ultimately, inequality. Let us
be honest: the breadth of the epidemic has long roots in
homophobia, transphobia and discrimination, too. And
let us acknowledge that our international community
failed to deliver in the early years after the outbreak
because of preconceptions of how the virus spread. At
that time, AIDS was still “the disease that is hard to talk
about”. As our understanding of the disease shifted, so
did our response. It moved to embrace universality,
equity and inclusiveness — principles crucial to
pandemic preparedness and response.
Finally, we work to make the right to equal access
to health care a reality for all. But let us also remember
that a humane approach is paramount to building trust

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16534 (E)

*2316534*

A/77/PV.78

and unity — two key components of the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS. There are also very
concrete measures we can take to better respond
to HIV/AIDS, first, by addressing the gaps in HIV
prevention, testing and treatment services, particularly
for vulnerable groups; secondly, by ensuring adequate
and equitable funding; thirdly, by implementing
evidence-based programmes; and fourthly, by using
the synergies between AIDS response, broader health
goals and the whole 2030 Agenda. Why? Because
overlapping and interlocking crises need to be
addressed holistically, not as siloed-off issues. For too
many, AIDS is still a life-or-death issue, but it should
not be. I urge Member States and stakeholders to renew
their political and financial commitments to ending the
pandemic. The SDG Summit in September will offer
the best opportunity to make ambitious pledges.
I wish delegations a fruitful meeting today.
In accordance with rule 70 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, I now give the floor to
Mr. Guy Ryder, Under-Secretary-General for Policy, to
make a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Ryder: I am delighted to be here this
morning delivering these remarks on behalf of the
Secretary- General.
Let me start by thanking Ms. Winnie Byanyima for
her leadership of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the 11 United Nations
system sponsors and staff of the Joint United Nations
Programme who are working with Governments and
civil society to bring an end to AIDS. Thanks to their
efforts, we are on the right track to meet our goal of
ending AIDS as a public health threat by 2030.
The report before the Assembly today (A/77/877)
shows some great strides in the global AIDS response.
Almost 29 million people across the world are receiving
life-saving treatment. The global roll-out of HIV
treatment averted an estimated 16.5 million AIDSrelated deaths between 2001 and 2020, and in 2021 the
estimated 1.5 million new HIV infections were almost
one-third fewer than in 2010. That is a remarkable
achievement in just 10 years. Each of those victories is a
testament to the power of strong political commitment,
global solidarity, evidence-driven strategies and
mutually supportive partnerships between affected
communities and public authorities.
2/24

12/06/2023

But we must not take our foot off the pedal. AIDS
continues to be a global crisis, causing a death every
minute. Midway towards the endpoint of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), global and local inequalities
are still blocking progress. Ending AIDS as a public
health threat is integrally linked to broader efforts on
poverty, hunger, governance and access to health care
for all. Those have all been badly affected by multiple
crises, including climate change and the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Ending AIDS is also linked to
progress on human rights and social inclusion, from
gender equality to tackling discrimination and stigma.
Laws and policies that criminalize people living with
HIV or those most at risk of contracting HIV do a grave
injustice to the cause. Recent steps by several countries
to remove those harmful laws are a source of hope.
Ending AIDS requires resources. Financing for the
HIV response has suffered a double hit, with declines in
both international and domestic investments. Adverse
global economic conditions have led Governments to
change their financing priorities. Some have reduced
funding for programmes and services that help end
AIDS. Reversing that shortfall is critical. This is not
only a matter of meeting the AIDS targets set out in the
2021 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030; it is also essential to supporting broader health
system functions, including pandemic preparedness
and response. For that, we need investments in new
medicines and technologies that help lower the cost
of vital products. We also need investment in the
education of women, girls and boys to ensure access to
health services for all. That is a crucial element in the
fight against AIDS.
We can end AIDS if we are bold. It will take
programmes based on solid evidence, driven by data. It
will take support for community-led responses. It will
take laws and policies that protect the human rights
of every person. It will take sustainable and equitable
funding. It will take urgent action to overcome
inequalities. And it will require us to ensure that
UNAIDS is fully funded and supported. Those actions
will not only help to end AIDS, which is an essential goal
in itself, but will also make an important contribution
to public health across the board. The global AIDS
response has built some of the most comprehensive
data systems in global health and development. The
systems that were set up to collect and analyse that data
23-16534

12/06/2023

are a model for designing interventions that meet the
specific needs of vulnerable communities.
Looking forward, we will host three major meetings
dedicated to health during this year’s high-level week of
the General Assembly. One is on tuberculosis, one is on
pandemic preparedness and one is on universal health
coverage. All three meetings will draw on the lessons
we have learned from the response to AIDS. One of
those lessons is the need for integrated approaches
to all global health priorities. Another is the need to
deploy new tools to empower communities so that they
can make a difference. And perhaps the biggest lesson
of all is that political will, supported by the needed
resources, has the greatest power to deliver on health
and development.
Our progress on AIDS is a blueprint for progress on
all the SDGs. There is a path to end AIDS by 2030. That
path is not a mystery; it is a choice. It is a path we have
already agreed. Let us walk it together.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): On behalf of the Group
of African States, I want to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting to follow up on
the progress of ensuring an equitable response to end
the AIDS pandemic and accelerate progress for global
health and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
with respect to the General Assembly commitment laid
out in the 2021 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS:
Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS
by 2030.
The African Group is pleased by the decline of
AIDS-related deaths since they peaked in 2004 and by
the decline of new HIV infections since 1996 in regions
with high burdens of HIV, across a range of income
levels, from high- to middle- and low-income countries.
Equally important, we are pleased that the integration
of tuberculosis (TB) and HIV care services has
expanded and that care and treatment services for HIV,
syphilis, viral hepatitis and other sexually transmitted
infections are also more functionally integrated with
antenatal and postnatal care services. That has widened
access to antiretroviral therapy and improvements in
the integrated delivery of HIV-TB care services, which
have led to a steep drop in TB-related deaths among
people living with HIV. Those gains, and the health and
community systems that continue to be strengthened,
are yielding wider health, economic and developmental
dividends that are accelerating progress towards other
Sustainable Development Goals.

A/77/PV.78

The African Group is disappointed that the
remarkable gains are not reaching everyone,
everywhere. AIDS remains the fourth leading cause of
death in Africa. Equally worrisome is that the Middle
East and North Africa, Eastern Europe and Central
Asia are experiencing steep increases in annual HIV
infections, while earlier declines in Latin America and
the Caribbean have stalled. In Eastern Europe, Asia
and the Pacific, new HIV infections have fallen steeply
in many countries, but are rising alarmingly in others
because of the lower treatment coverage, including in
the Middle East and North Africa, since only about half
of the people living with HIV received antiretroviral
therapy in 2021. We also realize that Asia and the
Pacific and Latin America and the Caribbean were also
below the global average for HIV treatment coverage
and viral suppression.
The African Group appeals for concrete
interventions to increase HIV prevention, diagnostics
and treatment to reverse those increases. We believe
that the 95-95-95 targets should be achieved and that
everyone should benefit equally across the globe from
the expanded provision of HIV diagnostics, prevention,
testing and treatment. Globally in 2021, almost 6 million
people were unaware that they were living with HIV
and were therefore not receiving treatment. This means
that conventional testing methods are missing those
people. We are of the view that continuing use of a
wider range of testing approaches and tools, including
HIV self-testing, upgrading national health testing,
including at the local level, can narrow this increasing
HIV infection gap substantially.
The General Assembly, in June 2021, adopted
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030. Member States and the international community
committed to achieving global targets that would put
the world on course to reach the landmark goal of
ending AIDS by 2030. The African Group realizes that
gains against HIV have stalled and that the overall pace
of progress against the AIDS pandemic is slowing. That
is due to faltering political will, funding constraints,
fragile public health systems and a failure to confront the
injustices and inequalities that fuel the pandemic, among
others. It is of great concern that social, economic and
gender inequality and the HIV-related health-care needs
of people in prisons, which continue to be neglected,
have heightened the risk of HIV infection. Those
inequalities impact women, especially young women,

23-165343/24

A/77/PV.78

in the highest-burden countries. The African Group is
also concerned that HIV-related stigma, discrimination
and violence remain alarmingly common and reaffirms
the right of everyone, including people living with HIV,
to be free from stigma and discrimination and to lead a
prosperous and sustainable life.
Children living with HIV are poorly served. A
large number of men are still missing out on life-saving
HIV testing. Treatment and programmes for preventing
the vertical transmission of HIV are losing momentum,
since their coverage has stagnated in recent years. That
is worrisome, especially in West and Central Africa,
where programmes reached only 60 per cent of pregnant
or breastfeeding women living with HIV in 2021. The
Group urgently calls for action to remove those barriers
so the world can achieve the global HIV elimination
targets and regain the momentum to end AIDS as an
epidemic by 2030.
We need stronger political will and commitment,
and we appeal to the international community and
our development partners to urgently accelerate and
enhance the global AIDS response, address the gaps
in HIV diagnostics, prevention, testing and treatment,
and ensure adequate and equitable funding to support
national efforts to eliminate AIDS by 2030. International
support should aim for the continued strengthening of
national health systems across the board and the sharing
of best practices in implementing evidence-based and
data-driven programmes in supporting nationally led
responses, including at the local level, and especially
in HIV-burdened regions. Those will assist in building
on HIV models and resources for broader health and
development outcomes in order to achieve equitable
access to medicines and other health technologies. We
believe that enhanced global partnerships and solidarity
are crucial in harnessing synergies between AIDS
response, broader health and the SDGs before 2030.
In conclusion, the African Group recognizes
some positive gains and practices, and we reaffirm
our commitment to enhancing global efforts to ending
AIDS by 2030. The Group is, however, concerned
about the low coverage of pre-exposure prophylaxis,
human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and cervical
cancer screening and treatment, especially in lowincome countries, the majority of which are in Africa.
We urge an increase in pre-exposure prophylaxis, HPV
vaccination and cervical cancer screening and treatment
care services for all countries without exception. In
the same spirit, we strongly appeal for more research
4/24

12/06/2023

and innovation for HIV vaccines, medicines and cure.
We are of the view that it is possible to achieve an
HIV-free world by 2030 if we step up our collective
commitments and actions towards that goal. The world
must therefore accelerate efforts to remove barriers to
HIV diagnostics, prevention and treatment and to other
relative health threats, so that the full realization of the
right of everyone to the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health is achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
27 member States.
The candidate countries Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia, as well as Armenia, align themselves with
this statement.
As in past years, we welcome today’s debate on the
follow up to the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
and its political declaration. Convened every year to
discuss the progress achieved and the challenges of
responding to HIV/AIDS, it helps pave the way to the
ambitious but achievable goal of ending HIV/AIDS as a
global epidemic. The first case of AIDS was diagnosed
over 40 years ago, and it has been now more than 20
years since the ground-breaking special session on
HIV/AIDS and the creation of the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. And yet, we still have
a lot of work to do if we want to end HIV/AIDS as a
global epidemic by 2030. Important progress has been
made. We should acknowledge it and be proud of that,
but the fight against HIV/AIDS is far from over. The
coronavirus disease pandemic has reversed hard-won
gains against HIV. More than ever, we must remain
committed to taking urgent and sustained action
through a coordinated global HIV response.
AIDS claims lives every minute of the day and
shatters families and communities. HIV stigma and
discrimination continue to harm people living with
HIV and key populations, as defined in the political
declaration. Every case that can be prevented saves
lives, spares grievances and spares life-long treatment,
besides saving economic resources. Every case
that receives treatment gives new hope not only to
individuals but also to families and communities. Every
23-16534

12/06/2023

stigma that is challenged improves the well-being and
mental health of people living with and affected by HIV.
Last year, the European Union pledged €715 million
from the EU budget to the Global Fund for the period of
2023–2025. Together with its member States, as Team
Europe, the total amount is more than €4.3 billion.
That shows our longstanding commitment to the Fund
and to the fight against HIV. Furthermore, the new
Global Health Strategy of the EU, as well as the Global
Gateway, focus and renew the EU commitment to
strengthening health systems across the globe. In a Team
Europe approach, the EU, its member States and their
financial and development institutions are committed
to mobilizing the private sector to support and align
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals. The Global
Gateway focuses notably on prioritizing the security of
pharmaceutical supply chains and the development of
local manufacturing. Over €300 billion in investments
are being mobilized to help support health investments,
among others.
The Global AIDS Strategy, adopted by the Board
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), and the Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to
End AIDS by 2030, adopted by the high-level meeting
in 2021, remain the critical guidance we need for the
coming years, and they have our full backing. The
EU and its member States also support the important
work and solid expertise of UNAIDS in guiding the
global response. Stressing the importance of the final
recommendation of this year’s report (A/77/877),
notably to integrate and harness synergies between
the AIDS response and broader health efforts, we
applaud UNAIDS for its leadership role in sexual and
reproductive health and in gender equality.
We need to be united and ambitious if we want
to meet the high expectations and live up to the
commitments of the Political Declaration. The work
done by UNAIDS to measure the progress that is being
made to deliver on the SDG commitment of ending
AIDS by 2030 is key. We cannot let down those already
living with and affected by HIV, And we must do our
outmost to prevent every new single case in the future.
Decades of experience and evidence show that
intersecting inequalities are preventing progress
towards ending HIV/AIDS. With new diagnostics,
prevention tools and treatment we can achieve the

A/77/PV.78

vision of zero new HIV infections, zero discrimination
and zero AIDS-related deaths. The EU and its member
States continue to pledge our strong commitment to
this cause and call upon all members to do the same.
Mr. Jackman (Barbados): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 countries
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report, contained in document A/77/877,
informing us of the progress made and challenges we
are encountering in our commitment to ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030.
CARICOM welcomes the remarkable progress of
the global AIDS response. We note that the global rollout of HIV treatment averted an estimated 16.5 million
AIDS-related deaths between 2001 and 2020. We also
note that the new HIV infections have continued to
decrease. This means that we are getting even closer to
achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target
3.3, to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030.
CARICOM Member States have been doing their
part to make that a reality. In a comprehensive approach
to realizing the vision of an AIDS-free Caribbean, we
ensured that we empower those persons living with, at
risk of and affected by HIV/AIDS to practice safe and
healthy lifestyles. We underscore accessible, equitable,
high-quality laboratory and community-based testing
services as central in our HIV response. We prioritize
high-impact interventions to improve treatment
outcomes and we integrate HIV services to also
address co-infections and co-morbidities. Therefore,
we are pleased that we are on our way to achieving
our 90-90-90 targets. According to our latest statistics,
77 per cent of people living with HIV in the Caribbean
ARER aware of their status, 81 per cent of the people
diagnosed with HIV Are on treatment And 80 per cent
of the people in the Caribbean on antiretroviral therapy
Are virally suppressed.
The CARICOM region also continues to make
efforts to reduce mother-to-child transmission, which
has already resulted in seven of our Caribbean countries
being validated by the World Health Organization for
the elimination of mother-to-child transmission. We
celebrate the fact that, in the Caribbean, deaths due
to AIDS have decreased by 37 per cent and new HIV
infections have been reduced by 29 per cent since
2010. Our region has been able to accomplish that
progress because we have implemented indigenous

23-165345/24

A/77/PV.78

approaches consistent with our political, social and
cultural environment. However, while we celebrate the
achievement made over the years both regionally and
globally, we are still confronted by the reality that there
is much more work to be done in order to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030.
We recall our strong commitments, as adopted
in the 2021 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDs:
Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS
by 2030, where we agreed to strengthen our health
systems and ensure equitable access to medicines,
diagnostics and health technologies. We must continue
to implement multisectoral and multistakeholder,
people-centred and community-based approaches to
ensure that our progress does not stall in the long term.
This means that in line with our 2021 commitments,
we will galvanize global ambition to end the AIDS
epidemic through the integration of HIV services into
universal health coverage. Building resilient health and
social protection systems will provide optimal health
outcomes for persons living with, at risk of and affected
by HIV/AIDS.
We underscore the importance of science,
technology and innovation in advancing the national
AIDS responses. We also underscore the need for the
transfer of technology in order to scale up capacitybuilding, as well as research and development, in
developing countries. Our regional capacity means that
we are still dependent on the full use of the flexibilities
of the World Trade Organization Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
and the opportunity provided by the 2001 Doha
Declaration. Through this, we can access safe, effective
and high-quality medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and
other health technologies. Without a commitment to
the global accessibility, availability and affordability
of medicines for all, we will be limited in our ability
to prevent, diagnose and treat HIV infections,
co-infections and co-morbidities. Therefore, we regret
that there has been no progress in developing a new HIV
vaccine, despite welcoming that commitment in 2021.
As we continue to outline the work we have set
ahead, CARICOM remains optimistic that, with timely
and effective implementation of the commitments
already set, we will be able to collectively end the
AIDS epidemic by 2030 and finally live in a world free
of AIDS.
6/24

12/06/2023

Mr. Setia (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (A/77/877), which
provides an insightful and informative update on the
global fight against HIV/AIDS.
India has been working in a planned way to
eradicate HIV/AIDS. India’s unique HIV prevention
model is centred around the concept of social
contracting, through which the Targeted Interventions
programme is implemented with support from civil
society. The programme is aimed at behaviour change,
communication, outreach, service delivery, counselling
and testing and ensuring linkages to HIV care. India’s
National AIDS Control Programme has been revised,
revived and revamped to focus on hard-to-reach and atrisk populations. Viral load testing facilities have been
scaled up and HIV counselling, testing and communitybased screening for early diagnosis have been ramped
up to achieve the target of eliminating the motherto-child transmission of HIV. India is providing free
antiretroviral treatment to close to 1.4 million people.
Indian drugs are also reaching millions of people living
with HIV in Africa. We have already made significant
progress in that regard. Efforts are now being made to
reduce the number of HIV cases to zero. In line with
the motto of the Government of India — “Together, for
everyone’s growth, with everyone’s trust” — the National
AIDS Control Programme has signed memorandums of
understanding with public and private sector industries
to mobilize their support for HIV prevention and
treatment. India aspires to scale up HIV care to reach
100 per cent of people living with that dreaded disease.
The important dimension of India’s efforts
is a coordinated and integrated approach for
comprehensive care to individuals affected by HIV.
The National AIDS Control Programme is executed
by the National AIDS Control Organization in
collaboration with State AIDS Prevention and Control
Societies. The National AIDS Control Organization
allocates funds to State AIDS Prevention and Control
Societies in the form of grants-in-aid, enabling them to
deliver vital services for HIV prevention, testing and
treatment. The awareness campaigns are a continuous
process and regular activities are conducted in schools
and colleges.
The Government of India launched the National
AIDS Control Programme to address the HIV/AIDS
disease in the country. The Government of India has
further set up several care and support centres to provide
universal access to comprehensive, equitable, stigma23-16534

12/06/2023

free, quality care, support and treatment services to all
people living with HIV using an integrated approach.
The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act of 2017
provides a legal and enabling framework to safeguard
the human rights of infected and affected populations.
We need to foresee and identify our challenges
and gaps, customize our programme, share knowledge,
emulate best practices and stride towards reaching the
Sustainable Development Goal of ending the AIDS
epidemic, which is a grave public health threat, by 2030.
India remains committed to strengthening international
cooperation in the collective fight against HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Since the first cases of AIDS
were reported over 40 years ago, the world has made
significant progress in the fight against HIV and AIDS.
Not only did the roll-out of HIV treatment globally
averted an estimated 16.5 million AIDS-related deaths
between 2001 and 2020, the latest data from the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
show that new HIV infections and AIDS-related
deaths have continued to decrease. Those gains have
undoubtedly brought the global AIDS response closer
to achieving target 3.3 of the Sustainable Development
Goals. However, inequitable access to life-saving
treatment, including vaccines, continues to linger and
has been exacerbated as an unfortunate legacy of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has
greatly infringed on the progress made in combatting
HIV and AIDS at the risk of reversing several gains.
Intellectual property barriers, prohibitive pricing,
restrictions on technology sharing and transfer and a
lack of access to affordable generic HIV drugs remain
a challenge — one that continues to impinge on the
right to health for many people living in low- and
middle-income countries.
Furthermore, countries’ capacities to respond to
AIDS have been severely diminished by the devastating
socioeconomic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and
further compounded by ongoing conflicts across the
world and the climate crisis. Domestic funding for the
HIV response in low- and middle-income countries has
fallen for two consecutive years. Increasing global food
prices have worsened food insecurity for people living
with HIV across the world, making them much more
likely to experience interruptions in HIV treatment. In
our quest to ensure that no one is left behind, we must
urgently tackle those challenges to ensure that they do
not further threaten the gains made so far.

A/77/PV.78

As we gather here today, we are cognizant of the
ongoing discussions, both here and in Geneva, on the
pandemic accord, the amendments to the International
Health Regulations and the political declarations to be
adopted at the upcoming high-level meetings of the
General Assembly on tuberculosis, universal health
coverage and pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response. We see those as comprehensive,
complementary and synergistic processes. These
intergovernmental processes are a clear signal that
countries of the world want to work together for a
safer, healthier future where we are better prepared
for and able to prevent future pandemics and health
emergencies, as well as to respond to them effectively
and equitably. They represent a critical step in ensuring
greater equity in the global response to public health
emergencies and in ensuring that we do not repeat
the mistakes of the COVID-19 pandemic response,
including in sharing life-saving vaccines, the provision
of information and the development of local capacities.
Progress towards ending AIDS as a public health
threat is integrally linked to broader efforts to end
poverty and hunger and close inequality gaps, while
building resilient institutions, functional partnerships
and sustainable communities. We have the collective
means, innovation and partnerships to have a world
where we can reduce and prepare for pandemic risks
and global health emergencies, including HIV and
AIDS. However, it is our responsibility to effectively
put those efforts into motion.
Mr. Oehri (Liechtenstein): The fight against HIV/
AIDS is a showcase for the impact the international
community can have if we all join forces. We are
encouraged by the most recent data from the report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/877) on the implementation
of 95-95-95 testing, treatment and viral suppression
targets. Today 85 per cent of people living with HIV
globally know their serostatus, 88 per cent of whom
are accessing antiretroviral therapy, again of whom
92 per cent have suppressed viral loads. Those gains
are testament to strong political commitment and global
solidarity and will yield further health, economic and
development benefits that are accelerating progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Halfway to 2030, we have to remind ourselves that
our common efforts to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic
not only contribute to good health and well-being, in
line with SDG 3, but also advance at least nine more
SDGs, including our commitments to ending poverty

23-165347/24

A/77/PV.78

and hunger, advancing gender equality and promoting
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions.
Despite the achievements in many parts of the
world, the international response to HIV/AIDS is
also a reminder of how fragile progress can be if we
fall back into complacency or lose sight. While there
has been a very substantial decline in new infections
in sub-Saharan Africa, the region with the highest
burden of HIV, we have unfortunately witnessed steep
increases in other parts of the world, notably in Eastern
Europe and Central Asia.
The Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the subsequent political declarations reflect our shared
belief that no one should be left behind in our decadeslong fight to end the epidemic. For our collective
efforts to be successful, it is indeed crucial to remove
societal barriers to services for those communities in
greatest need. Discriminatory laws targeting LGBTIQ
populations, whether in place for a long time or recently
introduced, remain an obstacle to our AIDS response.
The economic and social marginalization of groups at
higher risk of HIV infection —such as people who inject
drugs, sex workers, prisoners, transgender people and
men who have sex with men — often prevent them from
fully enjoying their fundamental freedoms and human
rights, above all the right to health. A suitable response
to HIV/AIDS must necessarily address and fully
recognize all fundamental elements of HIV risks and
vulnerabilities, including the disproportionate impact
of the epidemic on young women and adolescent girls.
Since pre-exposure prophylaxis constitutes a powerful
prevention tool that can significantly reduce infections
among at-risk populations, its use and availability need
to be rapidly expanded beyond high-income settings.
We express our full support for the recommendations
of the Secretary-General and commend his staff for the
tireless work to translate the 2021 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on
Track to End AIDS by 2030 into reality. The guidance
and leadership of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) have been pivotal for our
collective action, as has the work by the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and relevant
civil society organizations. Since 2007, Liechtenstein
has made regular financial contributions to UNAIDS,
and we aim to continue our support. By investing in
prevention, we have the best chance to create sustainable
results in the long term and to eradicate HIV/AIDS
once and for all. In that regard, we are hopeful that the
8/24

12/06/2023

declaration on pandemic prevention and preparedness
will help better navigate and address current and future
public health challenges, including HIV/AIDS.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Somalia on behalf of the Group of African States
at this very important meeting to discuss progress on
ensuring equitable response to end the AIDS pandemic
and accelerate progress for global health and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
In 2021, we made a commitment to ending
inequalities and getting back on track to end AIDS
by 2030. To keep our commitments on track,
consistent, relentless honest reviews on progress are
key to effectively fight the scourge. The report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/877) highlights that through
the global AIDS response, remarkable gains have been
made towards achieving target 3.3 under Sustainable
Development Goal 3, which is to end AIDS as a public
health threat by 2030. My delegation is, however,
concerned that that those gains are not reaching
everyone, everywhere. We must therefore continue
to prioritize an equitable response in order to impact
the most vulnerable populations, address social and
economic inequalities and ensure access to quality
health care for all.
Africa has been disproportionately affected by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. Poverty exacerbates vulnerability
to HIV infection and hinders access to prevention,
treatment and support services. To effectively keep our
commitments to the 2021 Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track
to End AIDS by 2030 on track, we must strengthen
multilateralism and make stronger collaborative efforts
in increasing awareness, enhancing resources and
bulking finances for prevention and treatment of HIV.
In the lead-up to the SDG Summit and the high-level
meetings on tuberculosis, universal health coverage
and pandemic preparedness, prevention and response,
this year provides a unique opportunity to renew our
health commitments. We must continue to prioritize
an equitable response to end the AIDS pandemic and
support the most vulnerable populations. Fulfilling
the commitments of the Political Declaration will
accelerate action towards achieving universal health
coverage, preventing future pandemics and addressing
social and economic inequalities.
23-16534

12/06/2023

HIV/AIDS remains a leading cause of morbidity
and mortality in Kenya. The Government has adopted a
people-centred, data-driven and multisectoral approach
to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We have implemented the
second phase of the Kenya AIDS Strategic Framework
in order to provide strategic directions towards
accelerated progress to a Kenya free of HIV infections,
stigma and AIDS-related deaths. Great focus has
also been placed on HIV education and awareness as
important components of HIV prevention. Kenya’s
gradual progress in the fight against HIV and AIDS
is attributed to intricate health-care investments in
the response to the epidemic. However, the rate of
infections among young people between the ages of 15
and 24 remains a concern and threatens the potential of
young people as the key drivers of economic growth.
For instance, in 2020, youth accounted for 35 per cent
of new infections.
Young women and girls are disproportionately
affected by HIV/AIDS, making it crucial to prioritize
their specific needs in the response to the epidemic.
In Kenya, women aged 15 to 24 are twice as likely to
be living with HIV as men in the same age bracket.
The intersecting factors of gender inequality, social
norms, economic disparities and limited access to
comprehensive health-care services contribute to
the higher vulnerability of young women and girls to
HIV infection.

A/77/PV.78

to treatment still exist across Africa, particularly
in remote and underserved areas. Ending AIDSrelated poverty requires a cooperative framework that
embraces comprehensive prevention, expanded access
to treatment and care, socioeconomic empowerment,
innovation and increased investment. Let us stand
together, united in our determination to eradicate that
scourge. Together, we can create a world free from the
grip of HIV/AIDS.
In conclusion, we must act now to combat the
HIV/AIDs pandemic and invigorate more concerted
efforts. We can do so by building on synergies between
our global AIDS response and our efforts to achieve
universal health coverage, as well as the implementation
of other relevant SDGs. Kenya remains committed to
concerted efforts to end HIV/AIDS by 2030.
Ms. Soares Leite (Brazil): Brazil is honoured to
participate in this plenary debate on HIV and AIDS and
highly commends the Secretary-General for his report
(A/77/877).

It is paramount that we prioritize the socioeconomic
empowerment of individuals and communities affected
by HIV and AIDS. By providing opportunities for
education, skills training, income generation and
entrepreneurship, we can create sustainable livelihoods
and improve the overall well-being of those affected.
To expedite progress in the AIDS response, it is also
imperative to ensure sustained funding for prevention,
treatment, care and support services.

We note with satisfaction that global new infections
are almost one-third and related deaths halved compared
to 2010. In particular, we wish to commend the region
of sub-Saharan Africa for the steepest reduction of new
infections in the world. Brazil shares the concern that,
despite the remarkable progress made, overall figures
are not declining fast enough to reach our global goal
and targets. We fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for strengthened collective actions,
with a focus on equitable and affordable access to
medicines and other health technologies; engagement
with the community; sustainable financing; and
international cooperation, while harnessing synergies
between AIDS response and efforts on tuberculosis,
universal health coverage and pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response.

Adequate funding and resources dedicated to
research, development and distribution of antiretroviral
therapy and other life-saving medications are crucial
to reducing new infections, extending the lives of
people living with HIV and preventing AIDS-related
deaths. Investing in medication is an investment in the
well-being of individuals, families and communities,
and it is a critical step towards a future free from
the burden of HIV/AIDS. Antiretroviral therapy has
revolutionized the management of HIV and AIDS,
prolonging and improving the lives of those living
with the virus. However, significant gaps in access

The fight against HIV/AIDS is a State policy
in Brazil. Brazil has consistently advanced in the
prevention and care of HIV/AIDS thanks above all to
our Unified Health System (SUS), which guarantees
universal and free-of-charge access to treatment and
diagnosis. Through SUS, more than 700,000 people are
being assisted with free medicines, over half of which
are produced locally. We began the free distribution of
HIV self-tests in public health units along with HIV
rapid tests, with the aim of reaching out to key and
priority populations, especially in the context of the
coronavirus disease. Our health system provides, free

23-165349/24

A/77/PV.78

of charge, a wide offer of effective, proven prevention
tools, such as condoms and oral pre-exposure
prophylaxis. Affordability, however, remains a central
issue. As the Secretary-General rightly points out,
upper-middle-income countries, such as Brazil, are
often not eligible for price reductions and affordable
new products. Equitable and affordable access to
medicines and other health technologies, which were
key in many of the biggest breakthroughs against
the AIDS pandemic, is still highly needed so that
all developing countries can provide innovative and
effective diagnostics, prevention and treatment to our
populations and reach everyone, everywhere.
The engagement of civil society in planning,
implementing, monitoring and reviewing has been
instrumental in guaranteeing the inclusiveness and
effectiveness of Brazilian public policies in this
area. With community support, Brazil has also built
a legal framework to protect the rights of people
living with HIV and AIDS and to counter stigma and
discrimination. Any discrimination against people
living with HIV and AIDS is a crime in our country.
A federal law guarantees confidentiality about the
condition of the person living with HIV in several
situations, such as schools and workplaces. Enhanced
global partnerships and solidarity are key. Brazil has
donated, upon request, medicines and tests to several
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. Brazil
is proud to be a founding member of the Global Council
on Inequality, AIDS and Pandemics, with a view to
proposing equity-based approaches to strengthen the
response to AIDS and other pandemics.
Mr. Rai (Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
We highlight with appreciation the key role the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS has
been playing in this initiative, as well as in closely
assisting Member States in their responses, including
our own. The international community has made
remarkable gains. Brazil reaffirms its commitment
to keep contributing to those efforts, with a view to
ending AIDS by 2030.
Mr. Aref (Islamic Republic of Iran): Before I
commence my statement, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the attention
accorded in his report (A/77/877) to the importance
of adequate, sustainable and equitable funding and
promoting equitable access to medicines and other
health technologies for developing countries.
10/24

12/06/2023

An effective response to AIDS and HIV requires
rigorous global solidarity and shared responsibility,
with a focus on development assistance to support health
systems and enhance access to diagnosis, treatment,
medication and other specialized needs for those living
with HIV. As highlighted in the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on
Track to End AIDS by 2030, there are still many gaps
in financing for AIDS and HIV at the international
level, which hinder the efforts of developing countries
in particular to accelerate effective responses to AIDS
and HIV. To overcome that pressing challenge and
thereby step up the effective AIDS and HIV responses,
reinvigorating international cooperation for technology
transfer, unhindered access to medicines for developing
countries, supporting capacity-building and research,
as well as development assistance and scientific
cooperation remain vital and should be addressed
through genuine collaboration at the international level.
Along the same lines, the latest medicine and healthcare technology, testing and treatment, including a
future HIV vaccine, should rapidly be made available
and affordable to countries to tackle AIDS and HIV.
Significant progress has been made in the Islamic
Republic of Iran in the area of promoting the health and
well-being of people at risk of or living with HIV, as
well as in eliminating the transmission of the disease
from mother to child, minimizing harm and reducing
the transmission of AIDS among drug users. The
Islamic Republic of Iran is continuing its efforts in
that regard and is strengthening its responses to AIDS
and HIV. Nevertheless, unilateral coercive measures
continue to impede our efforts to enhance our health
systems and effective responses to, inter alia, diseases
and syndromes, including AIDS and HIV. Those
internationally wrongful acts impede access to medicine,
medical equipment, vaccines, treatment products,
diagnostic medicine commodities and pharmaceutical
products. They also hinder international cooperation in
the area of health and undermine the capacity of States
in responding to and addressing health challenges.
Such unlawful measures, which are flagrant violations
of the fundamental principles of international law and
the principles set forth within the Charter of the United
Nations seriously violate the human rights of millions
of people, including those living with HIV and AIDS,
particularly the right to life and the right to health.
As such, we strongly condemn unilateral coercive
measures and highlight that those illegal measures
23-16534

12/06/2023

must be terminated. States must desist and refrain from
promulgating and applying such unlawful measures.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
sovereign rights and prerogatives of Member States in
adopting and implementing policies and programmes
related to health, including in responses to HIV and
AIDS, in accordance with domestic laws and national
priorities, including their development priorities,
as well as the religious, ethical, cultural and social
specificities of their people.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua welcomes this important meeting
to review achievements and challenges in follow up
to and implementation of the commitments made in
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030, which ensures the restitution of the fundamental
rights of the people affected by the disease.
In strengthening multilateralism and global
solidarity, joint efforts to improve public health systems
will be intensified, thereby guaranteeing access to
treatment for the disease throughout the world. It is
a State policy of our Government of Reconciliation
and National Unity to provide quality comprehensive
and universal care via the delivery of free treatment
and the complementary tests necessary for all actors.
Our Ministry of Health and the Nicaraguan AIDS
Commission hold special meetings at the national level
where each month different institutions and responders
present and analyse the progress of and challenges to
the local and national response. National institutions
prioritize the implementation of policy frameworks
targeted at groups of young people and adolescents in
order to reduce infection rates, raise awareness and
promote responsible sexual health among our youth
and population. Similarly, Nicaragua, as part of its deep
commitment to the Political Declaration and of efforts
to strengthen the national legal framework, adopted
in 2012 Act No. 820 on the promotion, protection and
defence of human rights in the face of HIV and AIDS,
as well as the National Strategic Plan for Response
to Sexually Transmitted Diseases 2020–2024, the
implementation of which includes a training process
for various bodies.
In the context of our achievements, we note that
in 2006, under the previous neoliberal Government,
Nicaragua had seven clinics for comprehensive care. As
of May 2023, there are now 117 such clinics throughout

A/77/PV.78

the country, staffed by multidisciplinary teams of
doctors, nurses and support staff, guaranteeing access
to comprehensive, dignified and free medical care
for the approximately 6,800 individuals who receive
antiretroviral treatment. At the national level, there are
an estimated 9,000 people living with HIV.
To address our population’s mental health, the
Ministry of Health implements programmes whose
work is centred on emotional health in psychosocial care
centres, with a view to providing adequate psychological
support, especially for those newly diagnosed with HIV/
AIDS. Similarly, through the National Commission for
a Harmonious Life, our Government has developed a
new strategy, the Living with HIV campaign, which
is aimed at encouraging shared responsibility on the
part of the family and the community, promoting
fundamental values for good living, and inviting the
population to gather important information to be with
people living with HIV in solidarity and with dignity
and respect.
To achieve the goal of ending inequalities and to
be in a position to put an end to HIV/AIDS by 2030,
it is urgent today more than ever to put an end to the
illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed on more
than one-third of the global population, measures
that hinder the access of countries to means that are
essential for them to continue to make progress in the
restitution of the rights of our populations, especially
the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that it is time
that we have an HIV/AIDS vaccine. We must learn
lessons from the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
we therefore believe that it is time to have that vaccine.
Nicaragua will continue to strengthen its national
policies, restoring the right to health of all Nicaraguans,
including of course people living with HIV/AIDS, so that
they live with dignity, well-being and, always, peace.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Somalia on behalf of the Group of African States.
We note with concern that HIV/AIDS claimed a
life every minute in 2021 and that it remains the fourth
leading cause of death in Africa, with sub-Saharan
Africa carrying the highest burden. We also express
deep concern that, according to the World Health
Organization Global Tuberculosis Report 2022, people
living with HIV are 14 to 18 times more likely to fall ill
from tuberculosis compared to people without HIV and

23-1653411/24

A/77/PV.78

that tuberculosis remains the leading cause of severe
illness and death among people living with HIV.
South Africa has made notable progress with respect
to the HIV prevention and treatment programme, with
over 5.7 million people currently in treatment. On
the 95-95-95 targets, South Africa scores 94-77-92 at
this moment. New infections have been declining and
continue to do so. Successes have also been recorded
in the prevention of mother-to-child transmission.
That demonstrates that a lot can be achieved through
strong political will and commitment and working in
partnerships with other stakeholders.
We have learned with despair of the reversal of
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) target of ending AIDS as a public health threat by
2030, as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. In our country, it led to the worst economic
downturn, which severely constrained the public health
budget as resources had to be diverted to respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic. That, in our view, should be a
wake-up call to develop a strong binding mechanism for
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response while
also ensuring universal health coverage, with the aim
of addressing inequalities and fostering international
cooperation and solidarity.
When we talk about our priorities for HIV
prevention and treatment, we also think about young
women and adolescent girls. Hence, we believe that
policies should integrate sexual and reproductive
health and rights and HIV interventions that focus
on adolescent girls and young women. A key priority
is ensuring that all vulnerable groups, particularly
young people, have choices for a prevention method
that works for them. Education is one of the best HIV
prevention tools and comprehensive sexual education is
integrated into the South African curriculum to create
an awareness of hygiene and health-related information
and to reduce the risk of HIV infection, child marriage
and teenage pregnancies.
In June 2022, South Africa launched a three-year
National Youth HIV Prevention Campaign 2022–
2025. This year, in March, we also launched the
fifth-generation National Strategic Plan for HIV,
Tuberculosis and Sexually Transmitted Infections for
the period 2023–2028.
In conclusion, the South African Government is
committed to providing domestic funding, based on the
country’s investment needs, and to providing funding to
12/24

12/06/2023

support financing transitions of pilots and evaluations
of biomedical interventions, such as pre-exposure
prophylaxis interventions. The Government is also
committed to engaging in sensitization of healthcare workers and implementers to provide services
for key populations, among others. We are very
pleased to reaffirm our commitment to continuing
our partnership with the United States President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the Global Fund to
fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and all our other
development partners.
Mr. Mao (Cambodia): My delegation would
like to commend the remarkable progress made in
implementing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/
AIDS, as contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/77/877). We also express our gratitude for
the 2021 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track To End AIDS by
2030, which has set a clear vision and direction for us
to end AIDS and all inequalities faced by communities
and people affected by HIV.
Since finding its first AIDS case in 1993, Cambodia
has made substantial progress towards ending the
AIDS epidemic. The National AIDS Authority of
Cambodia, which is responsible for coordinating
the HIV/AIDS response, has been advocating for the
inclusion of HIV/AIDS awareness in the community
by engaging community members, key populations,
and local and community-based organizations in HIV/
AIDS response planning, management, monitoring and
service delivery.
Although the coronavirus disease pandemic has
hindered our response to HIV and other epidemics,
Cambodia has made significant progress compared
to pre-pandemic baselines and remains committed
to improving equitable and sustainable access to
quality health care and universal health coverage by
promoting integrated, people-centred service delivery,
particularly at the primary health care level. Moreover,
Cambodia is firmly committed to a multisectoral
response to HIV/AIDS, including decentralizing the
response to sub-national levels to ensure ownership at
the province, district and commune levels so that those
community-led organizations can better deliver within
national programmes.
Meanwhile, Cambodia has also increased fiscal
space and social protection to support the framework
23-16534

12/06/2023

for reducing stigma and discrimination, particularly for
young adolescents, women and girls disproportionately
affected. Eliminating stigma and discrimination in
all aspects of society will substantially reduce the
vulnerability of people living with HIV and key affected
populations that are currently deterred from accessing
services and employment opportunities or are harassed
into excluding themselves.
Despite those achievements, Cambodia urges the
international community to allocate more resources to
fill financial gaps for HIV/AIDS, including technology
transfer, improving access to medicines in developing
countries, scaling up capacity-building, research and
development, and local production of pharmaceutical
products. As a member of the Programme Coordinating
Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS for the Asia-Pacific region, Cambodia will do
more to demonstrate its successful management of
the HIV/AIDS epidemic and make its contribution
to the United Nations and the collective effort for a
better world.
In conclusion, Cambodia strongly reaffirms its
commitment to the implementation of HIV/AIDSrelated programmes and declarations, as well as
its determination to promote cooperation with all
stakeholders in order to eliminate all forms of stigma
and discrimination against vulnerable people living
with HIV/AIDS and to achieve its ultimate goal of
ending AIDS by 2030.
Mr. Chala (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this important meeting. My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Somalia on behalf of the Group of
African States.
The world has come far in reducing the number of
HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths. In 2021, it
was observed that the estimated number of new HIV
infections arising globally was smaller than at any point
since the late 1980s. An estimated 16.5 million AIDSrelated deaths were averted in the past two decades,
while almost 120 million HIV infections were averted
since 1990 through the increased use of condoms.
As the report of the Secretary-General (A/77/877)
notes, the world is getting closer to ending AIDS as a
public health threat and to achieving the target under
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 3.

A/77/PV.78

Strong progress has been noted in regions with
the highest HIV burden, including sub-Saharan
Africa, where a 44 per cent decline in annual new
HIV infections since 2010 has been recorded, the
steepest reduction in the world. Similarly, Ethiopia has
made remarkable progress over the past two decades,
reducing the HIV prevalence rate from 3.3 per cent
in 2000 to 0.9 per cent in 2017. AIDS-related deaths
declined from 83,000 to 50,000 during the same period.
This is an indication that Ethiopia is on the right track
to deliver on its commitments.
It should, however, be noted that the gains achieved
to date are being challenged by an emerging trend of
complacency regarding primary HIV prevention. That
increasing complacence is observed particularly in
young people. That is particularly concerning, as over
30 million of Ethiopia’s population is below the age of
25. It is for this reason that the Government of Ethiopia
is exerting various efforts to build on the results gained
so far. Building on the political commitment and the
national ownership of the HIV programme, which has
led to remarkable results, Ethiopia has developed a
comprehensive policy framework. It includes a series
of strategic plans, national policies and technical
guidelines and implementation plans aimed at
strengthening the overall national response.
Ethiopia is one of the 25 countries that were
selected for the Global HIV Prevention Coalition.
While Ethiopia has adopted the global goal to attain
the 90-90-90 targets, we still have work ahead to meet
the targets. Challenges such as lack of skill, focus and
the quality of prevention programmes persist. A lack
of an evidence-based interventions package and the
limited interventions to address structural barriers
are also impeding progress. It is therefore critical to
continue to build on the protocol commitment and the
political frameworks to scale up comprehensive HIV
prevention responses. Enhancing national capacity for
the promotion of strategic information and resources
mobilization is also essential.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the importance
of building partnerships among key stakeholders, in
line with SDG 17. As we get closer to achieving the
SDG targets in HIV and AIDS prevention, it will be
vital to continue to build on the current momentum.
Ms. Poenateetai (Thailand): Thailand wishes
to thank the President of the General Assembly for

23-1653413/24

A/77/PV.78

convening this meeting and thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/77/877).
As the report recognizes, the progress of the global
AIDS response has been remarkable. Data shows that
new HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths have
continued to decrease, bringing us closer to achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target 3.3. But
despite such gains, the AIDS epidemic is not yet over.
To put countries back on track to end AIDS by 2030,
we must work harder and faster towards achieving the
targets set out in the 2021 Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track To
End AIDS by 2030. In that regard, Thailand wishes to
highlight key actions that we believe can help accelerate
that shared endeavour.
First, the full range of HIV-related services,
from prevention to treatment, that are accessible and
affordable must be integrated into the universal health
coverage system. Thailand is also looking to include
tools such as self-testing kits in our universal health
coverage scheme so that people can more easily access
testing and enable earlier detection.
Secondly, we strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s
recommendation
on
community-led
responses, because in our experience, communityled and key population-led efforts, supported by the
Government, can best reach those in need by filling
in the services gaps while addressing HIV-related
stigma and discrimination, which are often felt when in
traditional health facilities. The Government plays a key
role in building the capacities of those organizations to
meet quality standards, most recently having rolled out
a national community health worker certification on
HIV/AIDS care for and by people living with HIV. That
includes training on overcoming stigma, including selfstigma, and promoting their understanding of U=U, or
“undetectable equals untransmissible”.
Thirdly, Thailand recognizes the potential of
leveraging digital technology to address discrimination.
With partners, we have developed “Hello, POKPONG”,
an online crisis response system for filing complaints
on rights violations related to HIV/AIDS, such as
employment discrimination, which will then be
investigated, addressed and used as a basis for reviewing
relevant policies and laws.
Lastly, Thailand agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s call to harness synergies between the AIDS
response and broader health issues, as well as the SDGs,
14/24

12/06/2023

particularly as we will have the key opportunity this
September with the SDG Summit and the high-level
meetings on universal health coverage, tuberculosis,
and pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
taking place, all of which are strongly linked to the
HIV/AIDS challenge.
Thailand reiterates its commitment to working
with all Member States and stakeholders to get back
on track to end AIDS by 2030. As the world is now
moving on from the response to the recovery phase of
the coronavirus disease, we need the same political will
and sense of urgency to end AIDS.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation for and to highlight the report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/877), entitled “Ensuring an
equitable response to end the AIDS pandemic and
accelerate progress for global health and the Sustainable
Development Goals”.
Argentina reiterates its commitment to the 2021
Political Declarations on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track To End AIDS by
2030, and will continue to support the adoption of
strategies to combat HIV, implementing approaches
that are based on human rights and gender equality and
guaranteeing respect for the dignity of persons living
with HIV.
This year’s review of the implementation of the
Political Declaration gives us an opportunity to reflect
on how we can make the most of the synergies among the
three health summits, slated for September, concerning
tuberculosis, universal health coverage and pandemic
preparedness, as well as on combating HIV, with a view
to moving forward in a comprehensive way to address
those health-related issues, all of which fall within the
objective of achieving Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 3.
We note with satisfaction indications in the report
of the Secretary-General regarding the global response
to AIDS that significant progress has been made
towards achieving SDG target 3.3 on bringing an end to
AIDS as a public health threat by 2030, and that deaths
linked to the disease have decreased by 68 per cent
since reaching their highest level in 2004, while new
infections have fallen by over 50 per cent since 1996.
We do note, however, given the disproportionate impact
on women, children and people in certain regions,
that the achievements are not reaching everyone
23-16534

12/06/2023

everywhere. Therefore, we agree that urgent action is
needed to eliminate such barriers so as to achieve the
HIV goals established in the 2021 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS.
We wish to underscore that in July 2022, the new Law
27.675 was enacted in Argentina on a comprehensive
response to HIV, viral hepatitis, tuberculosis and
sexually transmitted infections. The law was developed
collectively by stakeholders and promoted by civil
society organizations. The new law changes the focus
and the approach to HIV; it is now more focused on
gender and human rights. Law 27.675 requires the end
of stigmatization and discrimination against those
living with HIV or sexually transmitted infections and
seeks to guarantee comprehensive care, free of charge.
It also prohibits the conduct of diagnostic tests for HIV,
hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections without
the consent of the person in question. That applies to
examinations pre-employment, to retain employment
or to enter educational establishments, among others.
My delegation believes that in order to bring an
end to the HIV pandemic by 2030, we must centre
people and communities, duly mobilize resources
and promote gender equality and the right to bodily
autonomy, guaranteeing sexual and reproductive rights
and empowering women and girls in all their diversity.
We also believe that it is critical to work to reduce the
stigma and discrimination that are often suffered by
those living with HIV, and even more so for those in
situations of vulnerability and who lack access and
face multiple intersectional forms of discrimination,
stigmatization, violence and exclusion, which often
go hand in hand with their sexual orientation and
gender identity.
Finally, Argentina renews its efforts to move
forward with the provisions of the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS, as well as the aim of achieving SDG
target 3.3, with a view to eradicating the epidemic of
HIV by 2030.
Ms. Hinton (Canada) (spoke in French): As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/77/877),
significant progress has been made towards
strengthening HIV prevention, testing and treatment
over the past decades. But progress remains uneven, both
among countries and within them. People in the most
vulnerable situations continue to be left behind. That is
especially true for adolescent girls and young women,

A/77/PV.78

and for the 60 per cent of children aged 5 to 14 who are
HIV positive and not on life-saving antiretrovirals.
Today the world is home to the largest-ever
generation of young people — 1.8 billion people are
younger than 25. Those young people make up 16 per
cent of the world’s population but account for 27 per
cent of new HIV infections. Globally, AIDS-related
illnesses remain the leading cause of death among
women of reproductive age. How is that possible when
young people have more access to health services than
ever before? How is it that millions of young women
have access to contraceptive products and services
and yet are still infected with HIV? As a result of
stigma and lack of resources, HIV services are often
narrowly focused and not integrated within essential
health services and wider sexual and reproductive
health services, including family planning. Thus,
young women who can access contraception may
not be receiving information on sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV. Those young women are
making tremendous efforts and taking steps to pull
themselves out of poverty by avoiding unwanted
pregnancies, but find themselves back where they
started when they become HIV positive. That failure
to collaborate and integrate services is a failure for all
of us.
(spoke in English)
Robust evidence shows that integrated sexual
and reproductive health services improve HIV testing
outcomes, increase consistent condom use and
provide a base from which to roll out new prevention
technologies for girls and women. Adolescent sexual
and reproductive health and rights features prominently
within Canada’s Feminist International Assistance
Policy and our 10-year commitment to global health and
rights because it is key to achieving gender equality.
But there is more to do, especially so that we can reach
those who experience intersecting inequalities.
Ninety per cent of the 1.8 billion young people
in the world live in developing countries, where they
often make up a large proportion of the population. For
example, the median age in the Niger and Uganda is 15
years old. That demonstrates the necessity for youthcentred and integrated programming to be central
to every single health intervention. That includes
comprehensive sexuality education. According to
UNESCO data outlined in the report, 85 per cent of
the 155 reporting countries have policies or laws about

23-1653415/24

A/77/PV.78

the provision of comprehensive sexuality education in
schools. And yet, survey data from sub-Saharan Africa
for the period 2015–2020 show that only 38 per cent
of youth had comprehensive knowledge about HIV.
Adolescents must have access to biological information
about their bodies, but also about the right to have
control over and decide freely and responsibly on
matters related to their sexuality. That includes how to
protect themselves from unwanted pregnancy, sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV, and sexual and
gender-based violence. That information saves lives.
Canada continues to advocate for comprehensive
sexuality education for young people in all their
diversity. We are committed to being an ally and advocate
in support of adolescent sexual and reproductive
health services, but we cannot do it alone. It will take
concerted efforts from Governments, international
institutions, civil society organizations and the private
sector to create the space for young people, especially
girls, in all their diversity, to be leaders in all our global
health responses. Canada urges every Member State to
make brave political decisions that prioritize the lives
of the most vulnerable when designing local, national
and international health interventions. We further urge
the inclusive design of such policies and interventions
in a way that empowers the most affected communities
to meaningfully contribute to decisions that affect their
lives. We need political decisions based on science
and evidence because evidence shows that eliminating
stigma and discrimination and empowering young
people with knowledge does save lives and does create
a brighter future for every nation.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Twenty-two years since the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS, inequalities persist in access to health,
and in particular with regard to that serious disease.
Only international solidarity and joint action among
our countries and Governments can ensure success in
tackling that and many other diseases. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has had a clear impact on our health
systems and on the economy of all countries; however,
that should not translate into the neglect of efforts to
combat HIV/AIDS. It is crucial to move forward in the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/AIDS
adopted by the General Assembly.
We reaffirm Cuba’s commitment to United Nations
efforts to combat the disease under the leadership of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
16/24

12/06/2023

(UNAIDS). We will continue to guarantee that our
people can enjoy the right to health and to contribute
to the global and regional responses to bring an end
to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Our country has taken a
primary health care-focused and person-centred publichealth approach to the HIV response that relies on the
participation of key populations, meeting the specific
needs of each group. We have made progress in very
relevant areas to combat HIV/AIDS by eliminating
discriminatory stigma around the disease, combating
gender stereotypes and sexist patterns of behaviour, and
providing better protection for sexual diversity. We will
always be proud of the fact that in 2015, our country
was the first to eliminate mother-to-child transmission
of HIV and syphilis, which was recognized by the
World Health Organization and reconfirmed in 2017
and 2019. Our programme of prevention, diagnosis
and treatment for antiretroviral therapy contributed to
that success. AIDS-related deaths have been gradually
decreasing and the incidence of the disease is tending
towards stabilization. We have also achieved high levels
of coverage for treatment and efforts are being made
to decrease viral load and to increase the therapeutic
levels to reach the 90-90-90 targets.
Those results have not been easy to achieve.
To accomplish them, Cuba has had to overcome its
condition as a small island developing State, as well
as the negative impact of the criminal economic, trade
and financial blockade imposed by the United States
for over six decades and that was intensified in an
opportunistic and inhumane way during the pandemic.
Between August 2021 and February 2022, the blockade
caused losses to Cuba of approximately $3.8065 billion.
Estimates suggest that Cuba’s gross domestic product
could have grown by 4.5 per cent over that period if the
blockade had not existed. The health sector, which was
one of the most severely affected sectors, saw losses in
the aforementioned period of more than $113 million.
How much more could we have done in the area of
health, and in particular in the fight against HIV/AIDS,
if we had not suffered such losses? The blockade not only
hinders our efforts; it also impedes those of UNAIDS
and hampers the projects financed by the Global Fund
for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, which is managed
by the United Nations Development Programme and
which provide medicines, diagnostics and laboratory
equipment that benefit people of all ages who are living
with HIV/AIDS. Despite all of this, nothing will hold us
back in building a society that is increasingly just and
23-16534

12/06/2023

inclusive, including for people living with HIV/AIDS.
We will continue to make every effort to guarantee a
better quality of life to those people and to gradually
decrease new infections. The real solution to HIV/AIDS
and to many other diseases will depend on shared joint
action. international cooperation and solidarity. Cuba
will continue to defend multilateralism as the only path
to resolve the great challenges that we are facing as an
international community, including HIV/AIDS.
Ms. Eyrich (United States of America): We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/77/877), for
the sobering news it holds and for the path forward
it proposes. The report confirms that persistent
inequities threaten progress for children, young
women and girls, and other at-risk populations, such
as the LGBTQI+ persons, people who use drugs and
sex workers. Too many countries still have fragile
and insufficiently resourced public health systems,
making it difficult to offer services beyond HIV/AIDS
treatments and undercutting our capacity to respond to
emerging threats.
The United States remains committed to ending
the HIV epidemic at home and around the world and
we rededicate ourselves to fighting the discrimination
that too often keeps people with HIV from getting the
services they need and living the full lives they deserve.

A/77/PV.78

AIDS pandemic, but the last mile of the response is the
greatest challenge.
UNAIDS and its United Nations agency sponsors
are called upon to support countries to address
inequalities, remove barriers to HIV services and
advocate for the removal of harmful policies and
discriminatory legislation that marginalize individuals
and threaten human rights. Those are not easy areas
to address. United Nations agency sponsors are called
upon to develop technical guidance and provide
support for implementation across a range of service
delivery areas. If the global response is to succeed in its
mandate, it must have adequate resources.
Ms. Anderson (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/77/877) on the
progress made towards our shared commitments in
the global fight against HIV. While there has been
remarkable progress in recent years, that progress has
stalled, and we are off track for achieving 2025 targets.
Every minute, a person dies as a consequence of the
disease — one which is preventable and treatable.

We know that success is possible. We will be able
to overcome this public health threat when we ensure
that 95 per cent of people living with HIV know their
status, 95 per cent of them are on treatment, and
95 per cent of those on treatment have achieved viral
suppression. Even as we celebrate the successes of the
United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief (PEPFAR), our bilateral programme and the
global HIV response, we cannot and must not lose sight
of the very serious work still required to end the global
HIV health epidemic by 2030.

The United Kingdom remains committed to ending
AIDS as a public health threat by 2030 and we remain
a dedicated supporter of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in its critical
role to convene and coordinate the entire international
system, generate authoritative data and evidence on the
epidemic and support community-based organizations
and interventions, all of which are crucial to form
an effective global HIV response. We remain strong
supporters of our key partners in the HIV response. That
includes the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria, Unitaid and UNAIDS. Our £1 billion
pledge to the Global Fund will help to save over
1 million lives over the next three years, and on HIV
it will help to provide life-saving antiretroviral therapy
for 1.8 million people and HIV prevention programmes
for 3 million members of key populations.

At the December Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Programme Coordinating
Board, generously hosted by the Government of
Thailand, we spoke of our concern that the growing
complexity of the work of UNAIDS has been matched
by a contradictory shrinking budgetary support.
PEPFAR is a partnership within our own country and
with global partners, including UNAIDS and the Global
Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Partnerships
have brought considerable progress to ending the HIV/

We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations supporting an HIV response that is
community-led, integrated into primary health-care
approaches and broader health systems and fully-funded,
with greater investments in prevention. But I would like
to draw attention to the very first recommendation and
the utmost importance of addressing the social, structural
and systemic factors driving HIV-related inequalities.
Our shared declarations, the Global AIDS Strategy
2021–2026, and the scientific evidence are clear — if we

23-1653417/24

A/77/PV.78

are to truly end the AIDS epidemic, we have to tackle
the inequalities that underpin it. To do that, we must
support rights-based models that are inclusive of key
populations, especially LGBTQ+ people.
Increasing barriers to HIV services through stigma,
discrimination and criminalization discourage people
from seeking vital health services for fear of attack or
punishment. That puts the HIV response in jeopardy for
all communities, and we simply cannot afford to lose
our hard-won gains from the past four decades. The
United Kingdom is a firm champion of human rights
and dignity of all people, and we urge all countries to
ensure that key populations can access the care they
need without stigma, discrimination or criminalization.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the convening of this meeting on the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/AIDS.
We also welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/877), which makes it clear that we need to give
highest priority to the fulfilment of commitments by
all parties, in all sectors and at all levels, in order to
avoid inequalities and the disproportionate impact
on women, girls, adolescents and youth, and in highburden regions. In that vein, Mexico is of the view
that it is essential to consider six priority areas in the
fulfilment of our commitments, not only on the issue of
HIV/AIDS, but also on the entire health agenda. That
involves taking on the responsibility of guaranteeing
the right to health and a healthy and full life to all
people, without distinction.
The first priority area is care through a
coordinated, cohesive strategy and primary health care.
Our response to the HIV epidemic must demonstrate
that we have learned from the fight against other
pandemics, as well as from the coordination of peopleand community-centred objectives. It is clear that care
must take into account social determinants, such as
stigma, discrimination and barriers to access to health
care, prioritizing those who are being left behind. A
cross-cutting strategy will make it possible to optimize
material and human resources for a more effective
response in the fight against HIV.
Secondly, we need people-centred records.
Cohesive information is essential for taking action.
Promoting information that measures health outcomes
and takes the different characteristics or conditions of
18/24

12/06/2023

people into account will make it possible to optimize
strategies at the local, district, State and national levels.
Thirdly, specific risk communication strategies and
the empowerment of communities and key populations
are necessary. Both in the fight against HIV and in
the response to tuberculosis, we need the recognition
of those key populations, among which it is important
to consider indigenous peoples, people experiencing
homelessness and others.
Fourthly, it is essential to develop programmes
within a framework of resilient systems capable of
responding to multiple threats. The fight cannot be
interrupted by human-caused disasters, natural risks or
other health emergencies, among other events. It must
include the professionalization of supply chains that
prevent shortages and allow for a response to all global
public health challenges.
Fifthly, the training and optimization of health
workers are also essential. We must take up the lessons
learned from the coronavirus disease pandemic on the
use of information technology and tele-mentoring, which
are accessible and culturally appropriate. Training and
verification at all levels of care in infection prevention
and control policies, including the proper use of
personal protective equipment is extremely important.
The establishment of diagnostic capacities and
the provision of feedback to health personnel must
be ensured within the framework of mechanisms and
the global response to the fight against antimicrobial
resistance, with special emphasis on communication
to the population and primary health care. In Mexico,
several specific actions have been taken to address the
issue of HIV/AIDS hand in hand with other challenges
on the global health agenda. The coordination of
the national and international health systems is
highly relevant, particularly in the context of the
negotiations taking place at Headquarters on the three
health processes.
I would like to highlight that Mexico is working
hand in hand with different international organizations
and the United Nations system for the implementation
of various programmes, such as the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). In collaboration
with UNFPA, we have carried out mobile sexual
and reproductive health projects for people in transit
along the migration routes of the Mexico-Guatemala
border. Mexico is committed to the fight against HIV/
23-16534

12/06/2023

AIDS, as well as to guaranteeing a healthy and stigmafree physical and mental life for all people, with full
enjoyment of their human rights. For that reason, we
will continue to work hand in hand with various actors
to achieve our common goal in this fight.
Mr. Aristov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting is devoted to one of the
most important foci of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in the sphere of health care: combating
HIV/AIDS. The Russian Federations pays unflagging
attention to this issue at the national and international
levels and has always supported a global dialogue on the
elimination of that serious threat to public health. HIV/
AIDS morbidity in our country is steadily dropping.
Prevention and treatment measures are helping to
extend the life expectancy of those living with HIV and
to reduce the risk of infection. As we are ahead of the
targets set in the State strategy for combating the spread
of HIV up to the year 2030, coverage by antiretroviral
therapies is also expanding.
The Russian Federation has one of the highest
coverages of testing for HIV infection, which allows
us to obtain the most objective data to identify those
with HIV at the early stages of disease and to begin
treatment in a timely manner. Nevertheless, despite
the clear successes of Russian medicine, we are
increasingly seeing attempts to misrepresent the
statistics concerning HIV in our country. In November
2022, the media covered alleged data from the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
which included the Russian Federation among a group
of five countries in the world in terms of the spread
of HIV infection. That does not reflect reality and is
an inaccurate propaganda provocation targeted against
us. The Russian Federation has its own programme to
combat HIV infection and finances it independently
from the federal budget, unlike many other countries
that, as a rule, use grants provided by international
organizations such as UNAIDS.
As regards the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/877), we support achievement of the 95-9595 targets on testing, treatment and suppression of
viral load, the combat against resistant forms of HIV,
vaccine development, prevention and the development
of epidemiological monitoring and promotion of a
healthy way of life. It is important to ensure equality
for absolutely everybody when it comes to access to
testing, treatment and health care in general.

A/77/PV.78

We are forced once again to note that instead
of internationally agreed approaches, the report
continues to impose many contentious concepts, in
particular comprehensive sexuality education, which
risks undermining the preservation of public health,
the protection of childhood and the family and the
struggle against narcotics use. It is important to take a
comprehensive approach that would ensure respect for
national priorities, development strategies and cultures.
We regret that the authors of the report have once again
chosen to turn a blind eye to that real problem, to
the detriment of global solidarity in the fight against
the infection.
Mr. Schlaepfer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Secretary-General for his
progress report (A/77/877) on the implementation of
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track To End AIDS by 2030.
We are pleased to see the progress achieved.
However, those gains are not universal. The inequities
that fuel the HIV/AIDS pandemic, particularly those
affecting women, especially adolescent girls and
young women in high-burden regions, and the stigma,
discrimination and violence associated with HIV, are
deeply concerning. Those shortcomings are a stark
reminder of the significant barriers that still need to
be overcome. Switzerland therefore calls for an urgent
collective response.
Turning first to the focus on prevention and policies
based on conclusive and factual evidence, we wish to
underscore the critical role of prevention in tackling the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, including through comprehensive
sexual education, the promotion of the use of protection
and the provision of harm-reduction services to drug
users. We support the exploration of new treatments
and prevention strategies and their implementation
when they are proven to be effective.
Secondly, we should promote human rights and
health equality. There is an urgent need to eliminate
all forms of discrimination against people living
with HIV/AIDS, and we would like to highlight the
importance of protecting their rights. That includes the
right to privacy, non-discrimination and access to care.
Switzerland also advocates for affordable, accessible
and quality treatment for all people living with HIV/
AIDS, irrespective of their geographic location, income
or social status.

23-1653419/24

A/77/PV.78

Thirdly, we should take a multilateral and
multisectoral approach. We underline the importance
of enhancing global cooperation and partnerships.
Strengthened partnerships can promote information
sharing, joint research initiatives and combined funding
efforts in the fight against HIV/AIDS. We also highlight
the importance of involving civil society, communitybased organizations, and private sector entities in
the fight against HIV/AIDS. Switzerland also adopts
a multisectoral approach in addressing HIV/AIDS.
That means integrating efforts to combat HIV/AIDS
into broader health and development programmes
and strengthening engagement with different partners
such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria.
Finally, turning to the promotion of sustainable
financing,
Switzerland
encourages
sustainable
financing solutions for HIV/AIDS initiatives. It
recommends innovative financing mechanisms to
ensure equal access to treatment and encourage
countries to increase their domestic funding for HIV/
AIDS programmes, notably through the mobilization
of national resources. Switzerland is also proud to
participate in and to financially support the new Global
Council on Inequality, AIDS and Pandemics, which
brings together global experts from various fields to
propose evidence-based solutions to the inequalities
that drive pandemics.
Mrs. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Government of China has always put the safety of
people’s lives and physical health first, attached great
importance to prevention and treatment and actively
fulfilled its commitments related to Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 3. Over the years, China
has focused on key areas, key populations and key
steps and has improved across the board the relevance
of its publicity and education, the effectiveness of
its comprehensive interventions, the accessibility
of testing and counselling and the synthetization
of follow-up services, and has implemented in full
nucleic acid testing, the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission, treatment and assistance policies and
measures to nurture and guide social organizations. We
have made progress in prevention and treatment, and
the HIV prevalence rate among the entire population
has remained low.
We are pleased to see that significant progress has
been made in the global AIDS response. The number
of HIV infections and deaths has continued to decline
20/24

12/06/2023

in recent years. The number of new cases worldwide in
2021 was the lowest since 1980. At the same time, it is
important to note that the response to AIDS still faces
a series of significant and serious scientific, social,
economic and political challenges, requiring greater
efforts from the international community.
With respect to the implementation of the Healthy
China 2030 strategy and the SDGs, China will focus
on key and difficult issues and further improve the
national HIV/AIDS response strategy, detection,
treatment and care of infected people. China will focus
on the protection of people’s health in all aspects and
stages. We will also continue to actively participate
in and support the global AIDS response and support
the United Nations, especially the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and the World Health
Organization, in the important role of promoting and
strengthening international cooperation and sharing
technologies and experiences, and will make relentless
efforts to achieve the vision of ending the global
AIDS epidemic.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Espiritu (Sovereign Order of Malta): The
Sovereign Order of Malta expresses its appreciation
for the accomplishments of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, partner
Governments and civil society, as underscored in the
report of the Secretary-General (A/77/877) regarding
the implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations on HIV
and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track
To End AIDS by 2030.
To effectively bring an end to the HIV/AIDS
pandemic, it is imperative for all stakeholders to sustain
their momentum and intensify their efforts. This
remains a global pandemic, although unfortunately
eclipsed by the coronavirus disease, that has inflected
unimaginable suffering upon individuals, families and
communities. Since its emergence, HIV has claimed
the lives of millions. Moreover, it has exacerbated
social and economic disparities, further marginalizing
the most vulnerable segments of society. In the words
of Pope Saint John Paul II encyclical Sollicitudo Rei
Socialis, we must
“face squarely the reality of an innumerable
multitude of people — children, adults and the
23-16534

12/06/2023

elderly — [...] real and unique human persons, who
are suffering under [an] intolerable burden”.
Recognizing that reaching the target of eliminating
HIV/AIDS by 2030 cannot be accomplished without
addressing the inequalities that perpetuate the
pandemic, the Order of Malta continues to commit
itself to aggressively reaching out to the poorest, most
isolated and most marginalized, who are at the highest
risk and suffer most from the virus.
On five continents, the Order of Malta has
continued to combat the HIV pandemic with treatment,
prevention and education programmes. We are also
mindful of meeting the psychosocial needs of those
living with HIV and their families through integrative
and holistic approaches. For example, in the iLembe
district of South Africa, our Blessed Gérard’s Care
Centre, in addition to providing free testing and
counselling services, provides life-changing antiviral
drugs for people living with HIV in the district. The
centre ensures that patients living alone in poverty and
isolation regularly take medicines via its mobile clinic
to ensure adherence and prevent treatment failure.
Again in South Africa, mindful that HIV does not just
affect those who have been infected, the Order of Malta
runs a home in Mandeni for children who have been
made orphans by the spread of HIV and AIDS.
In Kenya, the work of our relief agency, Malteser
International, has since 2001 focused efforts on the
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of tuberculosis
and HIV/AIDS among the disadvantaged living in the
slums of Nairobi and among various tribal groups. In
Mexico City, where the percentage of HIV+ mothers
over the age of 15 has increased, the Order continues
to run transmission prevention programmes, managing
courses for mothers and fathers, providing psychosocial
counselling and distributing food supplements, enriched
milk and hygiene kits for mothers and babies.
In conclusion, we eagerly anticipate fruitful
discussions and constructive outcomes as we
collectively strive towards a more inclusive and
accessible world for all. We express our gratitude for
members’ valuable time and look forward to the active
participation, engagement of all stakeholders in this
process as we work together towards eliminating HIV
and AIDS by 2030.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.

A/77/PV.78

Mr. Thomas (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): Let me start today by
reiterating what we have heard — the AIDS pandemic
is not over. While the interventions are improving and
we have seen huge progress, that varies within and
between countries. Millions around the world still
lack access to essential services at the basis of that
inequality. Poverty, conflict, disasters, displacement
and discrimination create formidable challenges,
leaving vulnerable communities marginalized and at
risk. New infection rates are three times the targeted
rate. We cannot deliver on the shared commitment
to ending AIDS as a public health threat by 2030 or
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
without ensuring that everyone everywhere can access
HIV prevention, treatment and care.
The International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and our 191 national
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies are committed
to supporting people living with or affected by HIV,
including key populations, communities in the last
mile and people on the move. And in partnership with
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), via our memorandum of understanding, we
are working to scale up access to testing and treatment
for tens of millions of people living with HIV.
Reflecting on the decades of experience of national
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies supporting
people living with or affected by HIV, allow me to
share a few recommendations.
First and foremost, we have a generational
opportunity ahead of us. We must commit to
achieving universal health coverage. The core
concepts of universal health coverage — universality,
non-discrimination, quality, access and protection from
financial hardships — are the exact same and are key to
unlocking access to HIV services, which will reach the
targets we aspire to achieve. It is no coincidence that the
report of the Secretary-General (A/77/877) identifies
those commitments as the driver of accomplishments
to date against AIDS.
Secondly, we must end inequalities to end AIDS.
Every individual, regardless of their background or
circumstances, must have access to HIV prevention
and treatment. Programmes to support people living
with or affected by HIV, including in humanitarian and
fragile contexts, need to target the most vulnerable.

23-1653421/24

A/77/PV.78

12/06/2023

That includes migrants, refugees and crisis-affected
populations. As the Secretary-General’s report says,

achieving the Sustainable Development Goal of ending
AIDS as a public health threat by 2030.

“HIV-related
stigma,
discrimination
and
violence remain alarmingly common. Many
underperforming HIV programmes [...] are in
places where HIV/AIDS is concentrated among key
populations” (A/77/877, p.2).

However, as the report shows, there is still much to
be done. AIDS claimed a life every minute in 2021, and
it remains the fourth leading cause of death in Africa.
Some earlier gains have stalled, and the overall pace of
progress against the AIDS pandemic is slowing. In our
neighbourhood, Asia and the Pacific, last year alone there
were 6 million people living with HIV, with infection
rates rising for the first time in decades. So, more
must be done if we are to end AIDS by 2030. Multiple
factors — including stigma and discrimination, and
social, economic and gender inequalities — continue
to put key populations everywhere, and women and
adolescent girls especially, at heightened risk of
HIV infection.

That is a matter of fact.
Thirdly, we have to put people living with HIV
at the centre of the HIV/AIDS response — that is,
via community leadership. Community leadership is
critical for making HIV prevention, care and treatment a
priority, but we also see how it delivers improved public
communication, drives evidence-based interventions
and makes global investments in HIV/AIDS more
effective. Local organizations, including those driven
by people living with or affected by HIV/AIDS, are
best equipped to identify and respond to the specific
challenges and opportunities of their own communities.
Such organizations reach the last mile where, as things
have stalled, we need to unlock progress.
Lastly, we must commit to driving innovation
in HIV prevention, treatment and care, backed by
sustainable investment. That is crucial and includes
the health-related political declarations currently being
negotiated. We have a vehicle to make those kinds of
commitments. Innovation represents a transformative
tool to eliminate HIV transmission, as we have seen.
We can expand the availability of a wide range of
prevention options and broaden access to high-quality
treatment and care through innovation.
The IFRC and our national Societies extend to
some of the hardest to reach communities. We are here
to support Member States to deliver the 2021 Political
Declarations on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track To End AIDS by 2030. Again, the
AIDS pandemic is not over — but it can be.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia sincerely
welcomes the encouraging gains in the fight against
HIV and AIDS that are highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/877). AIDS-related deaths
have declined by 68 per cent since they peaked in 2004
and new infections by more than 50 per cent since
1996. The global roll-out of HIV treatment averted an
estimated 16.5 million AIDS-related deaths between
2001 and 2020. That brings the response closer to
22/24

Australia has a long history of good support and
action on HIV and is proud to have played a key role
in reinvigorating the global AIDS response. With
Namibia, Australia co-facilitated the 2021 Political
Declarations on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track To End AIDS by 2030, with its
ambitious targets to guide the response. On a personal
note, if I may, that is one of the most important ventures
I have been involved with in my time here in New York.
Domestically, we have taken a cooperative and
collaborative approach to reducing the transmission
of HIV, delivering effective treatment of HIV and
AIDS and minimizing social and personal impacts.
Supporting human rights, involving key populations
and addressing stigma and discrimination are key
elements of Australia’s response. That approach has
worked well. AIDS is considered virtually eliminated
in Australia, and the transmission rate of HIV is
among the lowest in the world. HIV has been virtually
eliminated among people who inject drugs and sex
workers and in transmission from mother to child, and
community-driven interventions and publicly funded
health care have significantly contributed to achieving
those results.
Australia is committed to working with global
partners to eliminate AIDS, as well as to fighting the
inequality faced by those living with HIV. In 2022, we
renewed our multi-year partnership with the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and committed
$266 million over three years to the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. I acknowledge
the tremendous work that UNAIDS does. I should also
23-16534

12/06/2023

mention that we provide direct support to Pacific and
South-East Asian countries for communicable disease
prevention, treatment and control. In March, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs Penny Wong, announced
Australia’s first dedicated fund to support LGBTI civil
society organizations and human rights defenders in
addressing social stigma and legal discrimination. That
is the first step towards a dedicated LGBTI human
rights engagement strategy, including bilateral and
multilateral diplomacy, development and humanitarian
assistance. And, next month, Australia will also host
the International AIDS Society Conference.
We are alarmed that it is becoming more difficult to
reach consensus on the issues of sexual and reproductive
health and rights and ending stigma and discrimination
of key populations, as those issues are at the very
heart of an effective HIV response. We simply cannot
meet the targets without compassion, understanding,
respect and partnership with key populations, not just
because it is the decent thing to do, but because it is
proven to be the most effective approach. We have
the tools to address this epidemic and we know what
works: partnerships among Governments, affected
communities, researchers and clinicians, together with
evidence-based programmes targeting key populations.
We must galvanize all our efforts — Governments,
international organizations, civil society and affected
communities — so that together we can end AIDS
by 2030.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 10?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/77/L.71)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.71.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
am pleased to introduce the draft resolution entitled
“International Day of the Arabian Leopard” (A/77/L.71)
on behalf of the core group, namely, the Kingdom

A/77/PV.78

of Bahrain, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the
Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar, the State of
Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Morocco, the Republic of Yemen and my country, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Nearly 30 countries, representing different
continents, have sponsored the draft resolution. In that
regard, I would like to express our appreciation to all
Member States for supporting the draft resolution,
which highlights one of the most endangered
leopard species living on the Arabian peninsula. The
Arabian leopard represents beauty, serenity, physical
strength, courage and freedom. It has occupied a very
special status in the region for thousands of years as
part of ancient engravings, stories and even daily
idiomatic expressions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has paid considerable
attention to conserving biodiversity and to protecting
and saving Arabian leopards. We seek to rescue them
from extinction and to secure their place in the wild so
that they can return to their natural habitat. We work to
secure the future of the Arabian leopard against threats.
Countries where Arabian leopards are found have made
efforts to preserve them by providing natural reserves
with a view to saving them from extinction.
The proclamation of 10 February as the International
Day of the Arabian Leopard would highlight the threats
facing Arabian leopards with a view to rehabilitating
ecosystems and spreading awareness on conservation.
It would also increase knowledge about the Arabian
leopard and promote long-term plans to rescue that
species of endangered leopards.
In closing, I would like to express our gratitude
and appreciation to all countries that have sponsored
the draft resolution. We look forward to celebrating
10 February 2024 as the International Day of the
Arabian Leopard at United Nations Headquarters.
The Acting President: We will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.71.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Perera (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.71, the following countries have become
co-sponsors: Belgium, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,

23-1653423/24

A/77/PV.78

Colombia, Egypt, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, Slovenia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Uzbekistan
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.71 entitled
“International Day of the Arabian Leopard”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft resolution A/77/L.71?
Draft resolution A/77/L.71 was adopted
(resolution 77/294).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to delegations in explanation of position, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I make this statement on behalf of Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Paraguay, Peru
and Mexico.
We commend the delegations that sponsored the
resolution (resolution 77/294) entitled “International Day
of the Arabian Leopard” on their efforts to prevent the
extinction of this endangered species, while promoting
the conservation and restoration of ecosystems and
strengthening national and international efforts to
stop the illegal trade in wildlife. As range countries
for the jaguar, which has become the symbolic feline
of the Americas, we acknowledge the importance of
regional cooperation to prevent and reverse the loss of
species and their habitats and underscore their myriad
cultural and ecological benefits, while at the same time
addressing community and national development needs.
To that end, we would like to share the example
of the successful implementation of the Jaguar

24/24

12/06/2023

2030 Conservation Roadmap for the Americas,
presented at the fourteenth Conference of the Parties
to the Convention on Biological Diversity, which
established a coordinating committee made up of
the relevant ministries and experts from various
conservation organizations that meets periodically
to maintain momentum, raise awareness concerning
jaguars and maintain conservation efforts on the
ground. We appreciate the initiative before us within
the complementary context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Kunming-Montreal
Global Biodiversity Framework and other multilateral
environmental agreements, which demonstrates that
protecting endangered species can also benefit range
countries in delivering tangible results for biodiversity
conservation, climate action, health and human
well-being, especially for indigenous peoples and
local communities.
In that regard, efforts aimed at big cat conservation
have shown their potential for promoting ecosystem
restoration, developing local resilience and increasing
the connectivity of core protected landscapes. However,
sustaining and swiftly reaching that goal requires a
holistic approach and joint efforts between Governments
and partners at all levels in order to promote research,
raise awareness and scale up successful integrated
conservation initiatives. We therefore welcome this
regional initiative and are confident that the adoption
of this resolution will contribute to the conservation of
a critically endangered species.
In conclusion, we call for addressing the
unprecedented decline in biological diversity worldwide
in harmony with nature by stepping up international
commitment and efforts.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

23-16534
