S/PRST/2001/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4382nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 September 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
of 19 September 2001 (S/2001/886) submitted in accordance with the
statement of its President on 17 July 2001 (S/PRST/2001/18), particularly his
recommendations on how the United Nations might further contribute to the
recovery of the Central African Republic.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation of the continuing work
of the Secretary-General’s representative, General Lamine Cissé, and of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA).
“The Security Council expresses its continued deep concern at the
precarious situation in the Central African Republic. It reiterates its call on all
parties for political dialogue, national reconciliation and respect for human
rights in the spirit of the 1998 National Reconciliation Pact. In this respect it
has taken note of the appeals for national unity made by the Central African
authorities.
“The Security Council calls on the Central African authorities to follow
the internationally accepted standards for due process in the course of
investigations and court trials of individuals involved in the coup attempt in
May 2001. These procedures should be transparent and should not be allowed
to aggravate the inter-ethnic relations in the Central African Republic. The
refugees who left the country after the failed coup should be able to return in
safety without fear of persecution on ethnic basis.
“The Security Council encourages the international community to make a
substantial and urgent contribution to the recovery of the Central African
Republic and emphasizes that the efficiency of such a contribution will greatly
depend on the efforts the Government of the Central African Republic itself
makes to this end. The Council emphasizes that the crucial issues of external
debt and payment of arrears of salary for civil servants need to be urgently
addressed.

01-55207 (E) 260901

*0155207*

S/PRST/2001/25

“The Security Council encourages the United Nations Development
Programme and the international financial institutions, particularly the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank, to
consider, in consultation with the Government of the Central African Republic
and the Secretary-General’s Representative, ways of strengthening the
capacities of the Government of the Central African Republic in the
management of its economic and financial affairs, including through
secondment of high-level experts. The Council invites the Secretary-General to
keep it informed of actions taken in this regard when he presents his next
report on the Central African Republic. In addition, the Council urges the
Bretton Woods institutions to show exceptional solicitude towards the Central
African Republic.
“The Security Council takes note with interest of the intention of the
Secretary-General, in coordination with the Government of the Central African
Republic, to extend the mandate of BONUCA and to strengthen it in
accordance with paragraph 29 of his report of 19 September 2001
(S/2001/886).
“The Security Council underlines the need to continue the restructuring
of the Central African armed forces to enable them to fulfil their role
effectively, loyally and impartially, in the service of the Central African
people. It also recalls the importance of implementing an effective armscollection programme. In this regard, it supports the recommendations in
paragraphs 17 and 18 of the report of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
it regularly informed of the activities of BONUCA and the situation in the
Central African Republic, particularly in the areas of political dialogue,
national reconciliation and respect for human rights.”

2
