D

l)

The General Assembly
Authorizes the Secretary-General
1. To reimburse staff members for national
income taxes paid by staff members in respect of
payments received from the United Nations
during 1949;

L 'Assemblee generate
Autorise le Secretaire general :
1. A rembourser aux membres du personnel
le montant de l'impM national sur le revcnu
verse par eux sur les sommes per-,ues de !'Organisation des Nations llnies pendant l'annee
19ft9:
2. A prelever a cette fin des sommes sur le
Fonds de roulrment s'il v a lieu d'pffertner ms
remhoursements en 19!i9.
Cent-cinquante-neun·erne seance pleniere.
le 18 novembre 1948.

2. To withdraw funds from the Working Capital Fund for this purpose if such reimbursements
are necessary in 194 9.
Hundred and fifty-ninth plenary meeting,
18 November 19 48.

240 (Ill). United Nations
munications system

telecom•

240 (III). Reseau de telecommunica•
tions de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies

The General Assembly
Approves in principle the establishment of a
United Nations telecommunications system;
Reaffirms the United Nations position as an
operating agency in the field of international telecommunications, and calls upon all Member
Governments to support at all international
telecommunications conferences the requirements
of the United Nations for frequencies and services
envisaged in the report of the Advisory Committee on United Nations Telecommunications
(A/335);

Authorizes the Secretary-General to present to
the General Assembly, at its regular session of
19 50, such recommendations as he deems necessary to establifh a United Nations telecommunications system.
Hundred and fifty-ninth plenary meeting,
18 November 1948.

L 'AssembMe generale
Approuve en principe la creation d'un reseau
de telecommunications de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies;
Ajfirme a nouveau la position d'agent tl'exploitation occupee par !'Organisation des Nations
Unies clans le domaine des telecommunications
internationales, et invite les Gouvernements des
Etats Membres a soutenir, clans toutes les conferences sur les telecommunications internationales,
Jes demandes presentees par !'Organisation en
vue de l' obtention des frequences et des services
envisages dans le rapport du Comite consultatif
en matiere de telecommunications de l'Organirntion des Nations Unies (A/335);
Autorise le Secretaire general a presenter a
l'Assemblee generale, a sa session ordinaire de
19 50, les recommandations qu'il jugera indispensables a la creation d'un reseau de telecommunications de l'OrgaHisation des Nations Unies.
Cent-cinquante-neuvieme seance pMni"ere,
le 18 novembre 19 48.

a !'Organisation
des Nations Unies du reliquat des
avoirs et des activites de l'UNRRA
(United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)

241 (III). Transfer

241 (III). Transfert

The General Assembly
Approves the agreement between the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of UNRRA,
relating to the transfer to the United Nations of
the residual assets and activities of UNRRA,
entered into on 27 September 1948 and contained in document A/665, which is annexed to
the present resolution.

L' AssembMe generale
Approuve l'accord intervenu entre le Secretaire
general et le Directeur general de l'UNRRA
a la date du 27 septembre 1948, contenu dans
le document A/665 et concernant It: transfert
a !'Organisation des Nations Unies du rPliquat
des avoirs et des activites de l'UNRRA,
lequel est public en annexe i1 la prPsente
resolution.

to the United
Nations of the residual assets and
activities 9f UNRRA (United Nationb Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration)

Hundred and fifty-ninth plenary meeting,
18 November 19 48.

Cent-cinquante-neuvieme sean,ce pMniere,
le 18 novembre 191,R
1011
