A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/187
21 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 99 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/51/607)]
51/187.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United Nations
University1 and the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
University,2
Expressing its deep appreciation for the voluntary contributions made to
date by Governments and other public and private entities in support of the
University,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by the Rector of the United
Nations University in intensifying his interaction with the United Nations
Secretariat in the context of preparing for the third medium-term perspective,
Noting also with appreciation the efforts made by the Rector in
initiating a new series of research programmes,
1.
Welcomes the completion of the second medium-term perspective,
1990-1995, of the United Nations University and the ongoing work of
formulating the third medium-term perspective for the period 1996-2001, being
considered by the Council of the University;

1

A/51/31; see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first
Session, Supplement No. 31.
2

A/51/324.

97-76855

/...

A/RES/51/187
Page 2

2.
Takes note with appreciation of the steps taken by the Council and
the Rector of the United Nations University to promote the work and the
visibility of the University, particularly among Member States, the United
Nations and its agencies, through such measures as organizing a series of
public forums for the purpose of disseminating the results of its research,
and requests them to further intensify such efforts;
3.
Requests the Council and the Rector to continue intensifying their
efforts to improve the University's interaction and communication with other
bodies of the United Nations system, and to continue their efforts to avoid
the duplication of work within the system;
4.
Also requests the Council and the Rector to enhance further
coordination and complementarity between the University's programmes and its
research and training centres;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General, in this connection, to continue
his consideration of innovative measures to improve the interaction and
communication between the University and other bodies of the United Nations
system and to ensure the integration of the work of the University into all
relevant activities of the system, taking into account General Assembly
resolution 49/124 of 19 December 1994, so that the United Nations system may
draw more extensively upon the work of the University, and to submit a report
thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-third session;
6.
Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to allow for the
greater participation of the University in the work of the United Nations, and
invites him to continue to encourage the participation, as appropriate, of the
University in the activities of the Administrative Committee on Coordination
and its subsidiary machinery, as well as through other existing structures and
modalities for communication, interaction and integration;
7.
Requests the Council and the Rector, taking into account
resolution 49/124, to continue to make further efforts to ensure the
efficiency and economy of the activities of the University, as well as its
financial transparency and accountability, and to intensify efforts to augment
its Endowment Fund and to find innovative ways to mobilize operating
contributions and other programme and project support;
8.
Invites the international community to make voluntary
contributions to the University.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1996
