UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/20
29 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4019th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 June 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Timor" the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question of East Timor of 22 June 1999 (S/1999/705).
"The Security Council notes with understanding the Secretary-General’s
decision to postpone for three weeks his determination, which he will base
on the main elements identified in his report of 5 May 1999 (S/1999/513),
of whether the necessary security situation exists for the start of the
operational phase of the consultation process in accordance with the
Agreement between the United Nations and the Governments of Indonesia and
Portugal (S/1999/513, annex III). The Council also endorses his intention
that the operational phases of the popular consultation not begin until the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) is fully deployed, and his
decision to postpone the ballot date for two weeks.
"The Security Council emphasizes that a popular consultation of the
East Timorese people through a direct, secret and universal ballot
represents an historic opportunity to resolve the question of East Timor
peacefully. It concurs with the Secretary-General’s assessment that this
process must be transparent and that all parties must have the opportunity
to express themselves freely.
"In this regard the Security Council expresses serious concern that
the Secretary-General, in his assessment, concludes that the necessary
conditions do not yet exist to begin the operational phases of the
consultation process, given the security situation throughout much of East
Timor and the absence of a ‘level playing field’. It is especially
concerned that the militias and other armed groups have carried out acts of
violence against the local population and exercise an intimidating
influence over them, and that these activities continue to constrict
political freedom in East Timor, thus jeopardizing the necessary openness
of the consultation process. The Council notes the Secretary-General’s
assessment that while the security situation has severely limited the
99-19144 (E)

290699

/...

S/PRST/1999/20
English
Page 2

opportunity for public expression by pro-independence activists,
pro-autonomy campaigning has been actively pursued.
"The Security Council stresses the need for all sides to put an end to
all kinds of violence and for utmost restraint before, during and after the
consultation. It calls on UNAMET to follow up reports of violent activity
by both the pro-integration militias and Falintil. In this regard, it
expresses grave concern at the attack on the UNAMET office in Maliana, East
Timor, on 29 June 1999. The Council demands that the incident be
thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators be brought to justice. The
Council also demands that all parties respect the safety and security of
UNAMET personnel. The Security Council supports the statement of the
spokesman for the Secretary-General of 29 June 1999 and requests the
Secretary-General to report further.
"The Security Council welcomes the positive developments identified by
the Secretary-General. The Council warmly welcomes the excellent channels
of communication between UNAMET and the Indonesian authorities which have
been facilitated by the establishment of a high-level Indonesian task force
in Dili. The Council warmly welcomes the opening of the DARE II talks in
Jakarta with representatives of all sides in East Timor, and the progress
towards making the Commission on Peace and Stability operative.
"The Security Council stresses once again the responsibility of the
Government of Indonesia to maintain peace and security in East Timor. The
Council emphasizes that all local officials in East Timor must abide by the
provisions of the Tripartite Agreements (S/1999/513, annexes I-III), in
particular as regards the designated campaign period, the use of public
funds for campaign purposes and the need to campaign only in their private
capacity, without recourse to the pressure of office.
"The Security Council is particularly concerned at the situation of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in East Timor and the implications
which this may have for the universality of the consultation. It calls on
all concerned to grant full access and freedom of movement to humanitarian
organizations for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, to cease
immediately activities which may cause further displacement and to allow
all IDPs who wish to do so to return home.
"The Security Council notes that full deployment of UNAMET will not be
possible before 10 July 1999. It urges the Secretary-General to take all
necessary steps to ensure full deployment by that time, and urges all
parties to cooperate fully with UNAMET. It stresses the importance of
allowing complete freedom of movement for UNAMET within East Timor in order
to carry out its tasks.
"The Security Council urges the Indonesian Government and the
pro-integration and pro-independence groups to continue to enhance
cooperation with UNAMET, to allow the popular consultation to go ahead in a
timely manner.
"The Security Council will remained seized of the matter."
-----
