United Nations

A/52/PV.89

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

89th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 7 July 1998, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Young (Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

Agenda item 120 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/52/785/Add.8)

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Angola and members of the
United Nations Observer mission in Angola
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now pay tribute to the memory of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola, Maître
Alioune Beye, and to the memory of the members of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola, who perished
in the aircraft accident of 26 June. On behalf of the General
Assembly, I should like to convey our heartfelt condolences
to the bereaved families.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to their memory.

The Acting President: In a letter contained in
document A/52/785/Add.8, the Secretary-General informs
the President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communications contained in documents
A/52/785 and addenda 1 to 7, Honduras has made the
necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 36 (continued)
Question of Palestine

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.

Draft resolution (A/52/L.53/Rev.2)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 36, the General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution, issued as document A/52/L.53/Rev. 2, entitled
“Participation of Palestine in the work of the United
Nations”.

98-85564 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
I should like to inform members of a correction to
paragraph 7 of the annex to the draft resolution. The
comma appearing in the paragraph should be replaced by a
semicolon.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/52/L.53/Rev.2.
I shall first call on those representatives who wish to
make statements in explanation of vote before the voting.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
General Assembly meets today to debate once more a
Palestinian proposal to enhance the status of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) Observer Mission in the
General Assembly. We will be casting our votes nearly
seven months to the day after the General Assembly first
considered this issue. At that time, the Assembly wisely
deferred the issue on a procedural vote. That was the right
thing to do then, and it is the right thing to do now. This is
the wrong draft resolution at the wrong time.
We have no doubt that most members of this
Assembly are sincere supporters of the peace process in the
Middle East. They want to see that process moving forward
again and are frustrated by the fact that there has been a
prolonged impasse. So are we. They want to encourage the
parties to make rapid progress on the basis of agreements
already achieved. They want to see these negotiations
result, at long last, in an agreement that would lead to
accelerated negotiations on permanent status. The United
States strongly endorses this aim as well. No one has been
more energetic in the pursuit of an agreement than we. The
fact remains, however, that by taking this action the
General Assembly will have made it more difficult to
accomplish this objective. Focusing on symbols likely to
divide, rather than on steps to promote cooperation, will
lead us nowhere. Supporting unilateral gestures which will
raise suspicion and mistrust between negotiating partners
will not take us closer to our goal.
If this draft resolution is adopted, it will undermine
our efforts to get the peace process back on track and will
hurt everyone’s interests, including those it is most intended
to help. Exchanging momentum towards real progress on
the ground for symbolic progress in this Hall does not
strike us as a good bargain.

2

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
Moreover, if this draft resolution is adopted, it could
also set a precedent. By overturning decades of practice
and precedent in the General Assembly governing the
participation of non-members and observers, others who
do not enjoy full member status in the United Nations
may well press their own claims for enhanced status. This
would have serious repercussions for political relations
among Member States and would have a deleterious
effect on the orderly conduct of United Nations business.
The Arab-Israeli peace process has come a long way
since the Oslo accords were signed in 1993. Given the
current stalemate, it may not seem so. But the historic
gains of the past several years cannot be ignored. We in
this Assembly should look for ways to consolidate those
gains and help create the conditions in which the parties
will find it easier to move forward. That means, at a
minimum, that we should take no steps that could
undermine the fragile climate of trust and confidence so
necessary for the peace process to succeed. A vote in
favour of this draft resolution will not contribute to this
result and, in truth, may seriously undermine it. That is
why we ask our fellow Members to join us in voting “no”
on this flawed proposal.
Mr. Gold (Israel): Israel opposes the draft resolution
on participation of the Palestinian Observer Mission in the
work of the United Nations because of both the
preambular language, which serves as the basis of the
draft resolution, and the operative elements proposed. The
preambular part seriously misrepresents previous United
Nations resolutions. For example, this draft resolution,
which is sponsored by 13 Arab States, makes reference to
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947. It is ironic that at that time, 51 years ago, every
single Arab State, as well as the Palestinian leadership,
rejected resolution 181 (II).
In a statement in the Trusteeship Council on 20
February 1950, Israel’s Permanent Representative to the
United Nations, Abba Eban, underlined the fact that this
was not just
“the exercise of a legitimate right of noncompliance”
with a non-binding resolution, but rather
“the use of armed force to overthrow the
recommendation of the General Assembly”.
[T/PV.230, p. 8]

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
To come now as a group, insisting on an improvement
in Palestinian participation in the United Nations on the
basis of a United Nations resolution that they strongly
resisted, simply misrepresents the experience of the United
Nations in this matter.
Further misrepresentation in the preambular part is
evident in references to General Assembly resolution
43/177 of 15 December 1988. While this resolution
changed the designation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), it clearly stipulated, in paragraph 3,
that this change would take effect
“without prejudice to the observer status and functions
of the Palestine Liberation Organization within the
United Nations system”.
Today’s draft resolution conveniently overlooks this
qualification.
Finally, it must be added that reference to the
establishment of the Palestinian Authority in parts of the
West Bank and Gaza represents a transparent effort to
create a political link between this draft resolution and the
status of the disputed territories. The clear purpose of this
effort is to affect the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations over this territory by abusing the United
Nations system.
Notwithstanding Israel’s reservations about the
intentions behind this draft resolution, it must be
emphasized that both the preambular and operative parts
make clear one central fact: there is no effective change of
the status of the PLO in the United Nations. The PLO
remains an observer organization in the United Nations
system. Still, the attempt to achieve additional rights and
privileges with the intention of obtaining a symbolic shift
in status should be opposed, for it contradicts the bilateral
basis of the Arab-Israeli peace process begun in Madrid,
and it violates the principles of the Oslo agreements.
Israel has been prepared, since the signing of the
Hebron Protocol on 15 January 1997, to resume the
permanent status negotiations. Israel again undertook this
commitment in the Note for the Record, signed by the
United States. The PLO has refused to resume these talks,
in violation of the Note for the Record. Instead, it seeks to
obtain symbolic elements of changed political status by
means of United Nations resolutions. The international
community should deplore these efforts and encourage the
parties to resolve their differences bilaterally, at the
negotiating table, and not in the General Assembly.

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
In this context it is important to recall the
commitment given in writing by PLO Chairman Yasser
Arafat to our late Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, on 9
September 1993:
“The PLO commits itself to the Middle East
peace process and to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict between the two sides, and declares that all
outstanding issues related to permanent status will be
resolved through negotiations.”
The United Nations has a choice of reinforcing this
commitment, or undermining its content and weakening
the Arab-Israeli peace process. I call upon Member States
to oppose this initiative and thereby strengthen the ArabIsraeli peace process.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): My delegation finds itself
in a very painful situation. Not so long ago in this very
Hall, a draft resolution similar to the one we are debating
this morning was withdrawn with a view to holding
effective consultations. Our question as a delegation is,
what is at stake? The answer is: lasting peace and a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
What is the role of the United Nations in this
context? To ensure that peace prevails in the Middle East.
Suppose this draft resolution is adopted today. What
would be the consequences? Will we have achieved
peace? Peace is an important commodity in the Middle
East, to which, in our view, both parties are entitled.
We have a duty as the United Nations not to
exercise a double standard but to tell the truth in order to
help the parties involved. My delegation realizes the
frustration that the Palestinian people are experiencing.
They have already been waiting too long. Realizing that
recent events and developments are not on their side, they
have made some human mistakes. When all the doors are
locked, you attempt to find a way through the roof or
through the windows. But the question is, what happens
when you throw yourself through the window? You break
your bones, you break your head, and that is the end of
you.
True enough, the doors to a lasting peace are heavily
locked at the moment. But we have a duty as the United
Nations to look for a way that will not kill the people we
should be saving — the people we should be supporting
in their quest to be a sovereign state.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The conferences relating to the Middle East question
were supported by us all because there was light at the end
of the tunnel — the possibility that peace would prevail.
My delegation has not given up yet. Like any other
delegation with a positive outlook, we still believe that
peace can be achieved without compromising the dignity of
the United Nations, clearly embodied and enshrined in our
Charter. The Charter, as the torch-bearer, guides us and
shows us how we should do things and how we should
counsel one another.
My delegation believes that we have not yet exhausted
all channels. We have not yet exhausted all efforts to
persuade the two parties to come to the conference table.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the spirit of the
Madrid Conference and the Oslo agreement is rekindled
and that the parties agree to and honour the provisions
enshrined in that agreement.
I have already said that it is true that there are reasons
for the other party to be frustrated. We have a duty,
therefore, to counsel whomsoever feels the light at the end
of the tunnel is too far away. Accordingly, my delegation
calls on both parties to make a serious commitment to
realize a lasting solution in the Middle East.
It is our policy as the Kingdom of Swaziland that
when parties are at war, it is best not to favour one over the
other but to stand in the middle and offer counsel, so that
all might enjoy the friendship that could then develop
between both of the parties.
The Palestinians are our friends — our brothers and
sisters. The Israelis are our friends — our brothers and
sisters. Our quest, therefore, is to call upon all of them to
make a commitment to find a lasting solution in the Middle
East.
Mr. Benítez Sáenz (Uruguay) (interpretation from
Spanish): Uruguay has from the outset followed closely the
entire process associated with the item now before us —
the question of Palestine — and we wish to make a brief
statement on this issue.
The draft resolution contained in document
A/52/L.53/Rev.2, dated 2 July 1998, highlights a very
technical legal problem concerning the extension of the
status of observer to the United Nations, a problem on
which we should first obtain an opinion from the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs. Only once we have an
independent legal opinion on the scope and regulatory

4

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
implications of this draft resolution will we be able to
take a decision on the substance of the matter.
In our view, adoption of this draft resolution would
result in changing the status of observer in one particular
case only, and not in a general way through a course
different from that provided for in existing regulations.
We would in practice be conferring upon an
observer certain attributes which by their nature are
proper to a Member State, in particular those set out in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of the annex to the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.2, as orally
corrected. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Paraguay, Poland,
Romania, Rwanda, Zambia
Draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.2, as orally corrected,
was adopted by 124 votes to 4, with 10 abstentions
(resolution 52/250).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola, Nigeria and
Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
Cameroon and Swaziland had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to the
first speaker in explanation of vote after the voting, I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, the Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated country Cyprus, as well as the European Free
Trade Association countries members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Norway, align themselves with
this statement.
The General Assembly has just decided to confer upon
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, additional rights and
privileges of participation in the work of the General
Assembly. By doing so, the Assembly has responded
positively to a concern of the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, who had repeatedly argued that he was
experiencing practical difficulties in his daily work at the
United Nations.
The European Union recognizes the potential for
practical difficulties resulting from the fact that neither the
Charter nor any text of a general nature codifies the rights
and privileges of observers at the United Nations. These
rights and privileges have indeed been granted over the
decades on a case-by-case basis. This resolution is therefore
not regarded by the European Union as creating a
precedent.

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
After the General Assembly suspended consideration
of this item last December, the European Union had the
opportunity to carefully study different modalities on how
best to facilitate the practical aspects of the work of the
Palestinian observer delegation. In this context, the
European Union’s aim was to ensure clear formulations
and to avoid any ambiguities.
Since the text as contained in document
A/52/L.53/Rev.2 met these requirements, the European
Union was in a position to cast a positive vote. The
European Union hopes that, through the implementation
of the practical measures as contained in the annex, the
future work of the Permanent Observer of Palestine will
be facilitated.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
the draft resolution entitled “Participation of Palestine in
the work of the United Nations”. As members know, this
item was the subject of lengthy and difficult consultations
among interested countries. This is understandable, as a
change in the status of any delegation to the United
Nations is no ordinary matter, and requires a carefully
considered decision that accords with existing rules,
traditions and practices relating to the work of the
Organization. Nor can we fail to be mindful of the fact
that in the present very difficult circumstances
surrounding the Middle East settlement, the effort of the
Palestinians to bring the status of their delegation into line
with the serious political changes that have taken place in
the Palestinian territories over recent years deserves
serious consideration.
We appreciate the fact that, during work on the draft
resolution, the sponsors showed flexibility and took into
account virtually all the comments, advice and
amendments that were offered by a number of a
delegations, including our own. The adoption of this
resolution conferring additional rights upon the Palestinian
delegation — first and foremost with respect to
Palestinian and Middle East issues — does not in fact
contradict that delegation’s observer status, and therefore
sets no undesirable precedent for other similar situations.
As we express our satisfaction at this constructive
outcome, we reaffirm our readiness to engage in further
cooperation with the delegation of Palestine in the United
Nations.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): Canada voted in favour of
resolution 52/250 because we believe that it will permit

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
the Palestinian delegation to better participate in the work
of the United Nations. It is Canada’s view that the
resolution adopted today states in precise terms the
modalities of granting additional rights and privileges for
Palestinian participation as an observer at the United
Nations. Negotiations removed some of the difficulties
which we had identified in earlier drafts of the text, such as
the suggestion that the Palestine Liberation Organization
was acquiring rights reserved only for Member States.
Canada’s policy regarding Palestinian statehood has
not changed, and our vote in favour of this resolution does
not alter that policy. Canada continues to strongly support
the Middle East peace process and the negotiations
currently under way, which seek the full implementation of
the Oslo accords.
Ms. Millar (Australia): Australia has voted in favour
of this resolution because we consider it a practical
procedural measure which will clarify and assist the
participation of the Palestinian observer delegation in the
United Nations.
The resolution enhances the Palestinian observer
delegation’s current rights as an observer without the right
to vote or to put forward candidates. The resolution has no
bearing on the issue of Palestinian statehood. The issue of
Palestinian statehood is one that remains to be determined
in final status negotiations between the parties involved in
the Middle East peace process.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): Japan shares the grave concern
expressed by an overwhelming number of the States
Members of the United Nations over the deadlock in the
Middle East peace process. We particularly regret the
announcement by the Government of Israel of its plan to
strengthen its control of Jerusalem by extending that city’s
boundaries. This unilateral action taken by the Government
of Israel may precipitate a crisis of confidence that would
destroy the very foundation on which the peace process
rests.

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
observer, with regard to its participation in the sessions
and work of the General Assembly than was provided by
draft resolution A/52/L.53, which was submitted to the
General Assembly in December 1997.
On this occasion, my delegation wishes to make two
comments. First, from a political perspective, the
Government of Japan has no doubt that the efforts most
critical to the Middle East peace process are those to be
made by the parties most directly involved. The adoption
of this resolution must not be permitted to adversely
affect those efforts.
Secondly, from a legal perspective, the General
Assembly has not discussed in the past the additional
rights and privileges that are given to observers, such as
those we see in the resolution before us. In this
connection, the delegation of Japan thinks it might be
appropriate for the General Assembly to review, as and
when necessary, the rights and privileges enumerated in
the annex of the resolution on the basis of the information
the Secretary-General will provide in accordance with
operative paragraph 2.
Mr. Paguaga Fernández (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): Nicaragua voted in favour of resolution
52/250, consistent with its position of supporting any
decision that promotes universal representation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. However, in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22
November 1974 and 43/177 of 15 December 1988, I now
call on the observer of Palestine to make a statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for presiding over today’s
meeting and for giving us the floor in order to speak for
the last time from this seat.
(spoke in English)

As a country that has been actively contributing to that
process and has continuously played a leading role in
providing economic assistance to the Palestinians, Japan
urges all parties involved to return to the negotiating table
and to act to restore the atmosphere of mutual trust that is
the sine qua non for progress in this area.
We supported the resolution before us, which provides
a more detailed description of the additional rights and
privileges conferred on Palestine, in its capacity as

6

Today is an important day for Palestine and the
United Nations, which has dealt with the question of
Palestine since its inception. Today, the General
Assembly decided to upgrade the Palestinian
representation through the adoption, by an overwhelming
majority, of the resolution entitled “Participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, in spite of
pressures, campaigns and even threats.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
I would like to begin by expressing gratitude to our
Arab family and to friendly States that have sponsored the
resolution since last December, as well as to friendly States
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the Non-Aligned Movement, which decided, at the
ministerial level, to support the Palestinian endeavour in
this regard. Without the support of these brothers, sisters
and friends, we would not have been able today to succeed
in our achievement.
I would also like to extend our thanks to the States
members of other groups, in particular members of the
European Union, with which we worked and exerted efforts
to reach an agreement on the text of the resolution, which
we believe has great political importance. The support of
each State Member of the United Nations that supported
this resolution today is something we highly appreciate and
we thank them on behalf of the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian leadership. The overwhelming majority that
voted in support of the resolution makes us feel proud,
strengthens our conviction of the justice of our cause, and
increases our confidence that right can still be achieved in
our contemporary world.
I do not wish to enter into a discussion of some of the
views raised today, which we obviously reject. However, I
would like to note that it is indeed astonishing when a

89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
party claims that a certain act constitutes a “unilateral
action” at a time when 124 States supported this act.
Unilateral actions are those illegal actions which violate
international law, United Nations resolutions and binding
existing agreements; they are not actions based on
international legalities, even if those parties disagree with
such actions.
I have said that I do not wish to enter into a
discussion of some views which we reject, because the
first and last answer to these — actually, the decisive
answer — is the overwhelming majority of Member
States which supported the resolution today.
A small victory was achieved for Palestine today and
we thank everyone for that. However, we do want to say
that it is our hope that our reliance on the resolution
adopted today will not last long, as we hope that the
United Nations will accept Palestine as a Member State
in the near future — maybe, God willing, during the fiftythird session of the General Assembly. That shall be the
big victory.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 36.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

7
