In a letter dated 7 July 1993,49 the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General as follows:

the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in this
regard, designed to facilitate the peace talks.

"The members of the Security Council have considered your
report of 1 July 1993 on options for the deployment of international
observers on the borders of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herz.egovina. 50 The continue to believe that, in order to facilitate the
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions, international
observers should be deployed on the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with priority being given to the border between the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

"The Council reaffrrms its resolutions 824 ( 1993) of 6 May 1993
and 836 (1993) of 4 June 1993, in the first of which it declared
Sarajevo a safe area that should be free from armed attacks and any
hostile acts, and from which Bosnian Serb military or para-military
units should be withdrawn to a distance wherefrom they cease to
constitute a menace to its security and that of its inhabitants. It
condemns the offensive by the Bosnian Serbs on Mount Igman
aimed at further isolating Sarajevo and escalating the recent unprecedented and unacceptable pressures on the Government and people
ofthe Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the forthcoming
talks in Geneva. It demands an immediate end to this offensive and
to all attacks on Sarajevo. It also demands an immediate end to all
violations of international humanitarian law. It demands an end to
the disruption of public utilities (including water, electricity, fuel and
communications) by the Bosnian Serb party and to the blocking of,
and interference with, the delivery of humanitarian relief by both the
Bosnian Serb and the Bosnian Croat parties.

"Bearing in mind the observations in your report, they invite you
to contact Member States in order to establish whether they are
ready, individually or through regional organizations or arrangements, to make qualified personnel available to act as observers
along the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to continue to
explore all possibilities for implementation of the border monitors
concept. They also invite you to pursue the question of implementation with a view to obtaining full cooperation from the authorities in
the neighbouring countries.

"The Council calls on the parties to meet in Geneva under the
auspices of the Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia. It calls on the parties to negotiate in earnest with
the aim of achieving a just and equitable settlement on the basis of
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the principles agreed at the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in London on 26
August 1992 and supported by the Council in its statement of 2
September 1992. 54 In particular it reaffirms the unacceptability of
ethnic cleansing, or the acquisition of territory by the use of force, or
any dissolution of the Republic ofBosnia and Herzegovina.

"The members of the Council look forward to receiving further
information on the contacts proposed in the previous paragraph, as
well as reports pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution 838 (1993) of
10 June 1993 concerning material derived from aerial surveillance."

At its 3257th meeting, on 22 July 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina: letter dated 19 July 1993 from
the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/26107)". 51

"The Council emphasizes that it will keep open all options, none
of which is prejudged or excluded from consideration."
At its 3269th meeting, on 24 August 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina".

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 52
"The Security Council has noted with grave concern the letter of
19 July 1993 from the President of the Presidency of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the President of the Security
Council 51 about the Bosnian Serb military offensive in the area of
Mount lgman, close to Sarajevo, a city which has stood for centuries
as an outstanding example of a. multicultural, multi-ethnic and
pluri-religious society, which needs to be protected and preserved.

Resolution 859 (1993)
of 24 Au11ust 1993

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the conflict in the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina,

"The Council renews its demand that all hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina cease and that the parties and others concerned refrain
from any hostile acts. It supports the call from the Co-Chairmen of

49

Reaffirming the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the responsibility of the
Security Council in this regard,

S/26049.

Reaffim1ing also that Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a State Member
of the United Nations, enjoys the rights provided for in the Charter of
the United Nations.

50

Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1993, document
S/26018.
51

Noting that Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to be subject to
armed hostilities in contravention of Security Council resolution 713
(1991) of25 September 1991 and other relevant Council resolutions
and that, despite all efforts by the United Nations as well as regional

See Official Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-eighth

Year, Supplement/or July, August and September 1993.
52

S/26134.

51

54
S/2451 O; see Official Records of the Security Council,
Forty-seventh Year, Resolutions and Decisions of the Security
C'ouncil, 1992, p. 26.

Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement/or July, August and September 1993 document

S/26107.

'

16

5. Takes notes with appreciation of the letter of the SecretaryGeneral dated 18 August 1993 55 stating that the United Nations has
now the initial operational capability for the use of air power in support
of the Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina;

organizations and arrangements, there is still no compliance with all
relevant Council resolutions, in particular by the Bosnian Serb party,
Condemning once again all war crimes and other violations of
international humanitarian law, by whomsoever committed, Bosnian
Serbs or other individuals,

6. Affirms that a solution to the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must be in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, and also affirms the continuing
relevance in this context of:

Deeply concemed at the deterioration of humanitarian conditions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in and around Mostar, and
determined to support in every possible way the efforts by the United
Nations Protection Force and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue providing humanitarian assistance to civilian
populations in need,

(a)
The sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(b)
The fact that neither a change in the name of the State nor
changes regarding the internal organization of the State such as those
contained in the constitutional agreement annexed to the
Co-Chairmen's report in document S/26337 would affect the continued
membership ofBosnia and Herzegovina in the United Nations;

Concemed about the continuing siege of Sarajevo, Mostar and other
threatened cities,
Strongly condemning the disruption of public utilities (including
water, electricity, fuel and communications), in particular by the
Bosnian Serb party, and calling upon all parties concerned to cooperate
in restoring them,

(c)
The principles adopted by the London International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, including the need for a cessation of
hostilities, the principle of a negotiated solution freely arrived at, the
unacceptability of the acquisition of territory by force or by "ethnic
cleansing" and the right of refugees and others who have suffered
losses to compensation in accordance with the statement on Bosnia
adopted by the London Conference;

Recalling the principles for a political solution adopted by the
London International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
Reaffirming once again the unacceptability of the acquisition of
territory through the use of force and the practice of "ethnic cleansing",

(d)
Recognition and respect for the right of all displaced persons
to return to their homes in safety and honour,

Stressing that an end to the hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
necessary to achieve meaningful progress in the peace process,

(e)
The maintenance of Sarajevo, capital of Bosnia and
Heu.egovina, as a united city and a multicultural, multi-ethnic and plurireligious centre;

Mindful of its primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security,

7. Recalls the principle of individual responsibility for the perpetration of war crimes and other violations of international humanitarian
law and its decision in resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993 to
establish an international tribunal;

Taking into accaunt the reports of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering

Committee of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
contained in documents S/26233, S/26260 and S/26337,
Determining that the grave situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be a threat to international peace and security,

8. Declares its readiness to consider taking the necessary measures
to assist the parties in the effective implementation of a fair and
equitable settlement once it has been freely agreed by the parties, which
would require a decision by the Council;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter,

1. Notes with appreciation the report by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on the latest developments at the Geneva
peace talks, and urges the parties, in cooperation with the
Co-Chairmen, to conclude as soon as possible a just and comprehensive
political settlement freely agreed by all of them;

9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3269th meeting.

2. Calls for an immediate cease-fire and cessation of hostilities
throughout the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina as essential for
achieving a just and equitable political solution to the conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina through peaceful negotiations;

Decisions

Atits3276th meeting, on 14 September 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina".

3. Demands that all concerned facilitate the unhindered flow of
humanitarian assistance, including the provision of food, water,
electricity, fuel and communications, in particular to the safe areas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina;

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 56

4. Demands also that the safety and operational effectiveness of
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force and of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Bosnia and
Herzegovina be fully respected by all parties at all times;,

53
Official Records of the Security Co1mci/, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1993, document
S/26335.

56

17

S/26437.
