United Nations

A/RES/58/204

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 91 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/481/Add.6)]

58/204. Commodities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/236 of 20 December 2002, and stressing the urgent
need to ensure its full implementation,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by heads of
State and Government on 8 September 2000, 1
Taking note of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2001-2010 2 and the Least Developed Countries Report, 2002, 3
Taking note also of the Ministerial Declaration of the Fourth Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization, held at Doha from 9 to 14 November
2001, 4
Taking note further of the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, 5
Taking note of the targets set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security and the Plan of Action of the World Food Summit 6 and the outcome
document of the World Food Summit: five years later, 7 which reaffirms the pledge
to end hunger,

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
See A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
3
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.D.13.
4
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
5
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit, 1317 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
7
Ibid., Report of the World Food Summit: five years later, 10-13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also
A/57/499, annex.
2

03 50682

A/RES/58/204

Taking note also of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 8
Taking note further of the report of the Trade and Development Board on its
fiftieth session 9 and the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on world commodity trends and prospects, 10
containing recommendations for specific actions relating to the particular needs and
problems of commodity-dependent developing countries,
Mindful of the opportunity that the eleventh session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, to be held in São Paulo, Brazil, from 13 to
18 June 2004, will offer for the further consideration of proposals to address
commodity issues within the framework of the links among trade, investment and
finance,
Mindful also that, in 2004, the International Monetary Fund will review its role
in assisting low-income countries over the medium term,
Taking note of the summary by the President of the General Assembly of the
open-ended panel of the Assembly on commodities, 11
1.
Takes note of the report of the Meeting of Eminent Persons on
Commodity Issues, held at Geneva on 22 and 23 September 2003, 12 and expresses
appreciation for the work of the eminent persons;
2.
Emphasizes the need for efforts by the developing countries that are
heavily dependent on primary commodities to continue to promote a domestic
policy and an institutional environment that encourage diversification and
liberalization of the trade and export sectors and enhance competitiveness;
Encourages donor Governments and organizations to increase their
3.
financial and technical support for activities aimed at addressing commodity issues,
in particular the needs and problems of commodity-dependent developing countries;
Stresses the importance of a speedy resumption and successful
4.
conclusion of the work programme adopted at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of
the World Trade Organization,4 taking into account the needs of the commoditydependent developing countries;
5.
Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
other relevant bodies and organs of the United Nations system to continue to
mainstream and accord high priority to programmes on commodity-related issues
within their respective mandates;
Welcomes regular consideration of commodity issues by the Trade and
6.
Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;

_______________
8

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
9
A/58/15 (Part V). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 15 .
10
A/57/381, annex.
11
A/58/615, annex.
12
A/58/401.

2

A/RES/58/204

7.
Invites non-governmental organizations, civil society and the private
sector to initiate programmes of assistance and other innovative initiatives in
support of commodity-dependent developing countries;
Notes the relevance to appropriate governing bodies in the United
8.
Nations system and to international commodity bodies of the report of the Meeting
of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues, as well as the summary of discussions in
the Trade and Development Board and the Second Committee of the General
Assembly, which highlight the importance of finding lasting solutions to the
problems faced by commodity-dependent developing countries in their pursuit of the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration;1
Urges Governments and invites international financial institutions to
9.
continue to assess the effectiveness, including the operationalization and userfriendliness, of the systems for compensatory financing of export-earnings shortfalls,
and in this regard stresses the importance of empowering developing-country
commodity producers to insure themselves against risk, including natural disasters;
10. Invites donor countries and development partners to support the efforts of
commodity-dependent developing countries to add value to their products, and
reiterates the importance of making progress on the Doha work programme to
ensure the sustainability of those efforts;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake further open and transparent
discussions with all relevant stakeholders on enhancing the impact of the set of
existing instruments to support commodity-dependent developing countries in their
efforts to diversify their exports, overcome supply-side constraints, strengthen
institutions and build knowledge and technical capacity;
12. Calls upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and invites other relevant bodies and organs of the United Nations system, as well
as other relevant international organizations, to strengthen coherently and within
their respective mandates their capacity-building and technical cooperation
activities in the fields of policy design and implementation, institution-building,
management and utilization of commodity revenues, management of price risk and
improvement of supply capacities, including the ability to satisfy quality and other
requirements for market entry, and to enhance activities aimed at South-South
cooperation in the field of commodities, share experiences and identify best
practices for dealing with oversupply situations;
13. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and all
relevant international organizations to continue to analyse trends in commodities
and their impact on the development of commodity-dependent developing countries,
including on debt sustainability;
14. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
Common Fund for Commodities and all other relevant organizations to provide
useful, timely, accurate, comprehensive and user-friendly information and analysis
on commodities and to enable the use of this information by commodity-dependent
developing countries;
15. Requests the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to
undertake, within existing budgetary resources, initiatives and activities to raise
awareness of the commodities issue and keep it a high priority of Governments, the
international community, media, academia and all other relevant stakeholders;

3

A/RES/58/204

16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, taking
into account the provisions of Assembly resolution 57/236.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

4
