58

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

(c) To co-operate, on •such terms and conditions as may be
agreed, in the operation of a common pension fund ;
(d) To co-operate in the establishment and operation of
suitable machinery for the settlement of disputes arising in
connexion with the employment of personnel and related
matters.
3. The terms and c•onditions on which any facilities or
services of the Agency or the United Nations in connexion with
the matters referred to in the present article are to be
extended to the other shall, where necessary, be the subject of
subsidiary agreements concluded for this purpose after the
entry into force of the present Agreement.
ARTICLE XIX
Administrative rights and facilities
1. Members of the staff of the Agency shall be entitled, in
accordance with ·such administrative arrangements as may be
concluded between the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Director General of the Agency, to use the United
Nations laissez-passer as a valid travel document where such
use is recognized by States parties to the Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.
2. Subject to the provisions of article XVIII above, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director
General of the Agency shall consult, as soon as may be
practicable after entry into force of the present Agreement,
regarding the extension to the Agency of such other administrative rights and facilities as may be enjoyed by organizations
within the United Nations system.
3. The United Nations shall invite, and provide the necessary facilities to, any representative of a member of the Agency,
representative of the Agency, or member of the staff of the
Agency desiring to proceed to the United Nations Headquarters
district on official business connected with the Agency, whether
at the initiative of any organ of the United Nations, of the
Agency or of the member thereof.
ARTICLE XX
Inter-agency and other agreements
The Agency shall inform the United Nations before the
conclusion of any formal agreement between the Agency and
any specialized agency or inter-governmental organization or
any non-governmental organization enjoying consultative status
with the United Nations, of the nature and scope of any such
agreement, and shall inform the United Nations of the conclusion of any such agreement.
ARTICLE XXI
Registration of agreements
The United Nations and the Agency shall consult together
as may be necessary with regard to the registration with the
United Nations of agreements within the meaning of article
XXII, paragraph B, of the statute of the Agency,
ARTICLE XXII
Implementation of the present Agreement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Director General of the Agency may enter into such arrangements for the implementation of the present Agreement as may
be found desirable in the light of the operating experience of
the two organizations.
ARTICLE XXIII

Amendments
The present Agreement may be amended by agreement between the United Nations and the Agency. Any amendment
so agreed upon shall enter into force on its appr,oval by the
General Conference of the Agency and the General Assembly
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE XXIV
Entry into force
The present Agreement shall enter into force on its approval
by the General Assembly of the United Nations and the
General Conference of the Agency:

• See footnote 5, p. 55.

1146 (XII). Authorization to the International
Atomic Energy Agency to request advisory
opinions of the International Court of
Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of Article 96 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Noting the provisions of article XVII of the statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and of
article X of the Agreement governing the relationship
between the United Nations and the Agency, 8
Authorizes the International Atomic Energy Agency
to request advisory opinions of the International Court
of Justice on legal questions arising within the scope
of its activities other than questions concerning the
relationship between the Agency and the United Nations
or any specialized agency.
715th plenary meeting,
14 November 1957.
1151. (XII). United Nations Emergency Force

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1000 (ES-I) of 5 November
1956, 1001 (ES-I) of 7 November 1956, 1089 (XI)
of 21 December 1956, 1125 (XI) of 2 February 1957
and 1090 (XI) of 27 February 1957 concerning the
establishment, organization, functioning and financing
of the United Nations Emergency Force,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Force, dated 9 October 1957,9 and the
effective assistance rendered by the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Emergency Force,
Mindful of the contribution of the Force to the
maintenance of quiet in the area,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance rendered to the United Nations Emergency Force by Members of the United Nations which have contributed
troops and other support and facilities, and expresses
the hope that such assistance will be continued as
necessary;
2. Approves the principles and proposals for the
allocation of costs between the organization and
Members contributing troops as set forth in paragraphs
86, 88 and 91 of the report of the Secretary-General,
and authorizes the Secretary-General in connexion
therewith to enter into such agreements as may be
necessary for the reimbursement of appropriate extra
and extraordinary costs to Members contributing
troops;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to expend an
additional amount for the Force, for the period ending
31 December 1957, up to a maximum of $13.5 million
and, as necessary, an amount for the continuing operation of the Force beyond that date up to a maximum of
$25 million, subject to any decisions taken on the basis
of the review provided for in paragraph 5 below;
4. Decides that the expenses authorized in paragraph
3 above shall be borne by the Members of the United
Nations in accordance with the scales of assessments
adopted by the General Assembly for the financial
• Resolution 1145 (XII), annex.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 65, document A/3694.

Resolu,tions adopted without reference to a Co_m_m_iu_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 59

years 1957 and 1958 respectively, such other resources
as may have become available for the purpose in question being applied to reduce the expenses before the
apportionment for the period ending 31 December 1957;
5. Requests the Fifth Committee to examine, with
the assistance of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and in the light of the
present resolution, the cost estimates for maintaining
the United Nations Emergency Force contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, and to make such
recommendations as it considers appropriate concerning
the expenditure authorized under paragraph 3 above.

721st plenary meeting,
22 November 1957.
1193 (XII). Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1956 to 15 July 1957.10
728th plenary meeting,
12 December 1957.
1212 (XII). Clearance of the Suez Canal
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1121 (XI) of 24 November
1956 regarding arrangements for clearing the Suez
Canal,
Recalling further that the Secretary-General, pursuant to that resolution, requested and received from
various Governments as advances funds necessary to
proceed with the clearing operation,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General
dated 17 November 1957,11
Mindful that the clearing of the Canal is of direct
and immediate benefit to all shipping and trade using
the Canal,
w Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/3648 and
Corr. 1).
11
Jbid., agenda item 64, document A/3719.

Expressing its appreciation of the prompt and efficient manner in which the clearance operation was organized and completed,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Canal is again
serving world trade and international shipping,
1. Notes the expenses and obligations that have been
incurred by the United Nations in the clearing of the
Suez Canal;
2. Endorses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that, subject to reduction by such resources as
might become otherwise available, reimbursement of the
advances made by contributor countries to meet the
costs of the operations be effected by the application of
a surcharge on Canal traffic and that, under this arrangement, a surcharge of 3 per cent on Canal traffic
would be paid by all shipping and trade using the
Canal into a special United Nations account, the procedure to govern such payments to be negotiated with
the Government of Egypt and with the other parties to
the payments;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General no take the necessary steps to put this arrangement into effect;
4. Urges the Governments of Member States to
co,-operate fully with the Secretary-General under the
present resolution in order that advances made to the
United Nations for the purpose of clearing the Canal
may be repaid.
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1229 (XII). Terms of appointment of the Secre•
tary-General of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 11 (I) of 24 January 1946,
13 (I) (paragraph 32) of 13 February 1946 and 709
(VII) of 7 April 1953,
Decides that the terms of appointment of the Secretary-General during his second term of office shall be
the same as during his first term.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
