United Nations

S/PV.4673

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4673

rd meeting
Wednesday, 18 December 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Valdivieso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Colombia)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Tosi
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Koonjul
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Briefings by the Chairmen of the Security Council Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola, the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia, the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, and the Working Group of the
Security Council on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-74654 (E)

*0274654*

S/PV.4673

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990)
concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait,
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the
situation in Angola, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia, the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, and the Working Group of the
Security Council on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairmen of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990), concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait; the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1343
(2001) concerning Liberia; the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa; and
the Working Group of the Security Council on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ole Peter Kolby,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait; Mr. Richard Ryan,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola; the Chairman of

2

the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia; Mr. Jagdish Koonjul, Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa; and Mr. Wegger Christian
Strømmen, Chairman of the Working Group of the
Security Council on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations.
It is so decided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ole Peter Kolby,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
Mr. Kolby: Let me start by underlining the fact
that I am speaking in my personal capacity and not on
behalf of the members of the 661 Committee.
During the past two years, the volume of work of
the Committee has continued to increase. The
Committee has dealt with a wide range of issues of a
complex and diverse nature. Due to the complexity of
the issues on the agenda, the meetings of the 661
Committee have often been marked by frank discussion
and even controversies. We have not been able to
achieve results on all issues, but we have been able to
handle the work, I believe, to the benefit of the Iraqi
people, while implementing loyally the different
resolutions of the Council.
The Committee has attached high priority to the
processing of contracts submitted under the oil-forfood programme. Much of the Committee’s attention
has been focused on the question of holds on contracts,
and the Committee has completed its series of informal
meetings on sectorial activities, with presentations by
the United Nations agencies and programmes
concerned.
Earlier this year, the Security Council put into
operation the Goods Review List and a new set of
procedures, thereby easing the flow of humanitarian
goods into Iraq. This was a milestone during my tenure
as Chairman, and I would like to pay tribute to the
members of the Council who worked so hard to make it
possible to adopt resolution 1409 (2002).
The Office of the Iraq Programme, the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy

S/PV.4673

Agency have ensured a smooth transition to the revised
procedures on schedule, and I would like to pay tribute
to them as well.
The implementation of the Goods Review List
and its procedures has brought about much-needed
improvement in the flow of goods into Iraq. However,
the benefits have, to some extent, been affected by a
shortfall in the funding for the humanitarian
programme. The funding shortfall has been of great
concern to the Committee. The question of maximizing
revenues for the humanitarian programme has been
extensively discussed in the 661 Committee.
A great deal of time has also been devoted to
discussing reported violations of the sanctions, as well
as to humanitarian exemptions under resolution 661,
passenger shipping services and flights to Iraq, and
application of Article 50 of the Charter. For further
details on the work of the Committee in this regard, I
would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
various reports submitted to the Council by the
Committee.
Since 1 January 2001, the Committee has held 33
formal meetings. As Chairman, I have given oral
briefings to interested missions and to the press about
the work of the Committee after each formal meeting.
The Committee has also held frequent informal
consultations at the expert level.
As the Secretary-General said in his report to the
Council dated 12 November, the humanitarian
Programme in Iraq was not intended to be a substitute
for normal economic activity. As long as the sanctions
remain in force, there is no alternative to the
Programme for addressing the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Despite its shortcomings, the Programme has
made, and continues to make, a major difference in the
lives of ordinary Iraqis.
Let me conclude by extending my deep gratitude
to the Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq
Programme, Mr. Benon Sevan, and his staff and to the
Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Jingzhang Wan, and
others in the Security Council Subsidiary Organs
Branch. Their support and guidance has been
invaluable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Kolby for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Richard
Ryan, Chairman of the Security Council Committee

established pursuant to resolution
concerning the situation in Angola.

864

(1993)

Mr. Ryan: The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola was, of course, dissolved last week by the
Security Council on adoption of resolution 1448
(2002). I cannot, therefore, speak as Chairman of the
864 Committee, as it no longer exists. Even if it did
exist, I believe the comments I make here today could
be made only in a personal or national capacity. There
will, of course, be the annual report of the 864
Committee. I believe, in fact, that Council members
will already have received a draft copy.
The circumstances surrounding the termination of
the 864 Committee are happy ones, the sort that the
international community hopes for. The positive
military and political developments in Angola since
early this year provided the Council with the basis to
take the welcome action that it did last week. It is
difficult to measure precisely how much impact the
Council’s sanctions — and, by extension, the 864
Committee’s efforts — had on events in Angola. I
believe, though, it is right to say that the Council’s
efforts did indeed have some influence on what has
transpired.
Perhaps the most straightforward measure to use
is to contrast how the international community was
implementing the sanctions at the beginning of 1999
with the situation at the beginning of 2002. For a
number of years previously, we had witnessed
widespread, if not total, disregard for the Council’s
measures against UNITA. That prolonged the conflict
in Angola, and it did nothing to enhance the reputation
of the Council or of the United Nations. It will be
recalled that, under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Fowler of Canada, a whole new dynamic was
introduced to this file. I will not retrace the details
here. In summary, though, the Council, through its
innovative resolution 1295 (2000), put the international
community on notice that the sanctions against UNITA
should no longer be treated as a paper tiger: impunity
would be met with the full force of the resolutions
concerned.
Resolution 1295 (2000) provided for a number of
steps. None was more important in providing the
sanctions regime with teeth than the establishment in
July 2000 of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
Sanctions. The Mechanism allowed the sanctions

3

S/PV.4673

Committee to be furnished with additional and detailed
information about the violations of the sanctions and to
investigate where that information led. Its very
existence sent a strong warning that the Committee had
an additional arm that would systematically and
constantly monitor sanctions violations and the
violators. I am convinced that this acted as a strong
deterrent to those who had already engaged in
sanctions-busting, or who might have considered doing
so. I would like to pay personal tribute to the
dedication and the work of Ambassador Juan Larrain,
the Chairman of the Monitoring Mechanism, and his
colleagues in the Mechanism.
The harmonious atmosphere of the 864
Committee and the related absence of political
differences on the conflict in Angola itself were
important contributing factors to the success of its
work. As Chairman of the Committee, I took the view,
which was supported by all members, that a firewall of
sorts should exist between the sanctions regime and the
political track being pursued by the Secretary-General.
It was, in my view, crucial to maintain the distinction
between the Committee’s work and that political track.
The dovetailing of these lines that has occurred in the
past few weeks, when the sanctions regime and the
work of the Joint Commission set up under the Lusaka
Protocol overlapped, was an inevitable and welcome
development in the circumstances. But, until that
historic moment, it was important for our joint
objectives to avoid any entanglement. And I believe
that this has worked very well.
The Committee’s united approach opened the way
in September 2001 for the adoption of a revised list of
senior UNITA officials and adult members of their
immediate families. Those whose names appeared on
the list were subject to travel and financial restrictions.
A renewed signal of the Committee’s seriousness was
being sent to UNITA and its supporters. Directly
arising from this, seven United Nations Member States
froze bank accounts of individuals included in the list.
The Committee also engaged a private sector
organization to investigate UNITA’s international
financial networks. Although the investigation did not
reveal significant new information on UNITA’s
financial operations, another strong signal was, I
believe, being sent to UNITA and to the international
financial community of the Council’s determination to
close off as many avenues as possible.

4

The cooperation of Committee members and
other Member States extended well beyond New York.
In my capacity as Chairman, I visited 11 States, where
I raised, often at Government level, the priorities of the
sanctions Committee. Such visits proved extremely
useful for familiarization and direct contact with
Governments and other interested parties, both to
gather information and to convey the message of the
Security Council’s continuing determination in seeing
the implementation of its measures.
An important aspect of the sanctions Committee’s
work in the past two years has been the high level of
cooperation it received from the Government of
Angola. It is no secret that the relationship between the
United Nations and Angola has not always been a
happy one. However, I believe that the work of the
Committee and the impact this had on eroding UNITA’s
capacity to wage war have increased the credibility of
the United Nations and of the Security Council in
Angola’s eyes.
The Angolan authorities played their part in this,
particularly over the past two years, when they engaged
in bilateral discussions with a number of States that
had provided support to UNITA. The African Union
also played a part, establishing an Ad Hoc Committee
on the Implementation of Sanctions Against UNITA,
which visited a number of States, including some that
had caused concern to the Monitoring Mechanism. I,
myself, had a number of useful meetings with the Ad
Hoc Committee.
As Chairman, I followed very closely the
Kimberley Process, with its focus on the diamond
industry, and I engaged with the Wasenaar
arrangement, given its focus on weapons. Both of these
areas were central to the Angolan conflict. Although
there are highly complex issues at stake, including
valuable commercial interests, I am pleased to note that
significant advances were made by the Kimberley
Process. Some of the same issues — for example, in
the marking of weapons and the registration of
weapons dealers and brokers — should be addressed
more urgently in the weapons field.
The 864 Committee and its investigative arm
grappled with many sensitive and complicated aspects
that have not been without controversy. Matters such as
the compilation of lists of individuals subject to
financial and travel restrictions, the use of outside
contractors to assist in the work of the Committee, the

S/PV.4673

role of arms brokers, the capacity and willingness of
the diamond industry to police itself better and how to
encourage individual Member States to take action in
support of the sanctions regime have all given plenty of
cause for thought. Many of these issues remain the
subject of debate and, perhaps out of necessity, or for
other reasons, can be dealt with only on a case-by-case
basis.
An issue that I would like to add to the sanctions
agenda is what line the Council should take towards
sanctions-busters when a sanctions regime has been
dissolved. In such circumstances, is the Council
prepared to allow past transgressions to be quietly
forgotten or, in the interest of deterrence, should the
Council contemplate pursuing the transgressors? If
follow-up activity is required, the question of who
would carry this out raises itself.
It is not my intention to provoke a debate on a
permanent monitoring structure. However, the issue of
follow-up is a legitimate one to raise. We believe it is
an important element in favour of a permanent body
which could collect evidence and intelligence and help
create an institutional memory within the United
Nations in this regard.
Many of the issues raised in the work of the 864
Committee have simultaneously occupied the time of
other sanctions committees, most notably those dealing
with Sierra Leone and Liberia. On balance, the more
imaginative and, frankly, more intrusive methods
adopted by the Council and its committees in the
period since the publication of the Fowler Report in
March 2000, and the adoption one month later of
resolution 1295 (2000), have paid real dividends. The
advances should not lead to complacency, however.
Innovative thinking and refinement of practice could
possibly lead to further success.
I know from my time as Chairman of the 864
Committee, and as a representative of a member of the
Council, that there is plenty of thinking going on inside
and outside the Council in New York and elsewhere. I
would encourage this to continue and, where profitable,
use of the experience offered by the work of the 864
Committee to allow sanctions to play a positive role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Now I will
give a briefing in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Since the responsibility of

chairing the committees is a personal one, I am
presenting this report as have Ambassadors Kolby and
Ryan, who spoke before me.
In the last two years I have had the opportunity of
chairing the 1267 Committee, previously known as the
Committee on Afghanistan. The name change is
significant for this Committee because it reflects the
developments that have turned it into an instrument of
global scope in order to tackle the terrorist network that
is one of the greatest challenges to international peace
and security today.
I will begin by talking about the dedicated efforts
of all the members of the Committee as well as for the
support work provided by the Secretariat. The report on
the work I carried out in 2001 was published under
document S/2002/101. The report on this year’s work
will be published in the coming days. I would also like
to mention the reports of the Monitoring Group, the
last of which was submitted to the Committee last
week and will shortly be distributed as a Security
Council document.
The 1267 Committee has, besides its global
scope, another special characteristic, since it is the only
active sanctions committee established to fight
terrorism, in particular Osama bin Laden, Al Qaeda,
the Taliban and their associates.
The first sanctions against the Taliban were
applied almost two years before 11 September. The
measures were later extended to Al Qaeda. The
different acts of terrorism in the last two years —
among which the events of 11 September of last year
will continue to be stressed — have raised a few
questions on the role of the Security Council with
respect to the challenge of strongly responding to the
danger of these organizations. Was there a lack of
information? Was there no decision? Should the
Council act preventively?
I can assure the Council that we have been
lacking in meeting our responsibilities vis-à-vis the
challenges of terrorism. That is why I now make a plea
to make up for lost time in complying with our duties
as the Security Council and in general as Members of
the United Nations.
In January of this year the Council adopted
resolution 1390 (2002), which extended the scope of
coverage of sanctions to a global level. The
comprehensiveness of the sanctions is a special

5

S/PV.4673

characteristic of this regime and one of the main
differences from other current sanctions regimes. This
raises serious challenges for its implementation.
As we have said on other occasions, the fight
against terrorism must be preventive in nature in order
to be effective. Capturing the person responsible for
planting a bomb is undeniably a positive act of justice.
But it is even better to prevent a terrorist act from ever
taking place.
In its activity the Committee has had to deal with
the claims and requests from people who have
allegedly been unfairly affected by the application of
sanctions. In this respect, I must say that this is not an
easy discussion. But in any case, it is clear that neither
the Committee nor the international community can
limit itself to exhausting all the judicial procedures to
sentence someone after a terrorist act has been
committed. Even though we realize that we have to act
with sufficient precautions in order to prevent arbitrary
actions, it is just as true that we must develop very
skilful preventive efforts and make them more
thorough. In this respect, the guidelines adopted by the
Committee on 7 November provide procedures for
including new names on the list, as well as for
excluding names.
The present sanctions regime has three elements:
the freezing of financial resources, travel bans, and
arms embargoes.
With respect to the freezing of resources, it is not
easy to try to have a conclusive assessment of the
results achieved. Nonetheless, as is said in the
Monitoring Group’s report, Al Qaeda still has access to
considerable financial and economic resources. We
have to use our imagination in order to come up with
ways to make this measure more effective.
As for the travel ban, thus far we have not
received any information on people on the Committee
list who have tried to travel and have been rejected
because of this measure. Nevertheless, the Monitoring
Group has drawn the attention of the members of the
Committee to the need for the Committee list to be
used in a specific manner by the immigration
authorities of Member countries. For this, the list must
be as accurate as possible.
The experts have also drawn the attention of the
Committee to how easy it is in certain countries to
legally change a name. Additionally, we have to think

6

about a set of recommendations on what immigration
authorities in any country should do when they find
themselves facing someone who is on the list. Can that
person be arrested? Do they send him back where he
came from? What can they do?
The third measure, the arms embargo, is also
difficult to apply in isolation. The experts’
recommendations are in line with the recommendations
that have come up in various forums where illegal arms
trafficking, in particular in small arms and light
weapons, has been discussed. The different expert
groups that monitor the sanctions regimes imposed by
the
Security
Council
have
made
similar
recommendations. It would be fitting to have a
discussion on these recommendations, in particular
since they have the advantage of arising from the
concrete experience of the experts in these monitoring
groups in dealing with arms embargoes in specific
cases.
The list of people and entities associated with the
Taliban, with Al Qaeda or with Osama bin Laden is the
main instrument the Committee has. At this point, the
list has 232 individuals and 92 entities subject to
sanctions. It is clear that we have to make additional
efforts to try to make the list more specific and truly
usable.
There is another aspect that needs to be
emphasized. The Monitoring Group has detected at
least 104 names of individuals who are not on the list
and who, according to information from the press or
other sources, have been identified as or accused of
having ties with Al Qaeda. Some of these are even
under arrest. Here, I would like to point out that
Member States have obligations with respect to
providing information to the Committee. This question
should receive special consideration next month, when
we must consider the extension of the mandate.
With respect to cooperation received from
Member States, the results have been moderate. In
addition to the remaining names to be included in the
list, to which I referred a moment ago, 80 reports have
been received from Member States. However, more and
more countries are submitting to the Committee
requests to add names to the list. As mentioned in the
report of the Committee, 59 delegations have submitted
requests of this kind to the Committee.
I have referred on various occasions to the reports
of the Monitoring Group. Those reports contain

S/PV.4673

recommendations requiring the direct action of the
1267 Committee, as well as other recommendations of
a general nature, to be taken into consideration by
Member States. Next January, in conformity with the
provisions of paragraph 3 of resolution 1390 (2002),
the Council must review the sanctions imposed in order
to evaluate their effectiveness and, if necessary, to
modify or strengthen them.
I wish to stress, as we have done on previous
occasions, that the Security Council must be more
active in its work related to the functions of the 1267
Committee — namely, the activities and work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) — in particular,
by preparing actions and decisions against States,
individuals and organizations directly or indirectly
involved in terrorist activities. In other words, we must
move from a general framework of cooperation to the
implementation of measures by considering specific
cases. To do that, the CTC’s mandate will require
review and modification. This is an area in which we
have not yet been able to establish real points of
contact and exchange. In an ideal world of effective
cooperation, the existence of the CTC should
contribute to the effectiveness of the 1267 Committee.
However, it is obvious that there is still a gap between
the framework of cooperation created by the CTC and
effective implementation in specific cases, which is the
domain of the 1267 Committee.
In conclusion, allow me to underline that,
although international terrorism is not a new
phenomenon, after 11 September 2001 it took on the
added dimension of a challenge to international peace
and security. The recent terrorist attacks in Indonesia
and in Kenya, among others, have also had the result of
raising the international community’s awareness of the
fact that we are facing a global phenomenon. This
challenge requires us to be more proactive and vigilant
and to find innovative mechanisms to combat it.
I now resume my functions of President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia.
Mr. Mahbubani: Let me begin by commending
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, which
we believe is a very useful one to have, primarily
because there is no formal mechanism for handing over

the chairmanship of a Security Council committee. In
our case, for example, we do not know who the next
Chairman of the Liberia sanctions Committee will be.
So, the purpose of our remarks today is to try and help
the incoming Chairman do his work when he takes on
the chairmanship of the Committee. In doing so, let me
stress, as you have and as have Ambassador Kolby and
Ambassador Ryan, that I will be speaking in a personal
capacity and none other.
By way of background, there are at present only
three United Nations Member States that are subjected
to sanctions on the State itself. In the other cases, the
sanctions have either been lifted or suspended or have
been imposed on non-State actors. Those three States
are Iraq, Liberia and Somalia. Of course, the sanctions
on Iraq are a much bigger job. The sanctions on Liberia
are a much smaller job. I admire the work that
Ambassador Kolby has done.
In our case, three measures were imposed on
Liberia: the expansion of the 1992 arms embargo by
resolution 1343 (2001) of 7 March 2001; the May 2001
embargo on the direct and indirect import of all rough
diamonds from Liberia; and a travel ban on senior
Liberian Government members, senior military officers
and their spouses, and individuals providing financial
and military support to rebel groups in the region, as
designated by the sanctions Committee. All three
measures were extended for another year in May 2002
by resolution 1408 (2002).
Allow me to comment briefly on the question of
the performance of the Committee. Basically, as we
said to the Council in formal consultations, we have
good news and bad news. The good news is that we
have probably succeeded in achieving the objective
described in paragraph 3 of resolution 1343 (2001),
which “Stresses that the demands in paragraph 2 above
are intended to lead to further progress in the peace
process in Sierra Leone”. As we all know, the good
news is that the peace process in Sierra Leone has gone
well, especially since President Kabbah declared the
end of the war in January this year and since Sierra
Leone also successfully completed its elections in May
this year.
The bad news is that the three Panel of Experts
reports have documented continued violations of the
sanctions by the Government of Liberia and by other
groups, including the Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD). That creates, I

7

S/PV.4673

suppose, a dilemma for the Council next year in terms
of weighing the political considerations of the goals
achieved against the legal considerations of the
continuing violations. That is the challenge that the
Council will face next year.
Turning to the Committee’s work for next year,
we have tried to document the lessons that we have
learned. We have come up with seven lessons, which
we would like to share with the Council.
The first lesson is that it is very important for any
Chairman of a sanctions committee to visit the region.
There is absolutely no substitute for first-hand, direct
contact with the country on which sanctions have been
imposed and with the other countries in the region. In
that regard, I must say that we had a very useful visit in
April 2001, and I congratulate the Secretariat on the
remarkable work they did in organizing our visit. For
me, going to the region was an eye-opener. When I
arrived there, I explained to all the Liberians that we
met that the Security Council had imposed some very
smart sanctions: an arms embargo, a diamond embargo
and the travel ban. Yet I found, as I will discuss later,
that the sanctions also had a psychological impact on
the population as a whole. That is something that one
can discover only by going to the region oneself. It is
something to which we should pay attention.
The second lesson we learned is that it is
important to have a comprehensive policy for any
sanctions arrangement. Sanctions alone cannot be the
sole policy of the Council. Frankly, in the case of
Liberia, that is one problem that we constantly had: not
knowing exactly where the sanctions fitted into the
overall policy of the Council. But that problem has
been solved by Ambassador Aguilar Zinser. I want to
congratulate him and the Mexican delegation on having
succeeded in persuading the Council to adopt, on 13
December 2002, the presidential statement contained in
document S/PRST/2002/36. We think that it is a very
important complement to the work being done on
sanctions in Liberia.
The third lesson we have learned is that it is
extremely important for a sanctions committee to be
provided with adequate resources. Here, the problem
that any sanctions committee has — because I am sure
that this applies to others, too — is that we clearly do
not have the resources to monitor whether or not the
sanctions are being respected. In the case of the Liberia
Sanctions Committee, we had to rely upon the ad hoc

8

Panel of Experts that was set up. But the problem with
those panels of experts is that they work on what I call
a stop-start basis. They are suddenly jump-started, they
work for three months, they come up with a report and
then they stop their work. Then there is a gap. When
we need more information, we jump-start them again,
they work for a few months and then they stop again.
That process of stopping and starting creates problems,
because what happens, for example, is that you lose
some of the expertise. We lost the chairman of our
Panel of Experts and, in due course, we also lost one of
the experts, the Interpol expert.
So information is lost when the panels are
disbanded. That is why we have recommended that an
early decision be made next year to set up this Panel
because the more time that it is given, the better work
it does. I want to stress for the record that, despite the
fact that they have to work under unsatisfactory
conditions, it is remarkable what valuable and
insightful reports those panels have presented to the
Council.
The fourth lesson we learned was about the
difficulties in the implementation of sanctions. I will
talk briefly about the arms and diamonds embargoes
and the travel ban. In the case of the arms embargo, I
think we all know — and it is documented in the most
recent report of the Panel of Experts — that the arms
embargo is being visibly flouted both by the
Government of Liberia and by Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD). Indeed, the
latest period report states that, between June and
August 2002, more than 200 tons of weapons and
ammunition arrived in Liberia. In the same report, it
was also mentioned in paragraph 7 that the Panel had
observed that arms also continued to reach LURD
rebels through neighbouring countries. So, clearly, the
arms embargo is not functioning as it should and
something has to be done by the Council in that regard.
Also, not enough attention is being given by the
Council to the implementation of the provisions of
paragraph 4 of resolution 1343 (2001), which demands
that all States in the region prevent armed groups from
using their territory to prepare and launch attacks on
neighbouring countries.
Let me also raise one specific problem that arises
from the procedures used by the Panel of Experts. The
fundamental method they use is “naming and
shaming”. They name the countries involved and they

S/PV.4673

hope that that will prevent the countries from violating
the arms embargo. But sometimes, in some cases, the
countries have come back and said that they need more
information, or have asked if they can explain what
happened. Then we arrive at a practical problem,
because when the Panel’s mandate has expired, the
Panel has been disbanded and there is no mechanism
available within the Secretariat to deal with responses
from Member States or individuals who dispute the
allegations contained in the Panel’s reports or to deal
with requests from Member States and individuals
named in those reports who seek further information on
those allegations.

But, because there are no clear rules for listing or
de-listing, situations arise where a name that ought to
be put on the list is withheld because of the objection
of a single member, or a name that could be deleted is
retained for the same reason. I think there needs to be a
more transparent process in the Committee for the
designation or deletion of names from the travel-ban
list. It is very difficult, frankly, when one is chairman
of such a committee to be confronted with an
individual who writes you a long passionate letter
explaining why he should be removed from the list, and
you have to reply to him saying, sorry, we cannot agree
to this, when you can give him no reasons for this.

Here, I want to endorse the point made by
Ambassador Ryan that the Council has to address the
problem of continuity on this issue and clearly retain
the expertise to deal with complaints from Member
States. One specific suggestion I would have is, for
example, if indeed the Panel of Experts is set up again,
we should at least retain one of the experts to respond
to queries from Member States, if they raise questions
about the reports of the Panel of Experts.

The other problem we had with the travel-ban list
is that we often had skimpy information on the
individuals on the travel-ban list and countries have
complained that they could not impose the travel ban
when they have been given just the name and
designation, without passport numbers and so forth. We
hope that that will also be addressed in the future.

Secondly, on the diamonds embargo, there clearly
is also evidence that it has not been working very well.
There is a reverse trend of Liberian diamonds being
smuggled out of Liberia and sold as diamonds to
neighbouring countries. I also want to mention that,
despite the explicit call in the resolution for Liberia to
set up a diamonds certification system, the technical
assistance for that has not been forthcoming. In
addition, one problem that will also need to be
addressed is the fact that the diamond embargoes
imposed by the Council and the international control
regime set up by the Kimberly Process may not
necessarily be working in harmony and there is a need
to harmonize those two tracks also.
Thirdly, clearly, of all the sanctions imposed on
Liberia, the most effective measure was the travel ban.
That is what clearly hurt the Government of Liberia
more than anything else. It is also in a way the most
controversial, because there is no fixed criteria for the
listing and de-listing of names on the travel-ban list.
Consequently, individuals are usually proposed for the
travel-ban list through the provision of information by
some members of a sanctions Committee, and the other
members of the Committee generally agree to the
inclusion or deletion of names on the basis of trust.

Let me turn now to the fifth lesson we learned,
which is the unintended consequences of sanctions. As
I mentioned earlier, the sanctions that were imposed on
Liberia were intended to be smart sanctions and were
not intended to have any kind of adverse impact on the
population of Liberia. But, as I hinted earlier, they have
had a psychological impact on the population, and the
sad truth is that at about the same time that the
sanctions were imposed on Liberia, the humanitarian
situation in Liberia worsened. The most recent report
of the Panel of Experts makes it very clear that the
humanitarian crisis in Liberia is not a result of the
sanctions that were imposed. That is very clearly
established by the most recent report of the Panel of
Experts. But, at the same time, it also makes it clear
that Liberia is facing a serious humanitarian crisis and
that humanitarian assistance to Liberia has decreased.
That is something that clearly has to be addressed.
Of course, the Government of Liberia has taken
advantage of this humanitarian crisis to wage a
successful propaganda campaign in Liberia to convince
the Liberian population that the humanitarian problems
that they face are due to United Nations sanctions.
There is one thing the Council can do better next year,
and that is to fight that propaganda battle and convince
the Liberian population that their problems are not due
to the sanctions imposed on them.

9

S/PV.4673

The sixth lesson that we learned has to do with
one of the instructions given to us when the Committee
was set up and contained in paragraph 14 (c) of
resolution 1343 (2001), which states that we should, as
a Committee:
“promulgate expeditiously such guidelines as
may be necessary to facilitate the implementation
of the measures imposed by paragraphs 5 to 7
above.”
Unfortunately, after two years, we have not been able
to agree on the guidelines for the Committee. The good
news is that that did not deter the work of the
Committee. We managed to get our work done, despite
the absence of guidelines. But that situation is clearly
unsatisfactory and it is something that will hopefully
be remedied in due course. But, as we all know, a
similar problem has also been holding up the work in
the Working Group on sanctions. We hope that that
Working Group on sanctions will find the solution to
the problem of establishing clear guidelines.
The seventh and final lesson, which ties into the
point of our institutional memory, is about support. We
want, at this point, to thank the Secretariat for the
tremendous support they give us, in particular to
Loraine Rickard-Martin, James Sutterlin and Armie
Decepida, without whom, frankly, our sanctions
Committee could not have worked. They did a
tremendous job, and we want to thank them for it. But
as we leave, we want to encourage them to work harder
with our successors and to continue to provide them
good advice, because, frankly, the sanctions Committee
relies a great deal on the Secretariat for its work.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Jagdish
Koonjul, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
Mr. Koonjul: For the same reasons that
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani mentioned earlier,
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
I welcome this opportunity to provide a briefing on the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, over which I had
the honour to preside for the past 10 months.
As members will recall, the Working Group was
established following the public meeting on the
situation in Africa held last January with the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy,
Secretary-General of the then Organization of African

10

Unity — now the African Union — and of several
ministerial delegations, which led to the Security
Council’s
adoption
of
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2002/2. That presidential statement requested
the Council to give serious consideration to the setting
up of an ad hoc working group to monitor the
recommendations contained in the statement and to
enhance coordination and cooperation with the
Economic and Social Council — whose President, by
the way, participated in a Council meeting for the first
time on that occasion.
The Security Council subsequently established
the Working Group in February with the following
mandate: first, to monitor the implementation of
recommendations contained in the presidential
statement and in previous presidential statements and
resolutions regarding conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa; secondly, to propose recommendations on
the enhancement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council as well
as with other United Nations agencies dealing with
Africa; thirdly, to examine, in particular, regional and
cross-conflict issues that affect the Security Council’s
work on African conflict prevention and resolution;
and fourthly, to propose recommendations to the
Security Council aimed at enhancing cooperation in
conflict prevention and resolution between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity as well
as with other subregional organizations.
The very first meeting of the Working Group,
which was held at the ambassadorial level, provided an
opportunity for a very rich exchange of views and a
powerful brainstorming session, which in turn gave the
Group a general sense of direction and the broad
parameters of its work. It was agreed that, in fulfilling
its mandate, the Working Group would not duplicate
the Security Council’s work but would rather bring
added value to it by looking at issues of importance to
Africa, which generally are not adequately discussed in
the Council.
In May, under the Singaporean presidency of the
Council, I had the opportunity to present the Working
Group’s programme of work to the general membership
at a public briefing presided over by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Singapore. The debate that followed
confirmed the general membership’s approbation of the
relevance of the Working Group and of the work
programme that I had outlined. Here, I should like to
express my gratitude for the wide support and

S/PV.4673

encouragement that my Working Group received from
the general membership at that meeting. I am also
thankful to the Singaporean presidency for the very
succinct report that it presented at the end of the
meeting.
After a number of meetings, my Working Group
presented a first set of recommendations to the Security
Council in August this year (see S/2002/979, annex);
they related to a group of friends, to cooperation with
the African Union and to Guinea-Bissau.
In brief, with regard to the group of friends, the
Working Group based its discussions on background
information provided by the Department of Political
Affairs on the work of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General as well as on the experiences of
Member States that had launched similar groups.
On cooperation with the African Union, the
Working Group discussed extensively the question of
enhancing cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union. In that regard, the Working
Group heard the views of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union in New York and formulated a
number of recommendations. I am pleased to report
that there is now general and greater awareness among
Council members of the African Union’s activities with
respect to conflicts in Africa.
With regard to Guinea-Bissau, the Working
Group had a rich exchange of views with the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau, the President of the Economic and
Social Council, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Peace Academy and the Permanent
Representative of the Gambia, who acted as Chair of
the Group of Friends on Guinea-Bissau. After
discussing Guinea-Bissau’s current peace-building
needs and the obstacles that were being encountered by
that country in addressing those needs, the Working
Group made a number of practical recommendations.
A second set of recommendations, relating to the
enhancement
of
the
effectiveness
of
the
Representatives and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in Africa, were made by the
Working Group on 9 December (see S/2002/1352,
annex). While preparing those recommendations, the
Working Group consulted with the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office of the African Union and
the Office of the Secretary-General. I should like to

stress here that the recommendations concerning
Representatives and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General do not in any way reflect the
performance of existing Representatives and Special
Representatives but are intended to suggest ways and
means to enhance their effectiveness.
The Working Group also held briefing sessions on
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and on
the activities of the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division in order to provide the delegations
of Council members with a better understanding of
those issues while they deal with their work in the
Council. In addition, the International Crisis Group
was invited to brief the members of the Working Group
on the Mano River Union prior to the workshop that
the United Kingdom presidency organized in the month
of July.
The most significant achievement of the Working
Group has been the promotion of close cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Indeed, there is a growing recognition
that the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council should cooperate and coordinate their
activities for lasting solutions to conflicts. It was in
that spirit that the President of the Economic and
Social Council was invited to participate in the public
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Africa in January and in the meetings that the Working
Group held subsequently.
Likewise, the President of the Economic and
Social Council invited me, in my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council’s Working Group, to participate in
the Economic and Social Council’s commemoration of
the tenth anniversary of the General Peace Agreement
for Mozambique, which was held on 4 October 2002.
More recently, at the invitation of the Economic and
Social Council, I participated in the joint Security
Council-Economic and Social Council mission to
Guinea-Bissau with the Economic and Social Council
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries
Emerging from Conflict. We had a very constructive
meeting in Guinea-Bissau, and later in Washington
with the Bretton Woods institutions, and it is hoped
that very useful recommendations will be made that
will help Guinea-Bissau. Such joint activity illustrates
the close cooperation that we have been able to
establish between those two important organs of the
United Nations.

11

S/PV.4673

As the Mauritius membership of the Council will
be ending this month, and since the Working Group
will come up for review in February next year, I should
like, in my personal capacity, to make certain
observations on the future of the Working Group. In
our opinion, the Working Group’s informal nature
makes it an ideal forum for discussion of issues
relating to Africa, especially because the Group invites
speakers from various organizations to brainstorm on
African issues. Although the Security Council spends
most of its time on African issues, it hardly has the
time to devote itself to in-depth discussions. The
Working Group compensates for that shortcoming.
With the events of 11 September 2001 and other
pressing problems that the Council must address —
combined with a number of positive developments in
Africa — there may be a tendency to move the focus
away from African problems. The Working Group, we
feel, will greatly help in maintaining the focus on
African issues.
The link that has been created by the Working
Group with the Economic and Social Council will not,
we believe, survive on its own. The cooperation
between the two Councils is of vital importance, and
the Working Group can provide the vital link for the
continuation of such cooperation. The approach that
the Working Group and the Economic and Social
Council have taken with regard to Guinea-Bissau can
also be applied to many other countries emerging from
conflict, such as, for example, the Central African
Republic, Burundi, Angola and even Liberia at some
stage in the future.
The African Union and subregional organizations
in Africa are important partners of the Security Council
with respect to dealing with conflicts in Africa. We
believe that the Working Group can be of significant
importance in strengthening the partnership among the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa. It is therefore our view that
there is merit in maintaining and in strengthening the
Working Group well beyond its current mandate. We
also believe that the dialogue that was initiated with the
African Union by inviting the Secretary-General of the
African Union to participate in the Council’s public
meeting last January, should continue. We certainly
hope that next year the new Council will follow up on
that.
Finally, I would like to thank all Council
members for the support which they have given me in

12

the Working Group. I would like, in particular, to thank
the Department of Political Affairs — Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh and Ms. Vogt — as well as
the whole Secretariat team for the continuous
assistance that they have provided to the Working
Group. I would like to make a special mention of the
support that I received from Ambassador Gerry Corr,
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ireland, for
the comprehensive paper that he presented on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, from the United
States delegation, in particular Mr. Rick Mills, for their
contribution on the role of Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of my own team,
in particular Mr. Jingree, for their dedicated support,
which made the work of my Committee easier, and for
the recommendations which we have made in regard to
the work of the Working Group. We certainly hope that
Council members will give serious consideration next
year to continuing the Working Group and even to
strengthening it further.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Wegger Christian Strømmen,
Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Strømmen: The Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations conducted a total of eight
formal meetings in 2002, including one meeting with
troop-contributing countries to the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) — commonly
known as the new mechanism — which was held on 28
August.
By means of a note by the President of the
Security Council of 14 January this year (S/2002/56),
the Council adopted the mandate of the new
mechanism for cooperation with troop-contributing
countries, set out as an integral part of the mandate of
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping.
This represented the culmination of a year-long process
aimed at strengthening cooperation and consultation
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries.
Following the adoption of that note, the Working
Group was not given any immediate tasks by the
Council. Consequently, no meetings were held before
the end of May this year. The Working Group then met
to discuss two non-papers, introduced by the United
Kingdom and the Russian Federation respectively, on

S/PV.4673

how to improve military advice to the Security
Council. The need for enhanced and improved military
advice to the Council was acknowledged by members
of the Group. However, it was not possible to reach any
agreement on the recommendations put forward in the
non-papers.
Given a couple of incidents relating to actors
wishing to participate in troop contributors’ meetings
in accordance with resolution 1353 (2001), the
Working Group was tasked to elaborate an approach
aimed at avoiding such incidents in the future. The
response by the Working Group, adopted in the note by
the President (S/2002/964) of 27 August, was an
attempt to establish a coherent and inclusive practice in
this field. The note outlines that actors listed in annex
II.B of resolution 1353 (2001), which do not have an
automatic right to participate in the mentioned
meetings, should make a request for participation to the
President of the Council, and that the President,
following consultations with Council members, should
extend an invitation as appropriate and instruct the
Secretariat accordingly. It now rests on all actors
involved to implement that new procedure.
I will now turn to the meeting of the so-called
new mechanism for cooperation with troopcontributing countries held on 28 August. As Council
members will recall, this was the first meeting held in
this new format. As Chairman of the Working Group,
I am pleased to note that the meeting was generally
appraised in positive terms by Council members and
troop contributors alike. It was pointed out that the
meeting gave rise to a more substantive debate
compared to the consultation meetings under resolution
1353 (2001), and that the smaller format and the
specific, well-defined agenda item contributed to a
fruitful exchange of views among Council members,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
The experience gained so far suggests that such
meetings are not likely to overburden the Council or to
interfere with its prerogatives. On the contrary, in my
view, the new format has its merits, and efforts should
be made towards its further improvement. I would

therefore encourage close contact and consultations
among Council members, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat with a view to organizing further
meetings of the mechanism when this is deemed
appropriate. This will, not least, serve the important
purpose of strengthening the much-needed partnership
between those who design and those who implement
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Towards the end of the year, the Working Group
informally discussed possible topics which should form
the basis for future elaboration, with the overall aim of
improving
practices
within
United
Nations
peacekeeping. In that regard, challenges relating to
command and control in peacekeeping operations,
lessons learned, and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation have been raised by
members. However, it has been underlined that before
any debate can be launched, the specific challenges to
be addressed should be clearly defined, taking due
account of the mandate of the Working Group as well
as the mandates of other relevant bodies in order not to
duplicate efforts. This preparatory work is currently
ongoing, and the Working Group might therefore wish
to revisit it under its new Chair.
The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
is a standing organ under the Security Council
mandated to consider both generic and mission-specific
aspects of peacekeeping operations. As the outgoing
Chairman, I take the view that the Security Council
would benefit from continued input from the Working
Group in both these areas as a means to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping capacity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Strømmen for his briefing on the work of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

13
