Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the First Conunittee

6. Endorses the recommendation of the C0mmittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Secretary-General should be requested to prepare for the
consideration of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee the further studies on organizational and financia! matters relating to remote sensing activities from
space mentioned in paragraph 32 of the report of the
Committee;
7. Further endorses the recommendation that the
Secretary-General should explore the feasibility of utilizing existing facilities and expertise to establish, on
an experimental basis, an international centre for the
training of personnel from developing countries in the
effective use of remote sensing infonnation and take
other possible steps, as set out in paragraph 33 (a) of
the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, as well as undertake an appropriate
users' survey to obtain a clearer understanding of the
real needs of the users and their stage of preparedness
in this area of activity;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
increased burden of activity placed upon the Secretariat
in respond;ng to requests for studies, reports, surveys
and experimental practica! programmes, as well as
the increased role in ensuring more effective interagency co-ordination, to take measures, if possible
within his present resources, for the strengthening of
the Outer Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat;
9. Notes with satisfaction that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee has pursued its work, inter
alia,on:
(a) The United Nations programme on space applications;
( b) The question of a possible international conference on outer space matters;
10. Requests the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee at its thirteenth session to undertake further detailed work on these and other matters in accordance
with the recommendations of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as set out in paragraph 53
of its report;
11. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications as referred to in paragraph 36 of
the rcport of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space;
12. Recommends the continuing review of the space
applications programme, so as to enable it to respond
more effectively to the needs of the developing countries for assistance in the practica! applications of
space technology;
13. Afjirms the importance of ·ensuring effective interagcncy co-ordination in the area of space applications;
14. Requests the specialized agencies to provide
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
with progress reports on their work, including particular problems in the fields within their competence relating to the peaceful uses of outer space;
15. Reiterates its request to the World Meteorological Organization to pursue actively the implementation of its tropical cyclone project, while continuing
and intensifying its other related action programmes,
including the World Weather Watch and, especially, the
efforts being undertaken towards obtaining basic
meteorological data and discovering ways and means
to mitigate the harmful effects of tropical stonns and
to remove or minimize their destructive potential, and

15

looks forward to its report thereon in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 2914 (XXVII) of 9 November 1972, 3182 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973
and 3234 (XXIX) of 12 November 1974;
16. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station in India and the CELP A Mar del Plata Station
in Argentina and expresses its satisfaction at the work
being carried out at those ranges in the peaceful and
scientific exploration of outer space;
17. Notes the suggestion made by the Chairman of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space 7
conceming a potential future role of the Committee in
view of the prospective significance of the collection
and transmission of solar energy through space technology;
18. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present and previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-first
session.
2409th plenary meeting
18 November 1975
3389 (XXX). Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the itero entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening of Intemational Security, 8 and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the implementation of the Declaration,
W elr:oming the fact that for thirty years after the
victory of the United Nations in the Second World War
mankind has been saved from another world war, although local wars and conflicts have persisted in various regions of the world,
W elcoming new achievements and trends in international relations, such as the progress in decolonization,
the liquidation of the hotbed of war in Indo-China, the
successful outcome of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe 1' and other cfforts contributing
to the strengthening of intemational security and the
promoting of peaceful coexistence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming also, in that context, the successful outc~me of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to
30 August 1975, 10 which represents a further contribution to the strengthening of international security,
Noting with grave concern, however, the continuing existence of focal points of crises and tensions in
various regions endangering intemational peace and
security, the continuation of the anns race as well as
acts of aggression, the threat or use of force, foreign
occupation and alien domination, and the existence of
colonialism. neo-colonialism, racial discrimination and
7 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/10020), annex.
8 Resolution 2734 (XXV).
9
The Final Act of the Conference was signed at Helsinki
on 1 August 1975.
1º Far the text of the Lima Programme far Mutua,! Assistance a nd Solidarity, see A/ 1021 7 and Corr. l, annex.
