UNITED NATIONS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . , . . , . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e. . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . , . , . . , . . . , . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2382)

SlPV.2382

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol 3. . .> are normally published in
quarterIy Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2382nd MEETXNG
Held in New York on Sunday, 4 July 1982, at 8.45 p.m.
PrcsidPnt:

Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guyana).

Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

I.

Adoption

2.

The

agenda (S/Agenda/2382)

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in response to the letter dated 4 July from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council,
which is contained in document S/ 15272.

of the agenda

situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162)

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
I am sure I speak for all the
members of the Council when, at the outset of this
meeting, I ask the representative of France to communicate to Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil, the
Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations, our profound appreciation for his distinguished service as President of the Council for the
month of June. In a difficult month, a month of much
activity, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil guided the work
of the Council with very great diplomatic skill,

4. Members of the Council have before them document S/15273, which contains the text of a draft resolution which has been prepared in the course of the
Council’s consultations.
5. Members of the Council have the following other
documents before them: interim report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 5 12 ( 1982) [S/15267]; letter dated 25 June from the
representative of Madagascar to the Secretary-General [S//5259]; note by the Secretary-General
dated
28 June [S/1.5260], transmitting
the text of General
Assembly resolution ES-7/5; letter dated 28 June from
the representative
of L.ebanon to the SecretaryGeneral [S//526/ 1; letter dated 25 June from the representative of the German Democratic Republic to the
Secretary-General [S//5262]; letter dated 28 June from
the representative
of Mauritania
to the SecretaryGeneral [S//5263];
letter dated 30 June from the
representative of Belgium to the Secretary-General
[S//5265]: and letter dated 2 July from the representative ofIsrael to the President ofthe Council [S//527/ I.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2374rl?,
2375th lrnd 2377th meetings], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place
at the Council table; I invite the representative of
Egypt to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber,

6. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before
it, If there are no objections, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

7. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak.
I call on him.
8. Mr, TERZI (Palestine Liberation
Organization):
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this urgent meeting because of the
exigencies of the situation in Lebanon, particularly

--

in Beirut, and the implications
for the future of the
Palestinian people and the Palestinians who live in
Beirut.
9. I wish to express our gratitude to you and also
to the Government and people of Guyana for theil
position in support of the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian people and of our endeavours to regain OUI
rights in Palestine. I should also like to take this
opportunity
to thank the representative of France,
who served as President of the Council last month,
for his prudent conduct of the work of the Council.
I should like to make special mention of his efforts
towards the adoption of a draft resolution [S//.5255/
Rc1-.2] that called for the cessation of hostilities last
month. Unfortunately,
those efforts were torpedoed
by the veto of a permanent member, the United States,
IO. 1 wish to thank the members of the Council for
having unanimously
adopted the present resolution.
The situation has really been worsening as a result of
the policies and acts of the forces of Israel on Lebanese territory and in particular of the attempt to
strangle Beirut.
I I. This meeting has been called because of the
worsening situation
resulting from the escalation
especially in the areas which have been occupied by
Israel. There is a spirit of vindictiveness and malice,
as has been reported in the press, It is not my intention to repeat what has been reported in the past few
days in The Ncl~ York I’i~ncs by Mr. Shipler.
12.

Our great concern here is the fact that as a result
the occupation the Israeli forces have detained in
one place I.5 doctors from the Palestine Red Crescent
who were working in a hospital, 54 members of the
staff of the hospital and others. We fear for the fate of
these humanitarian workers.
of

13. We are also concerned about the fate of 6,000 Palestinians who have been arrested and taken prisoner.
Of course, the Israelis consider that they have a legal
problem-how
to deal with the 6,000 Palestinians who
have been taken prisoner. According to the .Jrrusa/cm
Posf this is posing a legal problem for the Israeli Gov-

ernment-whether
to consider these Palestinians as
detainees or as prisoners of war. Indeed, this subject
is being considered by the Justice Minister and also hy
some professors, like Professor Claude Klein, Dean of
the Hebrew University Faculty of Law, who has said
that he would prefer that the Government consider
L
the 6,000 Palestinians as prisoners of war.
14. We wanted to put it on record in the Council
that we are concerned about the fate of 6,000 Palestinians taken and detained by the Israeli forces uf
occupation, as is admitted.

15. Naturally, I do not wish to deal now with the
situation of the cease-fire since there has been il
resumption of the firing. There were reports yesterd:iy
and I have also just now received a message to the
effect that there is concentrated artillery shellling bn
Burj al-Barajneh and the area of the airport, as ~~11
as other areas within Beirut. I trust that the Council
will take note of these violations. I hope that IsrneI
will respect the resolution that has just been adopted
and that the “normal supply of vital facilities” ,as well
as peace will be restored as a result of the complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from Leibanon.
16. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Lebanon has asked to make a statement, and I now call
on him.
17. Mr. TUcNl
(Lebanon): I shall be very briel”.
since I know that it has been agreed that there should
be no debate at this meeting.
18. Mr. President, I wish to thank you for the manner in which you conducted the consultations, ensuring
that consensus and unanimity were quickly reached on
the resolution that has just been adopted.
19. Although the resolution was adopted on humnnitarian grounds, I think that there is a clear message.
I am sure that the Council is aware of this message
and I hope that Israel will listen and facilitate the
negotiations that should lead to full implementation
of previous resolutions,
