S/PV.7955

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7955th meeting

Tuesday, 30 May 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/445)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15198 (E)
*1715198*

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/445)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/445, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: The cruel conflict in Syria continues
to tear families apart, inflicts brutal suffering on the
innocent and leaves them pleading for protection and
justice. I readily acknowledge that there have been
reports of a significant drop in violence in some areas
of the country. However, such steps forward continue
to be counter-weighed by the reality of a conflict that
continues to devastate the civilian population.
On 16 May, 30 children and women were gravely
injured in a heinous attack by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) on besieged neighbourhoods
in Deir ez-Zor as they were lining up for water. In
addition, more than 100 civilians, many of them women
and children, have fallen victim, in recent weeks. to
the escalating counter-ISIL airstrikes, particularly in
the north-eastern governorates of Raqqah and Deir
ez-Zor. Millions more are in the line of fire, facing
crushing poverty and alarming physical danger. Tens
of thousands of children have been killed, and for those
2/21

30/05/2017

who have survived until today, the outlook remains
bleak. Children have been forcibly detained, tortured,
subjected to sexual violence, forcibly recruited and
in some cases executed. Close to 7 million children
in Syria live in poverty. Nearly 1.75 million children
remain out of school and another 1.35 million are at risk
of dropping out. Approximately 7,400 schools — one
in three across the country — have been damaged,
destroyed or otherwise made inaccessible. Morover,
even if the schools were intact, many would be unable
to open, with almost a quarter of the country’s teaching
personnel no longer at their posts.
Outside of Syria, hundreds of thousands of Syrian
children are left to face an uncertain and traumatic future
on their own. They have become stateless, abandoned
by the world but for the generosity of neighbouring
Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Turkey, as well as Egypt.
How are those children meant to function as adults?
What future do those children have, given that they
will often grow up to be illiterate, orphaned, starved,
traumatized and maimed? What future does a country
have when its next generation is a lost generation? For
those suffering children, what is at stake is not politics;
it is their lives and their futures. It is their innocent
voices and their suffering that need advocating.
Astana produced a promising step. It produced a
memorandum between the three guarantors — Iran,
Russia and Turkey — on the creation of four de-escalation
areas. It is a memorandum that stipulates, in no uncertain
terms, that fighting must significantly decrease and
unhindered humanitarian access must be enabled to
those four areas. The areas essentially encompass all
of the besieged locations except for those in Damascus
and Deir ez-Zor. With that said, too many agreements
that could have saved lives and reduced suffering have
failed in the past.
Therefore, let me be clear. The agreement simply
must succeed. We owe it to the 2.6 million people
that we estimate to be in the four de-escalation areas.
The United Nations stand ready to sit with all parties
involved to make it a workable agreement — one that
will make a tangible difference to civilians on the
ground, one that facilitates the delivery of life-saving
assistance based on the needs assessments of the
United Nations without constant interference, reduced
beneficiary numbers, the removal of medical and other
essential items out of spite, bureaucratic restrictions
and procedural and physical roadblocks.
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

We also must not lose sight of the fact that all
over Syria, millions of people, in locations inside and
outside the four de-escalation areas, continue to suffer
because they lack the most basic elements needed to
sustain their lives. We must not stand silent while
violence flares up elsewhere in the country and parties
continue to use starvation, fear tactics and the denial of
food, water, medical supplies and other forms of aid as
methods of war.
As this Council knows, in recent months, restricted
access and increased attacks resulted in a number of
so-called `evacuation’ agreements in the communities
of Al-Tal, Daraya, Al-Adamiya, Khan al-Shih, Wadi
Barada, eastern Aleppo, Madaya, Zabadani, Foah and
Kefraya. In that past few weeks, thousands more have
been moved from the besieged Barza and Al-Kabun
neighbourhoods of Damascus and the besieged
Al-Waer neighbourhood in the city of Homs to Idlib and
Jarabulus in rural Aleppo.
The evacuations have followed years of intense
airstrikes, shelling and sniping. The tactics are all
too obvious — make life intolerable and make death
likely; push people to choose between starvation and
death or fleeing on green buses to locations that are
just as unsafe. There needs to be accountability for
such actions. Starve and surrender tactics represent a
monstrous form of cruelty to impose upon a civilian
population. We have seen it happen numerous times
already — as I said, in Homs, Moadamiya, Al-Waer, and
elsewhere. In fact, Darayya and Zabadani are already
devoid of their civilian population. That may very well
be the fate of hundreds of thousands more people still
trapped in besieged locations across the country.
Evacuations are, however, only the beginning of
a new set of challenges for both those who are forced
to leave their homes and host communities. Travelling
mostly to Idlib and northern rural Aleppo, those
displaced now find themselves in an increasingly
precarious environment. The capacity in those areas to
support additional displacement is reaching its limit.
In Idlib alone, there are over 900,000 displaced people,
which places significant strain on local communities
and resources. While the situation has quieted since
the memorandum on de-escalation was signed, any
increase in fighting — attacks by the Government of
Syria, or fighting among groups inside of Idlib, for
instance — would be catastrophic for those already
stressed communities.

S/PV.7955

In fact, in many corners of the country, the
protection space is shrinking, humanitarian conditions
are worsening and the level of despair is rising.
That is not due to insecurity or poor infrastructure,
but rather due to increasingly strict limitations by
local authorities, non-State armed groups, as well
as terrorist organizations, along with the actions of
some neighbouring countries. I call on members of
the Council to use their influence to see that those
actors respect humanitarian principles and allow
the unfettered delivery of aid. We are also greatly
concerned at cross-border restrictions and regulatory
impediments imposed on the non-governmental
organization community operating in northern Syria
and are troubled by increasing reports indicating
that internally displaced persons fleeing al-Raqqah
Governorate are being kept for prolonged periods in
screening camps and subjected to restrictions on their
movement by the self-proclaimed democratic selfadministration in north-eastern Syria.
We need to see a step-change in access to the
increasingly dire situation in north-eastern Syria.
Rather than restrictions, we need an opening of space
in order to respond. With approximately 100,000 people
displaced due to fighting around Raqqah since April,
access is needed now through every possible modality.
We need to see restrictions eased for those operating
in the area. We need to see increased cross-border and
cross-line access for humanitarian assistance into the
area, including land access from Aleppo. I call on all
those with influence over the parties involved to act
now. Further delays or restrictions will only result in
the continued suffering and death of civilians.
For cross-line inter-agency convoys, administrative
delays on the part of the Syrian Government in the
approval of facilitation letters and convoy plans
continue to hamper our efforts. Every month, thousands
of facilitation letters are readily signed for convoys
headed to Government-controlled areas. Yet, in crossline areas, we have only been able to secure facilitation
letters for seven convoys under the April-May access
plan, which has allowed us to reach 266,750 people in
need. That is out of 1 million people that we requested
under the bi-monthly plan. As a result, we are essentially
down to one cross-line convoy per week to reach
those who are most in need, with only one besieged
location — namely Duma in eastern Ghouta — reached
by road during the April-May period.

17-151983/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

Compared to 2016, when we deployed 50 crossline convoys through May, today we stand at 18
crossline convoys in 2017. In addition, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent also delivered three cross-line convoys without
the United Nations, which reached 136,500 people in
hard-to-reach areas during that period. Moreover, the
removal of life-saving medicines and medical supplies
such as surgical kits, midwifery kits, and emergency
kits has continued unabated, with nearly 100,000
medical supplies refused or removed from convoys
since the beginning of 2017.
In
addition,
and
as
everyone
here
knows — and as the Secretary-General highlighted in
last week’s open debate on the protection of civilians
(see S/PV.7951) — attacks on hospitals and other health
facilities have become commonplace in Syria. About 20
have occurred every month between January and April
this year, making for an average of one attack every
36 hours and turning Syrian hospitals into death traps.
Such attacks and restrictions are not only violations
of international law and Security Council resolutions,
they are deliberate and cowardly acts aimed at the sick,
injured and infirm, at unborn children and pregnant
women, and at the elderly and young children — those
who are least able to protect themselves and most in
need of care and assistance.
The denial and delay of access, particularly for
people in besieged areas, is a political calculation
and a military tactic. This much is clear in Syria.
We may speak about the practical elements of
delay and denial — facilitation letters, inspections,
checkpoints — but these are simply the manifestation
of a mindset and approach by the Government of
Syria that uses civilian suffering as a tactic of war.
We have seen that when the political will exists, the
humanitarian imperative to deliver, based on assessed
need, is possible. Facilitation letters are signed, items
are not removed by inspectors and checkpoints allow
safe passage.
So I call on the Council to take all necessary steps
to see that the will to ensure that humanitarian-aid
deliveries are in their rightful position — which is
outside any military or political calculations — and
that they are restored, totally impartially. The delivery
of aid is not a request, it is a demand. It is the law,
and denying, refusing or frustrating it is and must be
a red line that is not to be crossed. Denial and delays
of assistance contravene Security Council resolutions
4/21

30/05/2017

and international humanitarian law. They must end. I
urge the Council to act to ensure that its resolutions are
implemented. Any prevarication will result in further
deaths and more suffering for civilians. Humanitarian
relief cannot be viewed as an optional element to be
occasionally provided. It must go where it is needed and
when it is needed, not where it is allowed and when it
is convenient.
As I have said numerous times before, we remain
committed and ready to deliver aid through all possible
modalities for people in desperate need, whoever and
wherever they are. However, the bottom line is that
the real extent of progress cannot be measured by ad
hoc deliveries to besieged communities once or twice,
or every so often. The bottom line is that we have
been wasting too much of our time literally begging
for facilitation letters; too much time arguing at
roadblocks, pleading for trucks to be allowed to pass
without a sniper taking a shot and for medical items not
be removed.
I do not come here today to seek favours. Calling
for humanitarian actors to be allowed sustained access
to all people in need throughout Syria is not a favour.
Calling for an end to the removal of medical items from
convoys is not a favour. Calling for all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
is not a favour. Seeking to prevent children from being
buried under piles of rubble in their basements and
schools is not a favour. Medicine for the sick and food
for the starving are not favours. These are the common
precepts, the bedrock, of our shared humanity, and
the foundations of international humanitarian law,
and they must represent an unflinching call to all
people’s fundamental decency. I call on all those with
influence on the parties to reinforce that message and
to take action.
In conclusion, I would like to send my very best
wishes to everyone observing the holy month of
Ramadan. For Muslims in Syria, the region and across
the world, it is a time for charity, contemplation and
community and a time for peace and forgiveness. Let
us all sincerely hope for an end to violence for this
period and beyond. Let us all sincerely work to achieve
the objectives of the Astana memorandum, so that the
attacks and bureaucratic impositions can come to an
end once and for all, and so that the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners can sustainably reach the
hundreds of thousands of civilians trapped behind the
current front lines.
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for giving us a very clear
and sombre picture of the situation on the ground, and
for being very clear about the demands that he, as a
humanitarian actor, is making, very legitimately.
I would also like to pay tribute to the United Nations
and to Mr. O’Brien’s staff and partners, who are doing
very admirable work on the ground in very challenging
circumstances. I would also like to particularly thank
him for bringing up the situation of the 6 million
children in need in Syria. Children are being killed
and maimed in indiscriminate attacks on a daily basis.
They are callously targeted in the schools and hospitals
where they seek shelter and, perhaps, a modicum of
normality in their otherwise shattered lives. A whole
generation of Syrian children have had their childhood
stolen from them. We commend the efforts of UNICEF
and its partners in responding to their needs, and we
emphasize the importance of helping them to access
their right to education and the psychosocial support
they need.
The overall level of insecurity within Syria remains
difficult to comprehend for those of us on the outside.
The Syrian people continue to face danger and the
threat of death every day. Every avenue must now be
vigorously pursued to end the violence, and we therefore
welcome the recent reduction in violence, mainly in the
four de-escalation zones, as a result of the most recent
meetings in Astana. We are nonetheless concerned
about the military offensives being conducted outside
those zones, primarily by the Syrian regime. It is
essential to ensure that de-escalation in one set of zones
does not result in an escalation in violence or the siege
of other areas.
One of the primary sources of suffering for those
in besieged areas is a lack of access to even the most
basic needs, such as food. Humanitarian access to
areas besieged by the Syrian regime in April and May
has been deplorable, as we just heard, with only one
convoy, to Duma, getting through, and that despite
the decrease in violence. It is clear that a systemic
change in the approval process is needed and long
overdue. We therefore renew the call we have made
on several occations to Damascus to provide safe,

S/PV.7955

unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to all
in need. We also urge the Syrian authorities to grant
permission for humanitarian agencies to use the road
between Aleppo and Qamishli, which has opened up for
commercial traffic.
The Duma convoy shows that access can be achieved
with Russia’s active engagement. My key message
today is that I urge the Astana guarantors’ working
group to prioritize implementing the humanitarian
provisions of their memorandum. We call on them
to initiate a dialogue with the United Nations and its
partners as soon as possible to agree on streamlined
access procedures for the four de-escalation zones. As
we heard today, the United Nations is ready to engage
and has the capacity to deliver. If humanitarian agencies
are granted unimpeded access to those zones they could
reach all of the towns besieged by the regime except
one, which would be a significant breakthrough. As a
co-penholder, Sweden has continued to engage with all
the relevant stakeholders and partners in order to seize
this opportunity. Expectations for the guarantors to
deliver on their commitments are high.
We are also concerned about the fact that armed
opposition groups, listed terrorist groups and Kurdish
local administrations are increasing restrictions to
access in Idlib and elsewhere. We urge those with
influence on them to use it to bring a halt to that trend. I
would also like to underline that increased humanitarian
access, including in the de-escalation zones, is critical
to sustaining the Astana process and improving the
conditions for achieving results in Geneva. The only
way to end this humanitarian crisis, of course, continues
to be a political solution, and we urge everyone to
intensify their efforts in support of the next round of
talks in the United Nations-led Geneva process.
On Thursday of last week, Mr. President, we
gathered in this Chamber under your presidency to
hold an open debate on the protection of civilians (see
S/PV.7951). Many of us spoke about the situation in
Syria, where, as the Secretary-General has said, there
are no events in recent history that compare to the current
protection crisis. We reiterate our concerns about the
forced displacement of civilians to areas where there is
a severe lack of protection for them. Any evacuation of
civilians must be safe and voluntary, and to a place of
their choosing. We remind all parties involved of their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

17-151985/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

Civilian casualties are no longer seen as a
consequence of this conflict. Civilians and civilian
infrastructure such as medical facilities are targeted
as objectives to gain military advantage, particularly
by the regime side. Despite resolution 2286 (2016),
there have been over 400 attacks on medical facilities
since the conflict began, with 30 hospitals reportedly
attacked in April alone. This fundamentally undermines
international humanitarian law. It is now incumbent on
the Council to intensify our efforts to halt this trend
and to build on the consensus during Thursday’s
important debate that civilians in armed conflict must
be protected.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to Mr. O’Brien
for his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council.
I thank him in particular for focusing on children today.
Millions of Syrians continue to suffer, whether it be
upon the anvil of the war raging in Syria or because
they were forced to leave their homes with their families
to live in refugee camps. Indeed, among the suffering
are children born in the past few years who have only
known camps as home.
The crisis continues to rage and the Syrian people
continues to suffer, which the reports of the SecretaryGeneral describe in detail. We see no end on the
horizon. I would like to express our appreciation to
all those working to deliver emergency assistance in
Syria and renew Egypt’s call to all parties, Syrian and
international alike, to ease humanitarian access through
facilitating procedures and providing full support to the
United Nations and its partners so that they can safely
reach those in need, particularly in besieged areas.
In the same context, we call on the States designated
to be guarantors of the de-escalation zones under the
memorandum of understanding recently signed in
Astana to make every possible effort to implement
the humanitarian terms of the memorandum. At the
same time, we welcome the diminishing intensity
of confrontations in the areas set up under the
memorandum. We hope this will also be reflected in
improved humanitarian access, while we know full
well that safe and lasting humanitarian access under the
memorandum will be a true humanitarian achievement
on the ground with respect to besieged areas.
Six years have passed since the Syrian crisis began.
First, it was an internal crisis, but it quickly became a
proxy war. Malicious terrorist groups have spread in
6/21

30/05/2017

a wholly unprecedented way. Syrian land has become
a safe haven for tens of thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters who will continue to threaten the region,
indeed the world, for years to come. It is perhaps
important to stress anew that the danger posed by the
threat of terrorism in Syria is very real; it cannot be
underestimated. This phenomenon did not come about
as a result of conditions on the ground. Rather, it is a
phenomenon supported, financed and armed by parties
with a direct interest in spreading chaos and extremism.
Despite the unprecedented number of parties to military
operations in Syria, and despite the fact that fighting
terrorism is one of the most important objectives of
these operations, the presence of interested parties does
not reflect a unified view on how to deal with the threat
or how to stop the financing and support of terrorist
groups, which is a subject that needs to be reviewed.
It is easy to continue delving into the details of the
humanitarian issues before us. It is easy to continue
condemning the fall of civilians and the targeting of
hospitals and schools. It is easy to demand easier
humanitarian access. However, experience shows that
if we stop there, we will not put an end to the tragedy
on the ground in the country. The only way to end
the humanitarian suffering of Syrians is to reach a
comprehensive political settlement in accordance with
the Geneva accord and resolution 2254 (2015) with a
view to preserving Syria’s unity and sovereignty on
its land.
I would therefore call on all members of the Security
Council — and renew my call on the joint chairmanship
of the International Syria Support Group — to initiate
a frank dialogue on the political process in Syria
and on how to combine the various initiatives into a
comprehensive approach to the crisis that leads to an
end of the humanitarian crisis and serves the aspirations
of the Syrian people to democracy and freedom in a
unified country, one that chokes off terrorism and
its supporters.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
In the 30 days since the previous Security Council
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Syria (see
S/PV.7931), we have heard about ongoing difficulties
and continuing tragedies, but at the same time we have
also received some positive news, even if, as I said, the
overall situation continues to be dire. On the political
side, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura convened the
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

sixth round of talks in Geneva. In the area of the cessation
of hostilities, the three guarantors of the Astana process
agreed on the memorandum of understanding on the
four de-escalation zones. With respect to humanitarian
access, the United Nations inter-agency convoy
delivered food and medical items to eastern Ghouta,
which was a much-awaited development.
In addition to the developments I just mentioned,
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) has been
regularly exchanging information and seeking solutions
that are possible in the short term. As a member of the
ISSG and as the humanitarian co-penholder, Japan has
been making efforts to convince the Syrian Government
to provide facilitation letters and allow access to
United Nations inter-agency convoys. Unfortunately,
these individual efforts cannot overcome the fact that
humanitarian access is neither systematic nor consistent.
Mr. O’Brien noted two months ago that successful
access has always been the result of humanitarian
workers’ patient negotiation and use of one or two
influential channels. We are aware that the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has been such a channel and has pushed
for expanded access. However, it is essential that the
Security Council itself together with the ISSG undertake
serious and coordinated efforts to expand discrete work
into truly effective action that results in full and good
faith implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Japan will continue to seek solutions to the
pressing humanitarian situation, in cooperation with
the other humanitarian co-penholders. We ask that
all actors, especially in the Security Council and with
political influence, do the same.
The Astana process guarantors are attempting to
reduce the fighting in the four de-escalation zones,
which include the besieged and hard-to-reach areas
where most of the people are located, as Mr. O’Brien
pointed out today. Our expectations on this front are
high because so much of the humanitarian crisis is
concentrated in these areas. Expanded information and
coordination with United Nations humanitarian actors
and the Security Council by the guarantors are needed
in order to make these efforts as effective as possible.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Stephen O’Brien for his powerful briefing and for
all he does on this crucial issue. We are meeting today
exactly five months since a ceasefire was declared in
Syria. Sadly, as Stephen has set out, it is a ceasefire that
exists in name only. The past five months have seen

S/PV.7955

continued fighting, continued atrocities and continued
destruction. Throughout civilians have been maimed
and killed, starved and besieged. In towns like Khan
Shaykhun, they have been exposed to the very worst
of humankind.
Like many others in this Chamber, we cautiously
welcomed the ceasefire and the Astana agreements on
de-escalation zones. After six years of fighting, we
are all ready to support any genuine effort to bring an
overdue end to the bloodshed. But the fact is that the
Astana plans have done little to help the people of Syria,
instead, so far, they have done a great deal to help the
regime and its allies. The guns have fallen silent only
where it has suited them. The guns have been deafening
elsewhere. So, in some places, yes, there has been an
overdue reduction in the violence, but only where it
suits the regime.
We need only ask the people of Dar‘a governorate,
one of the four so-called de-escalation zones, what the
ceasefire feels like on the ground. Last week barrel
bomb after barrel bomb, air strike after air strike,
rained down on opposition-held areas there. Is that
what the regime means by ceasefire? Is that what it
means by de-escalation? And just as the attacks have
continued, so have the sieges. At the end of April, the
United Nations estimated over 620,000 people were
living under siege in Syria, the overwhelming majority
in towns and villages besieged by the regime and its
allies. How can anyone claim there is a ceasefire in
place when the equivalent population of Las Vegas is
being besieged? Quite simply, one cannot.
Going hand in hand with the continued attacks
and continued besiegement is the continued failure to
improve humanitarian access. As Stephen said, in the
past two months, there has been just one aid delivery
to an area besieged by the regime and that delivery
was too little too late, providing supplies for the bare
minimum of the population.
It does not have to be this way. The United Nations
is standing by ready to deliver aid and medicine to
those in critical need. It knows the routes it will take.
It has the assurances it needs from the opposition and
it has the mandate to act. All of us around this table
have agreed in countless resolutions that access must
be granted, but instead the United Nations teams are
forced to wait — not for aid, not for supplies, but
instead for the regime’s letters of approval, letters that
never arrive. So the children continue to go hungry and

17-151987/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

the sick and wounded continue to die in pain. This is
not about bureaucracy or paperwork; these are the cold
calculating actions of a regime that chooses to starve
its fellow Syrians into surrender. One can see why
the United Nations judges that this kind of behaviour
constitutes war crimes.
In light of these continuing atrocities, it is clear that
the guarantors of the Astana process need to do more,
so much more, to make the ceasefire and de-escalation
zones a reality. This must mean a genuine end to the
violence — a ceasefire in deed and not just in thought.
It must mean effective and impartial monitoring
mechanisms, ideally reporting to the Security Council,
so that those who violate the ceasefire are named and
held to account. It means sustained humanitarian access
for the United Nations and its partners, with the United
Nations being allowed to assess what each de-escalation
zone needs. Those with influence over the regime must
ensure that this access is given. It is long overdue.
Above all, if there is to be a long-term peace in
Syria, there has to be full implementation of resolution
2254 (2017), as our Egyptian colleague has just said,
and there has to be justice. There has to be justice for
the people of Khan Shaykhun, for the people of Aleppo,
for the people of so many places across Syria who have
endured for so many years. Without these steps, there
simply is not a credible plan. There is just the fiction
that we have today. It is a fiction where ceasefire exists
and yet bombs still fall. It is a fiction that has endured
for too long.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
humanitarain situation, which Mr. Stephen O’Brien
eloquently described, remains tragic and very worrying
in several ways. I will highlight at least five of them.
First of all, the violation of the prohibion of the
use of chemical weapons — which should have been
absolute — continues to outrage our conscience. On
26 April, France sent to the Security Council its analysis
of the circumstances surrounding the use of chemical
weapons on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun. This analysis
was carried out by our experts and is irrefutable. It
estalishes without at doubt the invovlement of the
Syrian armed and security forces.
Secondly, the violence persists on the ground,
despite the fact the signing of the 4 May agreement.
The general high level has gone down in recent weeks,
but the incidents that took place, particularly in the
areas of Hama, Ghouta and Dar’a, show how precarious
8/21

30/05/2017

this seeming reduction in violence is. The guarantors
of the truce undertook their responsibility to oversee its
implementation. We therefore call upon the guarantor
States of the Astana process, in particular Russia and
Iran, to effectively impose the full cessation of hostilities
on the Syrian regime. Improving the situation on the
ground is essential to the success of the negotiations
with a view to political transition in Geneva under the
aegis of the United Nations.
The third matter of concern is the humanitarian
situation, which is far from improving. The regime
continues to block the access of humanitarian convoys
and to besiege opposition-held settlements. More than
620,000 people still live in besieged areas. France
reiterates its call for the immediate lifting of these
sieges. Assistance must go to all the people in need,
wherever they are in the Syrian territory, in accordance
with humanitarian principles.
Fourthly, the implementation of local evacuation
agreements concluded by the regime, after having
starved and besieged civilians for many years, is
generally carried out without international supervision
and leads to large-scale forced displacements of the
population. As the Secretary-General underscored in
his report, such displacements could constitute war
crimes or even crimes against humanity. We therefore
demand that these agreements, which are imposed
by force, cease; that evacuations be carried out in
accordance with international humanitarian law; that
civilians be treated with dignity; and, finally, that the
ceasefire be fully respected.
Fifthly, the situation of the detainees is of particular
concern. The Caesar files discuss it. According
to reliable information, 500,000 people have been
imprisoned by the Bashar Al-Assad regime since
2011. The reported information on the possible use by
Damascus of a crematorium to conceal the extent of the
summary executions perpetrated at the Sednaya prison
must be considered with utmost attention .
We are constantly repeating in this Chamber that
the Damascus regime must respect its international
obligations and allow full, safe, unconditional and
unhindered access for the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners to people in need throughout the
Syrian territory. Its supporters must put pressure on the
regime in that regard.
The Syrian regime continued refusal to issue
facilitation letters for the loading of convoys is
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

wholly unjustifiable. That responsibility lies squarely
on Damascus, which continues to deny access to
humanitarian actors and has used starvation as a war
strategy. We demand that the Syrian regime authorize
the humanitarian convoys to reach people in need.
Attacks on hospitals, medical facilities and humanitarian
convoys, as well as school buildings and homes persist.
The Secretary-General has reiterated his appeal to refer
the case to the International Criminal Court. We must
shed all possible light on those innumerable violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
In the face of that tragic assessment, it is more
urgent than ever to usher in a political transition in the
framework of the Geneva negotiations. France fully
supports the negotiation process in Geneva under the
auspices of the Special Envoy, — in accordance with
resolution 2354 (2017) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) — as the only way to put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and the humanitarian
tragedy unfolding before our eyes. More than ever, we
reiterate the urgency of reaching a political solution
that will culminate in a genuine transition in Syria.
Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for his briefing. Last
week, I stood in the no-man’s land between Syria and
Turkey where trucks with life-saving humanitarian aid
begin their perilous journey to reach desperate men,
women and children in Syria. In the course of five
days in Jordan and Turkey, I witnessed the generosity
of those countries in providing Syrian refugees health
and educational services. I met dedicated teachers and
doctors who, with the help of the United States and the
United Nations, are working to shape a better future
for Syrians. I sat and spoke with refugee children and
met the counsellors who are helping them deal with the
trauma that has marked their young lives.
Overwhelmingly, the displaced Syrian men, women
and children with whom I spoke want to go home but,
tragically, the violence and brutality that led them to
flee their homeland has continued since we last met.
There is no peace in Syria, only continuing, appalling
suffering. There is no home to which those desperate
people can return. According to one Syrian human
rights group, in just the month of April, the Al-Assad
regime killed nearly 500 civilians. That brings the
total number of Syrians killed by the regime in just the
past five months to more than 2,000. The same group
reports that the total number of civilians killed by all
parties during this period is more than 3,800.

S/PV.7955

The Syrian Government continues to imprison
tens of thousands of its people. It subjects them to such
violence and inhumane conditions, including torture
and sexual violence, that those who manage to survive
suffer devastating and lasting damage. Their families
suffer as well. But the most persuasive indicator of the
continuing hell that is life in Syria is what we have
learned this past month about what has been built
inside Al-Assad’s notorious Sednaya prison. Amnesty
International calls the prison a “human slaughterhouse”.
Survivors report being approached by wardens
inside with ropes and knives. They are then given a
choice — kill friends and relatives, also in the prison,
or be killed themselves. The evidence comes from
a combination of photographs of structural changes
in the prison and estimates of the horrifying rate of
killings behind its walls. It has led us to conclude that
the Al-Assad regime has constructed a crematorium in
the prison to dispose of victims’ bodies.
That is an appalling discovery. Even if Russia
and Iran had no direct role in the construction of the
crematorium, they have either aided in or passively
looked away as the Al-Assad regime commits atrocities
that are reminiscent of history’s worst war crimes. It
is hard to fathom yet another regime so soulless that it
has to devise a more efficient method of disposing of
all the dead bodies it generates, but that is where the
evidence leads us. We need Russia to use its influence
over the Al-Assad regime to bring an end to those
atrocities. Even those inside Syria who managed to
avoid Al-Assad’s prisons do not avoid suffering. The
bombings of hospitals and schools continue unabated.
I want to thank Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
for calling our particular attention to the staggering and
unacceptable impact of this war on children. Countless
Syrian children have lost family, friends and other
loved ones, and witnessed first-hand the unspeakable
horrors of war. For the more than three million Syrian
children under the age of six, many now orphaned, war
is all they have ever known.
As a recent report by Save The Children highlights,
children wake up at night screaming from reliving
those horrors as they fall asleep. They wet their beds;
some have lost the ability to speak, while others tell
their friends and families they would rather be dead
than live another day hungry and afraid. Others turn to
drugs as a way to cope with what they have endured. We
witnessed first-hand the effects on those children, with
many refusing to leave the house or struggling with fear

17-151989/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

of loud noises. The United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and assistance providers have done an
admirable job trying to assist those children, but the
systems and structures that exists to provide care and
support for children are eroding around them.
One in three schools in Syria have been destroyed,
damaged, or are being used as a shelter for the
displaced or for military purposes. More than half of
Syria’s public health facilities have closed and more
than 75 per cent of Syrian households’ children have to
help support their families, with many of them as the
sole breadwinners. The psychological and physical toll
on Syrian children could cost us an entire generation
if action is not taken. I applaud the United Nations for
recognizing the challenges facing those children and
recognize the United Nations-led No Lost Generation
approach to provide counselling and education to
school-age Syrians, other refugees and vulnerable
Jordanians who cannot always access formal education.
But the truth is no child should have to endure any
of that. The Council is in a position to chart a different
course for the children of Syria and give them the
future they dream of and deserve. Ultimately, the best
and only way to truly support those kids is by ending
the conflict and getting them the assistance they need.
Unfortunately, delivery of humanitarian aid continues
to be blocked by the Government. The regime continues
to put up bureaucratic roadblocks to the delivery of
life-saving food and medicine. No one is fooled by the
games they are playing. They are making the choice to
starve their own people for political gain and are being
supported by Iran, as Russia looks the other way.
The message I took to the refugees I visited last
week was that the United States will never give up
working to ease their suffering, but we have to be
honest — what they want, what they need is to return
home — but they will never have a home to return to
until there is peace in Syria. In addition to the political
solution, we must start to focus on the development
needs of host countries, as well as the transition for
Syrians to go home.
I was at a Turkish camp and one of the refugees
came up to me and asked that we remember that they
need our support. He said that Al-Assad is a brutal
leader and that “we are happy when we listen to you
and when you are talking about us. Please do not forget
about the Syrian people.” That must be our constant,
overriding and unfaltering purpose.
10/21

30/05/2017

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for
his briefing.
Recently, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, the political settlement of
the Syrian issue has gained momentum. Recently
concluded Geneva talks have made progress, while the
last round of Astana dialogue has created conditions
for the consolidation of the ceasefire and the scaling
up of humanitarian relief. China commends the
mediation efforts of the United Nations and the efforts
by Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkey and Iran in advancing
the Astana dialogue, and hopes that it will be conducive
to the alleviation of the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the promotion of a political settlement.
Despite recent difficulties on the ground, United
Nations humanitarian agencies continue to dispatch
relief convoys to relevant areas in Syria. China
commends those efforts and urges parties in Syria
to effectively implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, observe the ceasefire agreement and
actively coordinate with United Nations humanitarian
relief operations by providing rapid, safe and
unhindered access. The international community
should implement as soon as possible the outcomes
of the Brussels international conference on Syria by
providing assistance to Syria and to relevant countries
in the region.
Political settlement is the only viable way to
completely ease the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Special Envoy De Mistura has announced that the
next round of Geneva talks will be held in June. The
parties concerned should adhere unswervingly to
diplomatic efforts and continue to support the role of
the United Nations as the main mediator and the work
of the Special Envoy; jointly encourage the parties in
Syria to participate constructively in the next round of
Geneva talks, under the principle of Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led and take part in dialogue and negotiations,
in the quest for a comprehensive, lasting solution that is
acceptable to everyone.
Attacks launched by terrorist organizations in Syria
severely impede international relief efforts. China calls
on the international community to step up counterterrorism coordination efforts, adopt unified standards
and resolutely combat all terrorist organizations
identified by the Security Council.
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

China continues to support the alleviation of
the humanitarian situation in Syria and the political
settlement of the Syrian question. The Special Envoy
of the Chinese Government on Syria attended the most
recent round of Geneva talks to promote dialogue
for peace. China stands ready to continue to play
a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive,
impartial and appropriate solution to the Syrian issue
at an early date.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for his briefing.
Today, once again we have heard a sobering
briefing, which underscores that the humanitarian
situation in Syria has in no way improved. While there
are indications of a reduction in violence since the
adoption of the Astana agreement, fighting continues in
key areas and there is still no meaningful humanitarian
access to civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach
communities. A considerable amount of humanitarian
assistance is given through regular programming and
cross-border assistance — the latter being provided
without the need for the regime’s approval, thanks to
authorization by the Security Council.
But where needs are greatest, such as in areas
besieged by the Syrian regime, there has been no
improvement for many months. On the contrary,
compared to last year’s levels, the number of crossline inter-agency convoys for besieged or hard-toreach locations has, in fact, significantly decreased.
And where convoys are allowed to enter, medical and
surgical items are still removed by the regime, in what
amounts to a despicable practice that is contrary to
international humanitarian law, as well as to Security
Council resolutions and International Syria Support
Group Ministers’ agreements.
Besieged eastern Ghouta remains an area of
deep concern, in particular for the health needs of
the population. Besieged civilians in eastern Ghouta
need to be reached by the United Nations and other
humanitarian partners. One single convoy for a limited
number of beneficiaries is not the change of policy that
is needed. In Al-Waer and Barze in eastern Ghouta, we
call upon the Syrian Government to allow the United
Nations to carry out assessment missions and to monitor
the ongoing so-called evacuations that may amount to
forced population transfers to opposition-held areas.
Access by the United Nations should also be guaranteed
in the so-called liberated areas, such as Wadi Barada,

S/PV.7955

where, since rebels were evacuated, no monitoring or
humanitarian missions have been possible.
We are also worried about reports of increasing
restrictions for the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations operating in
Idlib and north eastern Syria, where assistance has been
curtailed, leaving many in need. We remain concerned
about the possibility that chemical arms will be used
again in Syria. In that respect, accountability for their
use, including at Khan Shaykhun, must remain priority
objective of the Council.
The general decrease in violence that has followed
the Astana agreement is a step forward. Yet, some areas,
such as Idlib, eastern Ghouta and Dar’a, have seen an
increase in fighting, as the parties jockey for positions
and as the regime tries to strengthen its presence in key
strategic territory. The reduction in violence should
have prompted an increase in humanitarian access. As
we have seen, that has not been the case so far.
In that regard, through the implementation of the
Astana agreement of 4 May, we expect that substantive
and sustainable results can finally be achieved on the
humanitarian front. In that framework, the United
Nations must have an active role in the implementation
of the humanitarian dimension of the Astana agreement,
ensuring that assistance can be provided, according
to the United Nations impartial assessment of needs,
and that people who wish to leave or require medical
evacuation can do so — all with respect for humanitarian
law and principles. We would not like to see the creation
of parallel tracks on humanitarian issues, without the
direct involvement of the United Nations.
Finally, ensuring a real ceasefire and safe,
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access to all
people in need remains the priority. Realizing rapid
humanitarian dividends for the population will also
help to create the conditions conducive to progress
on the political track in Geneva, under the auspices
of Mr. Staffan de Mistura and in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to express appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen O’Brien for
his briefing. As usual, it was very exhaustive and clear.
We also express our appreciation to the United
Nations and its partners for their sustained efforts
in trying to deliver the much needed humanitarian

17-1519811/21

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7955

assistance to those in
difficult circumstances.

need,

under

30/05/2017

extremely

will be taking a huge step forward in addressing the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.

As described in detail by the Under-SecretaryGeneral, the humanitarian situation in Syria remains a
source of serious concern. The fighting has continued
unabated, leaving many civilians killed, injured and
displaced, and destroying civilian institutions and
infrastructure. Nevertheless, we note that since the
signing of the de-escalation memorandum by the three
guarantors, Russia, Turkey and Iran, violence has
decreased in the de-escalation zones. Any effort that
reduces violence in Syria should be welcomed and we
appreciate the efforts of the guarantors to implement
the ceasefire agreement. As Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien has said, it has to succeed. It is vital that the
reduction of violence translate into safe, sustained and
rapid humanitarian access, which will help to address
the continued challenge of reaching out to those in need
of urgent assistance.

Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for introducing
the thirty-ninth report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2017/445) and
for his enlightening briefing. Through him, Senegal
again pays tribute to the ongoing sacrifices made by
the emergency medical personnel acting on behalf of
Syrian civilians, who are suffering through their sixth
year of conflict.

Only seven inter-agency convoys have been
allowed in April and May and their capacity to deliver
aid is underutilized. That should certainly change and
implementing a simplified facilitation procedure will
be instrumental in enhancing aid delivery. In that
regard, the cooperation of the Syrian Government is
indeed critical in addressing administrative challenges
in order to improve humanitarian access. Ultimately,
the long-term solution to the humanitarian situation
depends on the Syrian-led political process, under the
auspices of the United Nations. In that connection, we
continue to support the Astana process and the Geneva
talks, which complement each other.
No doubt, as we discussed last week, a political
solution may not be easy to achieve over the short term,
but it is the only sane option. That is why we believe
that even small and incremental progress should be
welcomed. That is also why it behoves all the Syrian
stakeholders to be fully committed to stopping the war
and ending the suffering of the people. Let me say that
we align ourselves with what the representative of Egypt
said regarding the danger that terrorism represents
in Syria. It bears responsibility for complicating the
situation in the country. Third parties have played a
big role in the development of those complications.
As memebrs of the Council know, the success of the
political track in Syria hinges on the concerted efforts
of countries of the region, along with major Powers with
influence on the parties. Most importantly, it hinges on
the unity of this Council. If we succeed here, then we
12/21

My delegation recalls the devastating impact of the
conflict on the children of Syria. In particular, I should
like to focus on the fate of the 2.4 million children who
have been displaced from their homes and the 280,000
children who still living in besieged areas. In that
regard, we echo the appeal launched by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child, calling for an investigation
into crimes committed against children, including
through active cooperation with existing mechanisms,
such as the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
on international crimes committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
Despite the efforts under way, the cessation of
hostilities triggered by the Astana process, which
initially elicited hope and optimism, remains fragile.
Unfortunately, we are still witnessing a large number of
Syrian victims, in addition to the ongoing destruction
of public infrastructure, such as schools, health-care
facilities and markets, in violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2286 (2016). The
United Nations has registered 30 attacks against healthcare facilities and two against schools.
Despite the current difficult situation, the
United Nations and its partners continue to provide
humanitarian assistance in extremely difficult
conditions to the people most in need, whose numbers
have seen a substantial reduction of some 20,000 people
in 13 besieged areas of the country. However, there
still remain 624,000 people in need. In that regard, my
delegation notes that there has been an improvement
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

in humanitarian access to some areas that have been
besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), thanks to locally signed agreements. We remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law to
ensure access to those providing assistance, including
medical supplies, in safe, unrestricted, unconditional
and unimpeded conditions via the most direct routes,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That having been said, my delegation reiterates
its call on the relevant authorities of Syria to continue
delivering facilitation letters, which are essential to
the optimal implementation of the programmes of
the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and
their partners. We hope that the cessation of hostilities
will spread throughout the country and that, better
yet, it will translate into a significant improvement
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance under
United Nations coordination. My delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts made by the guarantors of the
Astana process, namely, Russia, Turkey and Iran, in
particular the memorandum of understanding whereby
they are committed to creating de-escalation zones
in specific areas of the country so as to facilitate the
cessation of hostilities, humanitarian assistance and
a return to conditions conducive to the peace process
under United Nations auspices.
My delegation reiterates its encouragement to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
through the Fact-Finding Mission, in its efforts to shed
light on the use of chemical weapons in the attack
on Khan Shaykhun in order to hold accountable the
perpetrators of that heinous act, whose many victims
included children. We reaffirm the priority of fighting
and violent extremism terrorism, including ISIL
and the former Al-Nusra Front, pursuant to a global
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our faith that a negotiated
political solution is the only way out of the crisis in
Syria, which has had devastating consequences, in
line with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2016) and under the auspices
of the United Nations. We welcome the sixth round
of negotiations led by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, which will promote the ongoing exchange of
information on pertinent issues, such as constitutional
reform, the political transition, national integrity and
the fight against terrorism.

S/PV.7955

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation for the briefing by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, on the tragic
humanitarian situation in Syria.
We commend and appreciate the efforts made by
the United Nations, under the leadership of the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and his
colleagues in the field, to supply food, fuel and potable
water to areas in need in Syria, as well as his efforts to
organize the evacuation of civilians. We also support
the humanitarian efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
United Nations agencies working on behalf of the
Syrian people. At the same time, we are of the view that
humanitarian assistance should not be politicized, as the
lives of hundreds of thousands of Syrians, especially
children, depend on the timely delivery of humanitarian
aid by parties engaged in the humanitarian sector. We
ask the guarantors of the ceasefire — Russia, Turkey
and Iran — to continue their important work towards
reconciling the conflicting parties. It is gratifying to
know that the number of settlements that have joined
the reconciliation process has increased to 1,500. We
welcome that process.
Kazakhstan believes that the war cannot be
considered over until the last mine is cleared.
We therefore support Russia’s appeal to create an
international coalition to demine Syrian territory. My
delegation also considers that it would be expedient to
establish a fund to finance the specialized commercial
companies that would carry out such work. We
strongly condemn attacks on schools, hospitals and
other medical facilities, which only worsen an already
difficult humanitarian situation in the country. We
call on the parties to the Syrian conflict to comply
with international humanitarian law and refrain from
actions aimed at destroying civilian infrastructure,
water-supply facilities and medical and educational
institutions.
Kazakhstan wishes to draw the attention of the
Council to the trend of mass forced resettlement
of civilians, which often happens on a false basis of
compassion. Such practices can result in artificial
changes to the population’s composition, aggravating
interreligious differences among citizens, and can
threaten Syria’s territorial integrity, according to the
Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,

17-1519813/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

30/05/2017

annex), which is the basis for the possibility of achieving
a political agreement as soon as possible.

sentence we just heard from Mr. O’Brien — that civilian
suffering is a tactic of war.

Kazakhstan is concerned about the fate of detainees
being held in Syrian prisons. We call on the Syrian
Government to allow United Nations representatives to
investigate the allegations of violence against prisoners,
including those in the Saydnaya prison. We share the
view that there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict and that it will be essential to settle it through
political means in the spirit of the negotiating processes
in Geneva and Astana. We urge the parties to the
conflict and the guarantors to observe the provisions of
the 6 May memorandum on establishing de-escalation
zones in Syria. We believe that the memorandum can
help to advance a political settlement. While we have
been informed that the cessation of hostilities between
Government forces and the armed opposition groups
that have already joined the ceasefire regime is visible
within the boundaries of the de-escalation zones, no
initiative aimed at establishing peace in the conflict
zones can be successful or effective without the
Security Council’s support.

Secondly, we are alarmed by the most recent
UNICEF report on the suffering of millions of children
in Syria, as well as the horrifying information just
provided by the Under-Secretary-General. More than
2 million children are living in besieged or hard-toreach areas around Syria, with little to no humanitarian
aid. Such a reckless and deliberate strategy carries
fundamental risks for the long-term stability of
not just Syria and the Levant but the entire Middle
East. Depriving these children of basic necessities is
equivalent to creating the best possible environment for
the recruitment campaigns of Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Leaving young Syrians
without hope and turning them into a lost generatio, will
end up creating a long-term safe haven for terrorists at
the very heart of the region.

In Syria, time is precious and counted in human
lives. Procrastination means death for countless
innocent citizens, particularly children. The Security
Council has a special duty to end the bloodshed there,
but for more than six years it has been unable to agree
on measures to contain this brutal civil war, which
has seriously affected not just the lives of millions of
peaceful Syrians but the entire region. We need unity to
achieve success, and we should strive for that.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We too are grateful
to Mr. O’Brien for his sobering and chilling account
of the humanitarian situation in Syria. This month,
unfortunately, seems to be no different from previous
ones, since the humanitarian track continues to be
dominated by devastating negative trends, as we just
heard. While there are many of them, today I would like
to touch on three areas of particular concern.
First, there are still more than 600,000 people
under siege. Of those, 82 per cent are besieged by
the regime’s forces. At the same time, the issues of
sustainable humanitarian access and lifting the sieges
are an integral part of the Astana memorandum and the
concept of de-escalation zones. The question, therefore,
is about how much real progress has been made here.
Has Damascus shown any willingness to follow through
on the memorandum? The answer lies in the dreadful
14/21

Lastly, we are concerned about the continuing
forced displacement of civilians in the eastern districts
of Damascus and other regions of Syria, which is
leading to devastating demographic and humanitarian
consequences. Such actions may amount to violations
of international humanitarian law and an attempt to
change the demographic composition of modern Syria.
These and other outrages committed against civilians
by the Syrian regime with the help of its sponsors,
first among them the Russian Federation, must come
to an end.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for his report and once again reiterate
our full support for the work he has been tasked with.
The fighting that has resulted in death and
destruction in Syria has now been going on for
more than six years. According to the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
about 13.5 million people have been forced to flee their
homes for safety. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has reported that
more than 620,000 people remain under siege in Syria
and about 5 million have fled the country between 2011
and March of this year. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs believes that over the same
period about 6.6 million more people, half of them
children, have been internally displaced within Syria.
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains critical.
In April alone, according to the Secretary-General’s
report issued on 23 May (S/2017/445), there were
around 30 attacks on medical and educational facilities
and personnel. We are very concerned about the fact
that despite the ceasefire that has been implemented
in accordance with resolution 2336 (2016), attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure by the parties to
the conflict still continue.
Bolivia insists firmly that agreements reached
in the framework of the ceasefire must be abided by
and respected, and we reiterate that all the parties
involved are obliged to ensure the safety and integrity
of everyone caught up in the conflict. We also welcome
the most recent message, on 26 May, from Mr. Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, in which he urged all the parties to
the conflict to take much greater care to distinguish
between legitimate military targets and civilians, and
to fulfil their obligation to protect the population,
saying that
“[t]he same civilians who are suffering from
indiscriminate shelling and summary executions
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are
also falling victim to the escalating air strikes,
particularly in the northeastern governorates”.
On behalf of Bolivia, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the work being done to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people by the staff
of various humanitarian aid agencies and organizations,
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the Syrian Red Crescent, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF
and the International Organization for Migration. We
would also like to highlight the important work that the
Russian centre for the reconciliation of opposing sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic has been doing, both in
ensuring security for the deployment of humanitarian
assistance and in evacuating people from areas where
there have been armed clashes. In that regard, we would
like to remind the parties to the conflict once again that
they must allow unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance. They should ensure and protect its security
and integrity and refrain from targeting humanitarianassistance convoys as military objectives. We call
on the parties to the conflict to intensify efforts to
guarantee humanitarian access to besieged and hardto-reach areas.

S/PV.7955

We believe that as long as military tactics take
precedence over politics, there can be no lasting peace
and that the civilian population, especially women and
children, will be exposed to unnecessary suffering as
a result. We also firmly condemn all acts of terrorism
as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of motive and
wherever, whenever and by whom they are committed.
We reaffirm the importance of ensuring that all States
combat this human scourge by every possible means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
their other obligations under international law.
Lastly, we reiterate that the only way to resolve
this conflict is through an inclusive political process,
organized and led by the Syrian people, and we
therefore reaffirm our support for the progress that
has been made in the Astana and Geneva meetings and
express our fervent hope that those dialogues can help
us achieve a definitive and lasting peace.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
We highly value the work being done conscientiously by
humanitarian workers in fulfilment of their mandate.
As a result of the memorandum of understanding
concluded in Astana on 4 May on the de-escalation
zones, the intensity of the armed clashes in Syria has
significantly diminished. This is a fact that has been
acknowledged by many within Syria and outside. To
assert the contrary is to intentionally undermine the
achievements of the Astana process, which is bearing
tangible results and is providing impetus in the political
negotiations in Geneva. We intend to pursue the
Astana process, and we are grateful to the leadership
of Kazakhstan for the political and organizational
assistance it has offered.
At the same time, we condemn the renewed mortar
shelling of the Russian embassy in Damascus on 22 May,
which was undertaken from the terrorist-controlled
Jobar region. It is unfortunate that our Western partners
had nothing to say about this today. We would kindly
like to ask our partners to work with the people they
sponsor to make sure that they stop targeting Russian
diplomats.
We have not failed to notice the fact that the
humanitarian nature of the reports is being diluted.
Instead of an objective analysis of the humanitarian
situation, we are seeing calls for transferring the
Syria matter to the International Criminal Court and
the need for a discussion of the problem of assisting

17-1519815/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

a very questionable investigator mechanism. The
reports should paint a broader picture of the work
that helps to bring a peaceful life back. For example,
something should be said about demining, which is part
of a humanitarian action plan, and generally about the
efforts being made to normalize the situation in the
country. Also worth mentioning is the 2016 report of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
on Syria, which very clearly sets forth the country’s
needs in terms of making progress in its reconstruction
and describes how the United Nations can help and is
helping. Russia is one of the leading donors to UNDP
projects in Syria.
The approaches to the humanitarian situation in
Syria display a very serious methodological flaw. In
order to eliminate this flaw, one has to accept that the
issue of humanitarian assistance to Syria cannot be
reduced to the issue of blockages and hard-to-reach
regions. The reality is that most of the people who
need assistance live in areas that are controlled by the
Government. Special attention must be paid to regions
that have been liberated from fighters, in particular
those settlements where local truce agreements have
been reached. We cannot share the negative assessment
of this kind of practice. Those who criticize the practice
should not forget that as result of our efforts on local
truces, we have managed to save tens of thousands of
human lives. Furthermore, peaceful inhabitants are
returning to those regions.
The agenda is now focused on de-mining and on
ensuring that the infrastructure functions normally
and that social services and facilities are in place and
available. In order to improve the quality and volume
of humanitarian access, normal working contact
with Syrian authorities at various levels is needed, as
acknowledged by many United Nations personnel. We
have been very active to that end. However, Russia’s
capacity in this area is not unlimited, especially since
as can be seen in today’s meeting, we are not exactly
supported by everyone here. Others need to establish
normal working contacts with the Syrian Government.
We think that a special role could be played here by
the humanitarian troika of the Security Council since it
decided to work on this difficult matter.
The description of the incident that took place in
Khan Shaykhun cannot withstand scrutiny. The main
problem today is that neither the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons nor the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
16/21

30/05/2017

taken the steps necessary to carry out their mandate,
including by sending specialists to Khan Shaykoun
and the Shairat air base, even though we raised the
issue with them. Damascus is ready to work with them
but, despite the fact that it has been brought up, the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/445) does not say a
word about the issue.
On another note, the report says that the last route
into eastern Ghouta was closed in late April, but we
were told long ago that this region had been completely
blocked. The difficulties with delivering supplies to
Damascus suburbs have been intentionally exaggerated,
following the direction of fighters associated with
terrorist groups and non-governmental organizations
that are at their beck and call, including the infamous
White Helmets, in order to exert additional pressure on
the authorities in Damascus.
But the activities carried out by the White Helmets
are very well known to the United Nations and in the
region. It turns out, for example, that the the hospitals
and clinics that many non-governmental organizations
have claimed to have been destroyed are intact and
working. The Al-Wafidin corridor has allowed for the
provision of food supplies, which has caused the prices
for foodstuffs at local markets to drop considerably. It
is the constant clashes among illegal groups that are
hindering humanitarian activity, inflicting suffering on
innocent people.
How long will we have to wait before those who
support and train the Syrian armed opposition can knock
some sense into those people? We cannot help but be
worried by the fact that we are seeing a rising number
of victims among civilians in the areas controlled by the
United States-led opposition. If they promote fairness
and justice, why did they fail to mention that?
We have pointed out the illegal nature of these
operations on many occasions. They violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, which we
have strongly emphasized in many Security Council
resolutions. We cannot agree with the approach of some
of our partners to humanitarian situations in hot spots
of the Middle East. One set of ideas is applied when
considering Syria, a completely different set of ideas
when it comes to Iraq, and yet a third set for Yemen.
What does this mean? Does it mean that different kinds
of people live in Middle East? Are there three different
classes of citizens living there? Let us at least be honest.
17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

I must state in conclusion that regardless of the
tenor of our meetings, whether it is an acute polemic or
legendary diplomatic politeness, our Western partners
exploit these public meetings to make unjustified
accusations against us, which verges on insulting. The
only question we hear is: What should Russia do about
Syria? What we are doing is obvious, overt and known
to all. We constantly inform the Council about what
we are doing. Why do our colleagues not report to the
Security Council about what their countries are doing
to bring a political settlement closer?
We call once again on Council members to refrain
from the kind of fruitless and inappropriate rhetoric
whose rules Council members have flouted when
flinging unacceptable provocations on us and other
countries. We propose instead that we concentrate
on making specific contributions to ending the war
in Syria and assisting in its reconstruction. We stand
ready to work together there.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Uruguay.
Since we joined the Security Council last year, our
delegation has maintained that, as elected members
of the Council, it is our responsibility to provide our
opinion before the membership at all briefings. This is
why we are very pleased that, this afternoon, all the
other members of the Security Council chose to speak
in public about the situation in Syria. I must confess
that we were left with a bitter aftertaste when this
morning (see S/PV.7954), as we discussed Yemen — a
humanitarian tragedy that in terms of scale is of even
greater magnitude — only two delegations expressed
their opinion before the membership.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen
O’Brien for his comprehensive briefing, and we
recognize and thank him once again for his continued
efforts and those of his entire team deployed in the field
in difficult conditions, who risk their lives on a daily
basis to try to help the civilian population of Syria.
There is little left to say about the Syrian conflict
that has not been said previously in this Chamber.
Uruguay’s position has been clear and consistent since
we became elected members of the Council last year; if
members pay attention, they will recognize phrases and
expressions that have already been used on numerous
occasions in the past. However, our primary objective
is and must continue to be reaching a political solution,

S/PV.7955

which will make it possible to put an end to this crisis
and put a peaceful transition on track in Syria, one that
is negotiated by all Syrians and with the support of the
international community.
To that end, we trust in the good offices of Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in order to pursue the
rounds of intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva, which
will gradually make it possible to reach common points
to give shape to a new political chapter in Syria. We
believe that the Astana process is also critical as we seek
to reduce the levels of violence in the Syrian territory.
We support the guarantors’ efforts to consolidate the
ceasefire and gradually extend it to other parts of the
country. However, we are concerned that the United
Nations is not participating in this initiative, which
would provide guarantees of respect for essential
principles of international humanitarian law, such as the
prohibition of forced displacements and the freedom of
movement to enter and leave the so-called safe zones.
Of course, the political process and the end of
hostilities are only two of the steps to ensure that
the page is turned in Syria. The third and equally
important step is the humanitarian aspect. Despite
some improvements in access, we are still very far
away from an encouraging result, which would make it
possible to allieviate the suffering of the Syrian civilian
population. We must not forget the millions of refugees
and displaced people who sooner or later will have to
return to their homes or what is left of them. We continue
to call for immediate, sustained and unimpeded access
to all besieged and hard to reach areas. However, the
priority objective should be the lifting of all sieges,
which is unjustifiable in the twenty-first century.
For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria
and in any other conflict is an absolute priority. It is
immoral to distinguish between civilians because they
support one side or other another or because they are
located in a certain area controlled by one or another of
those parties. The provision of justice for the hundreds
of thousands of innocent victims of this conflict is
essential for lasting peace in Syria and for this country
and all its people to overcome the horrors of this war.
As long as we cannot ensure accountability for the
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, which have been committed by all
parties to the conflict since 2011, those responsible
will feel that they can continue committing them with
impunity. This applies both to Syria and Yemen.

17-1519817/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

That is why Uruguay supported the creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, and hopes that it will soon
be able to begin its work. We also support the request
of the Secretary-General for the situation in Syria to be
referred to the International Criminal Court. Similarly,
my delegation believes that the same thing should be
done with the situation in Yemen.
April was a particularly difficult month for Syrian
civilians, first with the chemical weapon attack in
Khan Shaykhun and a few days ago with the brutal
attack on civilians being evacuated in the framework
of the four towns agreement. We still do not know who
was behind both incidents, which were war crimes. We
trust that those reponsible will be quickly identified so
that they may be brought to justice. With regard to local
ceasefire agreements, we reiterate that any evacuation
that takes place must ensure the security of civilians,
the provision of humanitarian assistance and create the
conditions for people who wish do so to return to their
homes as quickly as possible.
One year after the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), we continue to witness the destruction of
hospitals and health centers in Syria. It is outrageous
that the parties have flouted its provisions, depriving
thousands of people of the right to medical care and
leading to hundreds of victims among medical and
health-care staff. This practice is repeated in schools,
markets and all kinds of civilian infrastructure. We
condemn these attacks in Syria, Yemen and wherever
they may take place. They are war crimes and those
responsible must be identified and brought to justice.
In conclusion, Uruguay affirms that the full and
effective implementation of some measures, such as
the consolidation of the cessation of hostilities, the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, and
the easing of bureaucratic processes for humanitarian
access, which can make a great difference in the life
of the Syrian people for whom the Council has been
demanding concrete action to be taken on a monthly
basis. We trust that, as on previous occasions, the
Council can overcome its differences and take its
responsibility for international peace and security.

18/21

30/05/2017

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I hope that you, Mr. President, will be patient
and listen to our comments on the briefing by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
The Government of my country has considered the
thirty-ninth monthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/445). It expresses its concern and regret over
the approach of the report’s authors, which in many
aspects reflects the positions of certain States, parties
and Governments that deliberately distort reality and
deny the basic causes for the situation and humanitarian
crisis in Syria, and the emergence and spread of armed
terrorist groups with the support, financing and
guidance of known Governments.
These Governments — some of which,
unfortunately, are permanent members of the Security
Council — impose unilateral economic measures
against the Syrian people in order to bring pressure
to bear on the people by denying them various basic
resources necessary for a decent life. In this regard, I
note that this morning the Government of my country
has addressed two identical letters to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council
containing its detailed response to the report.
The Government of my country finds it strange
that the authors of the report, who should focus on
humanitarian issues, continue to include issues that
have nothing to do with humanitarian affairs and do
not reflect the reality on the ground. Allow me to share
some key observations of the Syrian Government on
some of this erroneous information.
The authors of the report insist on sending political
messages adopted by the Governments of certain
countries. They accuse the Syrian Government of laying
siege to areas of Syria. The entire Syrian people is under
siege and exhausted on both the living humanitarian
levels, due to the unilateral economic measures imposed
by the Governments of certain Member States — led
by the United States and the European Union — that
shed crocodile tears and bemoan the situation of the
Syrian people.

17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

As for the areas that the United Nations has
classified as under siege, the Organization is operating
under erroneous information. Rather, armed terrorist
groups that lay siege to those areas use civilians as
human shields and deny them the humanitarian aid they
are sent. Those groups sell humanitarian provisions
at exorbitant prices — in Aleppo, for example. The
report uses the term “forced displacement” to describe
national reconciliation measures being implemented
in large swaths of Syria — a dangerous posture that
reflects the positions of Governments that continue to
insist on covering for and protecting armed terrorist
groups in Syria. Those national reconciliation measures
have restored security, stability and normalcy to many
Syrian towns and cities. In that regard, we stress that
the reconciliation efforts are transparent operations
through which the Government offers armed groups
the option to lay down their weapons and regularize
their status without any legal charges brought against
them or they can relocate to another area. That does
not apply to civilians, of course, who can go back to
their daily lives after the armed groups leave. We do not
yet know why some senior officials of the Secretariat
feel concerned about Syrians regaining their homes,
security and normal lives.
My Government regrets that the authors of the
report have adopted, fully and in a biased way, the
American version regarding the use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun. The Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly made clear
its principled position rejecting the use of chemical
weapons or toxic chemicals, which is considered to be
a crime against humanity and an immoral, heinous act
that cannot be justified in any circumstance for any
reason or anywhere. We reiterate that we have not used
chemical materials in our war against terrorism. The
incident in Khan Shaykhun was contrived by terrorist
groups, led by the Al-Nusrah Front, with the guidance
and support of the Governments of some States, in order
for Syria to take the blame for the use of such weapons.
The authors of the report insist on remaining
silent on the catastrophic consequences of the illegal
air strikes carried out by the self-styled international
coalition. Those strikes have targeted infrastructure
such as dams, bridges, hospitals, schools and oil
facilities. Moreover, it is well known in the Council
and to world public opinion, that such arbitrary strikes
in northern and eastern Syria have claimed dozens
of innocent civilian victims. We also regret that the

S/PV.7955

Secretariat continuously promotes the actions of that
coalition and deliberately turns a blind eye to the illegal
nature of the coalition and the fact that it is violating
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The coalition was not created at the request of the
Syrian Government or pursuant to a Security Council
resolution.
The authors of the report continuously try to justify
the aggression of the Turkish military regime — which
backs some armed terrorist groups in Syria — against
the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is
therefore quite odd that the report states that Turkey’s
closing of the Nusaybin/Qamishli border crossing
is but temporary and for security reasons, whereas
in fact the closure began in December 2015 and only
seeks to increase the suffering of the population of the
Hasakah governorate.
The Government of Syria has to date provided its
people with around 75 per cent of its humanitarian
needs. We reaffirm our steadfast policy to ensure the
provision of humanitarian aid and to meet the needs of
Syrian citizens everywhere, without any discrimination.
Thus, we have welcomed the proposal put forward by
the United Nations and the Government of Japan to
facilitate regular monthly humanitarian convoys.
I would also like to make certain observations on
the humanitarian situation.
First of all, my Government again stresses the
obligation of the United Nations to coordinate with it,
in a spirit of partnership and cooperation, all aspects
of the humanitarian efforts with Syria. We must not
submit to the political agendas of certain Member
States or to the demands and allegations of other actors,
which the authors of the report erroneously identify as
“local authorities”.
Secondly, the authors of the report must hold the
Al-Nusrah Front terrorist group and its allied armed
terrorist groups responsible for blocking humanitarian
aid because those groups target peaceful residential
areas, block vital roads, besiege several locations and
use civilians as human shields.
Thirdly, the Syrian Government rejects the
allegations and accusations levelled against it by
the authors of the report concerning procedural
and logistical measures concerning the delivery of
humanitarian aid to unstable zones. We reaffirm that
we comply with all agreements on the provision of

17-1519819/21

S/PV.7955

The situation in the Middle East

aid, including medical supplies, to civilians in need.
Moreover, we want to ensure accuracy in determining
the number of people who receive that aid, and that the
supplies do not end up in terrorist hands. Additionally,
the Syrian Government has facilitated the delivery of
more than 15 humanitarian convoys in April and May,
in keeping with the monthly humanitarian convey
agreement. We will continue to make efforts to ensure
that more convoys can reach those zones.
Fourthly, the authors of the report do not address
the failures of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Syria, which deliberately
delays the operations of the convoys, allows the
delivery of aid to some zones on a monthly basis to the
exclusion of others, and refuses humanitarian access to
zones requested by the Syrian Government. Moreover,
the Office does not provide accurate numbers of the
convoys that are being organized every month in
order to underplay the role and efforts of the Syrian
Government. Additionally, the Office and the authors
of the report purposefully avoid mentioning the joint
International Committee of the Red Cross-Syrian Arab
Red Crescent convoys, and they include neither the
actual numbers of convoys being organised based on
prior approvals, nor the number of people benefiting
from them.
Fifthly, the authors of the report cite the tragedy
of civilians who fled Foah and Kafraya in a narrative
way that it is far from describing the scale of that crime,
despite the fact that the terrorist bombing of their
buses in the Rashidin area in Aleppo city on 15 April
claimed the lives of dozens of women and children and
destroyed dozens of ambulances and buses that could
not be replaced due to the economic siege imposed by
Governments of certain Member States upon Syria.
Sixthly, the report continues to promote crossborder aid, most of which falls into the hands of the
terrorist groups that are rampant in the areas, where
such aid arrives.
The people of Syria continue to be the victims of
the lies and hypocrisy within the Security Council
espoused by the same group of States that do not wish
to see an end to the crisis in Syria but want to continue
to manage and invest in terrorism and in armed
terrorist groups and impose an economic blockade on
the Syrian people.

20/21

30/05/2017

I now address my comments to the representative
of the United States, who claimed earlier today that she
was speaking on behalf of a Syrian refugee in Turkey. I
speak here on behalf of millions of Syrians inside and
outside Syria, who call on the Governments f France,
the United States and the United Kingdom and on the
Governments of regimes that support terrorism in
Syria to stop exploiting the Syrian crisis to achieve
their political schemes at the expense of the Syrians’
interests. I call on them to lift the economic blockade
on the Syrian people and to end air strikes on cities,
the destruction of infrastructure and the targeting of
civilians under the pretext of combating Da’esh, and
to stop making up fictitious stories that are similar to
cheap Hollywood movies.
I remind the United States representative and her
colleague from France that the media in their two
countries have questioned the fabricated evidence
provided by the two countries on about the situation in
Sednaya and Khan Shaykhun, yet no one has questioned
the fact that the aircraft of the so-called international
coalition kill hundreds of innocent civilians in Syria
and Iraq.
Finally, my country, Syria, will continue to play a
constructive role to ensure that the Astana and Geneva
meetings are successful, in the context of its involvement
in any genuine effort to put an end to the blood bath in
Syria and to terrorism, and that will help us to find a
political solution, on the basis of intra-Syrian dialogue,
led by the Syrian people, without foreign interference
or preconditions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Since this is the final meeting under the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council, I would first like
to thank my colleagues at the Permanent Mission of
Uruguay to the United Nations. Without their support,
we would not have been able to achieve so much
during our presidency. It is the unseen workers at
the permanent missions who make it possible for the
Permanent Representatives and the Deputy Permanent
Representatives to conduct their work. They provide
much needed support, day after day, throughout the year,
but in particular when a country holds the presidency
of the Council. I sincerely thank and acknowledge
them all.

17-15198

30/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, I would like to thank all of the Permanent
Representatives present and their delegations for
having made our work as easy as possible this month.
I would also like to thank the Council secretariat for
the technical and organizational support they continue
to provide. I also thank the security personnel, whom
we do not see but who nonetheless are part of our work.
I would like to thank the sound engineers and all of
the staff working in the Chamber and the consultations
room. Last but far from least, I would like to thank

S/PV.7955

our interpreters and translators, who are absolutely
indispensable to our work.
I know that I speak on behalf of the entire Security
Council in wishing the best of luck to the Plurinational
State of Bolivia when it assumes the presidency of the
Council in June.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

17-1519821/21
