1985 in the war between the two countries, as concluded in the report of the medical specialist appointed by the Secretary-General. 32
"'They recall the statement of 30 March 1984 by
the President of the Security Council on behalf of
the members. 33 They strongly condemn the renewed
use of chemical weapons in the conflict and any
possible future use of such weapons. They again
urge the strict observance of the Geneva Protocol of
1925, 34 according to which the use in war of
chemical weapons is prohibited and has been justly
condemned by the world community.
"'The members of the Council condemn all violations of international humanitarian law and urge

both parties to observe the generally recognized
principles and rules of international humanitarian
law which are applicable to armed conflicts and
their obligations under international conventions
designed to prevent or alleviate the human suffering
of warfare. At the same time, they urge a cessation
of hostilities and remain convinced that a prompt,
comprehensive, just and honourable settlement acceptable to both sides is essential and in the interest
of international peace and security.
"'The members of the council express their full
appreciation and support to the Secretary-General
for his report contained in document S/ 17097.
They are ready to issue at the appropriate moment
an invitation to both parties to take part in a renewed
examination of all aspects of the conflict. They call
on the parties to co-operate with the Security Council and with the Secretary-General in their efforts to
restore peace to the peoples of Iran and Iraq."'

32 Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement /or April, May and June 1985, document S/17127 and Add.I.
33 See Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1984,

p. 10.
34 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138,

p. 65.

THE QUESTION OF SOUTH AFRICA,'

the uprootings, relocation and denationalization of the
indigenous African people,
Noting with deep concern the aggravation of the situation in South Africa resulting from repeated killings of
defenceless opponents of apartheid in various townships
all over South Africa and, most recently, the killing of
African demonstrators against forced removals at
Crossroads,
Gravely concerned by the arbitrary arrests of
members of the United Democratic Front and other
mass organizations opposed to the apartheid regime,
Deeply concerned by the preferment of charges of
"high treason" on Mrs. Albertina Sisulu, Mr. Archie
Gumede, Mr. George Sewpershad, Mr. M. J. Naidoo,
the Reverend Frank Chikana, Professor Ismael Mohammed, Mr. Mewa Ramgobin, Mr. Cassim Saloojee, Mr.
Paul David, Mr. Essop Jasset, Mr. Curtis Nkondo,
Mr .Aubrey Mokoena, Mr. Thomazile Qweta, Mr. Sisa
Njikelana, Mr. Sam Kikine and Mr. Isaac Ngcobo, officials of the United Democratic Front and other opponents of apartheid for their participation in the nonviolent campaign for a united non-racial and democratic
South Africa,
A ware that racist South Africa's intensified repression
and charges of "high treason" against leading opponents
of apartheid constitute an effort further to entrench
racist minority rule,
Concerned that repression further undermines the
possibilities of a peaceful solution of the South African
conflict,
Concerned over racist South Africa's policy of the
uprooting, denationalization and dispossession of three

Decisions

At its 2571st meeting, on 8 March 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Democratic
Yemen, Guinea, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania and Viet
Nam to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled "The question of South Africa: letter
dated 28 February 1985 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16991)". 36

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to the Acting Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid.

Resolution 560 (1985)
of 12 March 1985

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 473 (1980), 554 (1984) and
556 (1984), which, inter a/ia, demanded the cessation of
35 Ri:5<?lutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the
c~~Cll m 19~7. 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983 and 1984.

See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement I or January, February and March l 985.

7

African Republic, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic and Zaire
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

and a half million indigenous African people to date,
thus swelling the ranks of the other millions already
doomed .to permanent unemployment and starvation,
Noting with indignation that South Africa's policy of
bantustanization is also aimed at the creation of internal
bases for the fomenting of fratricidal conflict,
1. Strongly condemns the Pretoria regime for the
killing of defenceless African people protesting against
their forced removal from Crossroads and other places;
2. Strongly condemns the arbitrary arrests by the
Pretoria regime of members of the United Democratic
Front and other mass organizations opposed to South
Africa's policy of apartheid;
3. Calls upon the Pretoria regime to release unconditionally and immediately all political prisoners and detainees, including Nelson Mandela and all other black
leaders with whom it must deal in any meaningful
discussion of the future of the country;
4. Also calls upon the Pretoria regime to withdraw
the charges of "high treason" instituted against the
United Democratic Front officials, and calls for their
immediate and unconditional release;
S. Commends the massive united resistance of the
oppressed people of South Africa against apartheid, and
reaffirms the legitimacy of their struggle for a united,
non-racial and democratic South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
7. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

At its 2602nd meeting, on 26 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Yugoslavia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Resolution 569 (1985)
of 26 July 1985

The Security Council,
Deeply concerned at the worsening of the situation in
South Africa and at the continuance of the human suffering that the apartheid system, which the Council
strongly condemns, is causing in that country,
Outraged at the repression, and condemning the arbitrary arrests of hundreds of persons,
Considering that the imposition of the state of
emergency in thirty-six districts of the Republic of South
Africa constitutes a grave deterioration of the situation
in that country,
Considering as totally unacceptable the practice by
the South African Government of detention without
trial and of forcible removal, as well as the discriminatory legislation in force,
Acknowledging the legitimacy of the aspirations of
the South African population as a whole to benefit from
all civil and political rights and to establish a united nonracial and democratic society,
Acknowledging further that the very cause of the
situation in South Africa lies in the policy of apartheid
and the practices of the South African Government,
1. Strongly condemns the apartheid system and all
the policies and practices deriving therefrom;
2. Strongly condemns the mass arrests and detentions recently carried out by the Pretoria Government
and the murders which have been committed;
3. Strongly condemns the establishment of the state
of emergency in the thirty-six districts in which it has
been imposed and demands that it be lifted immediately;
4. Calls upon the South African Government to set
free immediately and unconditionally all political prisoners and detainees, first of all, Mr. Nelson Mandela;
5. Reaffirms that only the total elimination of apartheid and the establishment in South Africa of a free,
united and democratic society on the basis of universal
suffrage can lead to a solution;
6. Urges States Members of the United Nations to
adopt measures against South Africa, such as the
following:
(a) Suspension of all new investment in South
Africa;
(b) Prohibition of the sale of krugerrands and all
other coins minted in South Africa;

Adopted unanimously at the
2574th meeting.

Decisions

At its 2600th meeting, on 25 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Cuba, Kenya,
Mali and South Africa to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the item entitled:
"The question of South Africa:
"Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17351); 11
"Letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mali to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/ 17356)". 37

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid.

At its 2601st meeting, on 26 July 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the Central
37 Ibid., Supplement for July, August and September 1985.

8
