S/PV.8179

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8179

th meeting
Tuesday, 13 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skau
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04088 (E)
*1804088*

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh
and Myanmar to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to participate in
this meeting.
Mr. Grandi is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: We are discussing the crisis in
Myanmar in this Chamber for the first time in 2018. It
is now five months since the start of the violence that
has forced 688,000 Rohingya across the border, and the
outflow of people continues, although at a lower rate.
As of 5 February, between 1,000 and 1,200 people were
reportedly waiting on a beach in Maungdaw, planning
to leave for Bangladesh. Since the last briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Feltman on 12 December
2017 (see S/PV.8133), the General Assembly adopted
resolution 72/248 on the human rights situation in
Myanmar by vote.
The Secretary-General has laid out three priorities
that provide an important framework for assessing the
situation. Regrettably, while there has been certain
progress, not all have been implemented thus far.
First, we need to end the violence and improve
the security situation. Although large-scale acts
of violence have subsided, concerns about threats
and intimidation against the remaining Rohingya
population from Bamar and Rakhine communities, as
well as from militia and security forces in Rakhine
state, persist. Bamar-Rakhine tensions remain high,
further fuelled by incidents, such as a clash between the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army and the military on
7 January, or the incident in Mrauk U on 16 January, in
which police shot and killed seven Rakhine nationalist
2/27

13/02/2018

protestors, and later imprisoned two noted Rakhine
leaders. We remain concerned about the protection of
future returnees.
On 14 November 2017, the Government of Myanmar
reportedly transmitted to the Bangladesh authorities
a list of 1,300 of what it called suspected terrorists
and asked for their extradition. The Government also
published in the official newspaper the names and
photos of hundreds of suspected terrorists. These steps
have raised questions about due process and possible
intimidation of potential returnees.
Secondly, humanitarian access must be secured
immediately in the affected areas of Rakhine. Such
access continues to be severely curtailed. The majority
of humanitarian organizations that previously worked
in Rakhine are simply not allowed to enter the area.
A handful of organizations have been given travel
authorizations, but in a short-term and unpredictable
manner that impedes the systematic delivery of
assistance. The United Nations does not have sufficient
access to make a meaningful assessment of the
humanitarian or human rights situation. Thus, there is
little sense of whether the full range of humanitarian
needs of the population is being met and whether
the human rights of all people of the region are
being protected.
Thirdly, we must ensure the voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their places of origin
or choice. Let me acknowledge the fact that the
Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar signed a
memorandum of understanding and established a joint
working group that reached an agreement on 16 January
on a number of issues in order to facilitate the return
process. It is also important to note that Myanmar has
made progress in its logistical preparations to receive
returning refugees.
On the issues related to repatriation, I will defer
to High Commissioner Grandi to provide more details.
The Secretary-General has underlined the
importance of implementing the recommendations of
the Rakhine Advisory Commission as a key element
of creating conditions for a safe and dignified return.
The Government has taken some high-level steps to
advance this process, including convening an advisory
board, led by Mr. Surakiart Sathirathai and comprising
distinguished national and international participants.
At the end of its deliberations, the board offered
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

preliminary recommendations to the Implementation
Committee, including the involvement of United
Nations an early stage, full humanitarian access as
soon as possible, wider media access and the formation
of an independent fact-finding commission.
In this context, I wish to reiterate that we urge
the Government to cooperate with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and all United
Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular the
fact-finding mission mandated by the Human Rights
Council, and with the Special Rapporteur for Human
Rights in Myanmar. It is important that the work
of United Nations human rights mechanisms not be
undermined by other mechanisms.
As suggested by the final report of the Rakhine
Advisory Commission, we urge the Government to take
a leadership role in promoting intercommunal cohesion,
create an environment conducive to dialogue, foster the
values of tolerance and respect for basic human rights
between Rakhine and Rohingya communities, and
accelerate and align the citizenship verification process
in alignment with international standards and treaties.
Overall, addressing the root causes is fundamental
to ensuring a durable and genuine solution to this
crisis. We have consistently said that the problem is
statelessness. This must be addressed.
In line with the Council’s presidential statement
of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22), the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, made her first official visit to
Myanmar from 14 to 17 December 2017 to address
reports of conflict-related sexual violence. In her
consultations, she advocated for the swift adoption of
a joint communiqué of the Government of Myanmar
and the United Nations on the prevention and response
to conflict-related sexual violence, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013).
While we discuss Rakhine, we also take this
opportunity to note other developments in Myanmar,
in particular the ongoing fighting as well as the
peacemaking efforts between the Government and
diverse ethnic armed organizations. We are concerned
that fighting in Kachin and northern Shan states has
escalated in recent months. This has cast a shadow
on peace negotiations and provoked a number of
serious human rights and humanitarian concerns.
Such concerns include the situation in Tanai, Kachin,
where many civilians have been killed or injured and

S/PV. 8179

as many as 5,000 civilians are reportedly unable to
leave the area, where fighting is ongoing. And as in
Rakhine state, the Government has severely restricted
humanitarian access in many of the most critical areas.
The United Nations is therefore unable to verify the
numbers of people affected.
On a more positive note, two ethnic armed
organizations, the New Mon State Party and the Lahu
Democratic Union, signed the Nationwide Ceasefire
Agreement in Nay Pyi Taw today. The signing is the
first of its kind for the ruling National League for
Democracy Government and brings the total number
of ethnic armed groups that have signed the Agreement
to 10 out of 16.
Finally, I would like to address the unfortunate
arrest of two Reuters journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw
Soe Oo. The Secretary-General has called in clear
terms for the release of these journalists and urged the
authorities to respect the right to freedom of expression
and information. Allow me to reiterate those calls here
today. The ability to exercise their right to freedom of
expression and information is a barometer for respect for
human rights more broadly. Reuters has now published
the story these journalists were working on — a deeply
disturbing account of the execution of 10 Rohingya
men in the village of Inn Din, Maungdaw, in northern
Rakhine state. The Associated Press has also published
a report of five mass graves in Gudar Pyin village in
Buthidaung. These and other shocking reports of grave
abuses demand our attention and action for the sake of
lasting peace and justice.
The President: I thank the Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: Abdallah is a father of eight from
Buthidaung, in the northern part of Myanmar’s Rakhine
state. When he fled to Bangladesh in September last
year he became a refugee for the third time. The first
time was in 1978, when he came to Bangladesh as a
young boy, and the second was in 1991. That second
time he remained for three years and then, anxious
to recover his home and his four acres of land, he
returned to Myanmar as part of an organized voluntary
repatriation operation.
Back home, he and his family started to rebuild
their lives. They had seven cows and were able to
make a living. But, he says, around two years after
his return, “hope started to fade away”. Forced

18-040883/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

labour, confiscation of crops and cattle and relentless
incremental restrictions on their freedom of movement,
their right to worship and their access to livelihoods
constrained their existence.
Last year his village was attacked. Houses were
burned and others in his community, including his
own nephew, were shot dead. Hiding nearby, he saw
his own his own home torched. He had no choice but
to flee again. And he is once again living in a flimsy
shelter in Kutupalong refugee settlement, together with
his family, despairing at the prospect of never being
able to build a safe and stable life. “My decision to
return was wrong”, he said recently. “That is why we
are suffering now.”
It has been almost six months, as we heard, since
the current rapid and chaotic outflow of more than
688,000 refugees from Myanmar to Bangladesh began,
driven by violence and destruction, following decades
of repression and exclusion. That movement has now
been significantly reduced, but it still continues.
Already this month, some 1,500 Rohingya refugees
have arrived in Bangladesh. The Government and the
people of Bangladesh continue to receive refugees and
provide them with protection and support. For this, they
are to be deeply commended.
With reports of insecurity continuing, as we heard
from the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, it is critical that the border remains open and
that those still fleeing are able to reach safety. The
Government of Bangladesh, together with highlyskilled national and local organizations, the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies with solid
donor support, has mounted an impressive response.
Yet conditions remain overcrowded and precarious
for many, including for host communities. Disease
outbreaks, including diphtheria, have been met with
decisive action but remain a significant risk.
We are now in a race against time as a major new
emergency looms. The monsoon season will start in
March. We estimate that more than 100,000 refugees
are living in areas prone to flooding or landslides.
Tens of thousands of particularly vulnerable refugees
must be urgently relocated. Their lives are at grave
risk. The foundation of existing shelters must be
strengthened; bridges built and reinforced and new land
found and made ready. The Government is steering a
massive emergency preparedness effort. Nonetheless,
international support must be stepped up to avert a
4/27

13/02/2018

catastrophe. The Kutupalong area in Cox’s Bazar is now
the largest refugee settlement in the world, with its own
character, economy and emerging social structures.
As we have repeatedly stated, resolving the crisis
means finding solutions inside Myanmar. However,
while they are pursued — as they must be — significant
support will be required in Bangladesh. Humanitarian
action and funding must be sustained but longer-term
support will also be required to help the Government
reinforce local infrastructure and economy and ensure
access to opportunities for refugees and the communities
hosting them. Education and opportunities to develop
skills and earn an income will be critical in order to
avoid the deep despair that can set in when refugees are
abandoned on the margins of societies. We must ensure
that young people retain a vision of a future and that
the ground is laid for eventual voluntary return. Failure
to do that will inevitably lead to disillusionment and
radicalization. It will also expose refugees to protection
risks, including sexual and gender-based violence,
trafficking and other forms of abuse and exploitation.
The causes of the crisis originate in Myanmar, and
a genuine search for solutions must finally start. At the
heart of it all is the restoration of rights, including the
right of refugees to return home voluntarily, and in safe
and dignified conditions. Let me be clear. Conditions
are not yet conducive to the voluntary repatriation of
Rohingya refugees. The causes of their flight have not
been addressed, and we have yet to see substantive
progress on addressing the exclusion and denial of
rights that has deepened in recent decades, rooted in
their lack of citizenship. But preserving the right of
return and pursuing the conditions that will enable it
to be exercised must remain a central priority. For that
reason, I welcome the dialogue between the Government
of Bangladesh and the Government of the Union of
Myanmar on the voluntary repatriation of refugees,
and the commitment to international standards on the
voluntary, safe and dignified return, setf out in the
arrangement agreed between them in November 2017.
In line with my mandate to support Governments to
pursue solutions for refugees, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has extended an offer of support to both Governments,
including by participating in the joint working group
established for its implementation. The framework
for return should eventually be defined in a tripartite
agreement among the two Governments and UNHCR.
Our offer of support remains open.
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

The construction of infrastructure to support
the logistics of return is important but should not be
confused with the establishment of conditions conducive
to voluntary repatriation. An end to violence and the
destruction of property, and granting humanitarian
access throughout Rakhine state — as called for by the
Secretary-General — are critical, basic steps.
Humanitarian access, as the Council has heard,
remains extremely restricted. UNHCR has not had
access to affected areas of the northern part of Rakhine
state, beyond Maungdaw town, since August 2017, and
our access in central Rakhine has also been curtailed.
UNHCR presence and access throughout the state are
essential to monitor protection conditions, provide
independent information to refugees, and accompany
returns as and when they take place. Refugees must
be able to return to a place of their choice, including
the location where they previously resided. Temporary
arrangements should be avoided. As we have seen in
Myanmar and elsewhere, they have a tendency to
persist for considerably longer than envisaged, and to
take on a permanent character.
The recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State are an important blueprint for a
peaceful and inclusive future, and, therefore, for the
sustainable return of refugees. I fully endorse the twotrack approach envisaged in the report: the first focused
on access to citizenship and the restoration of rights for
the Rohingya, including freedom of movement, access
to education and basic services, and to livelihoods;
and the second on inclusive development aimed at
improving the condition of all communities in Rakhine
state, and on fostering peaceful co-existence.
Refugees must determine the timing and
pace of returns; building their confidence is
crucial. Implementing the Advisory Commission’s
recommendations related to central Rakhine would be
a concrete first step. There, around 120,000 internally
displaced people, mainly Rohingya driven from
their homes by intercommunal violence, are now in
their sixth year of confined encampment. Granting
freedom of movement, allowing them to return home
and fast-tracking the confirmation of their citizenship
would send a strong signal to refugees in Bangladesh
that Myanmar is genuinely committed to taking
responsibility for their protection and well-being, and
to pursuing lasting solutions. As in the past, UNHCR
stands ready to work the Government of Myanmar in
those efforts, by providing technical advice and support

S/PV. 8179

on securing solutions for the internally displaced,
voluntary repatriation, and resolving statelessness.
Addressing the root causes of the appalling violence
and systemic discrimination that has driven hundreds
of thousands from their homes repeatedly over decades,
and securing solutions to the current crisis will require
substantial support to both Myanmar and Bangladesh.
International political engagement, technical expertise
and financial resources will be needed on both sides
of the border, including for humanitarian and targeted
development activities. Preferential trade arrangements,
labour and migration pathways, innovative financing,
enhanced national partnerships and expanded regional
cooperation should also play a critical role. If solutions
are successfully pursued, they have the potential to
yield significant dividends across the wider region,
while helping to prevent extremism, foster stability and
spur economic development.
Despite all that they have endured, Abdullah and
his family are still holding on to a vision of a future
back in Myanmar. They say:
“We want to go back but we want the United
Nations to accompany us and provide security.
We want to go to the village we come from — the
same place. We want our belongings and our land.
We want our right to move around freely like
other citizens.”
That call must be heeded. It is time to put an end to the
repeated, devastating cycle of violence, displacement
and statelessness to invest in tangible, substantial
measures that will start to overcome the profound
exclusion that Abdullah and the rest of the Rohingya
community have endured for far too long. It is the
responsibility of the Government of the Union of
Myanmar, but international engagement and support
are key to making it happen.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Grandi
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča and High Commissioner
Grandi for their briefings.
This weekend the United Kingdom’s Foreign
Secretary, Boris Johnson, visit Cox’s Bazar, where he
met some of the almost 1 million Rohingya refugees

18-040885/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

enduring the difficult living conditions that we have
heard about today. Visiting northern Rakhine, he saw
with his own eyes the horror of what has happened
there. When he met Daw Aung San Suu Kyi on Sunday,
the Foreign Secretary said that there needed to be the
right conditions created in Rakhine that made it safe
for Rohingya refugees to return home free from fear
and in the knowledge that their basic rights would be
protected and upheld.
The Council stated last November that the Rohingya
refugees must be allowed to return to their homes
safely, voluntarily and in conditions of human dignity.
The United Kingdom believes that the Council has a
duty to ensure that those words are matched by action.
We should be clear on three things. We should be
clear on why refugees fled Rakhine in the first place,
indeed why they continue to do so; we should be clear
that the conditions in Rakhine today are not yet suitable
for informed, safe, voluntary and dignified returns; and
we should be clear about what needs to be done now.
The Rohingya refugees fleeing Rakhine have
suffered the most appalling violence: rape, murder,
the burning of their villages. In December, Special
Representative Pramila Patten briefed us on the horrific
sexual atrocities allegedly committed by the Burmese
security forces (see S/PV.8133). More details emerged
last week of specific atrocities allegedly committed
by Burmese security forces at Gu Dar Pyin and Inn
Din villages. Even now Rohingyas still flee forced
starvation and continued human rights violations. As
many of us have said, this is ethnic cleansing.
We welcome the Burmese Government’s
willingness to enter into agreements in Bangladesh
and the initial preparations that it has made for returns.
Much of this is in response to the Council’s focus on
the crisis. But the United Kingdom believes that the
conditions in Rakhine do not yet allow for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees.
We must be clear on the way forward. Last
November’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22)
remains the guiding frame set by the Security Council
for the actions that need to be taken. I want to highlight
four in particular.
First, both Myanmar and Bangladesh must
cooperate fully with the United Nations. We welcome
Bangladesh’s initial engagement with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
6/27

13/02/2018

(UNHCR), which now needs to be fully involved in the
returns process, ideally through a tripartite agreement.
Only UNHCR has the expertise to handle returns on the
scale and give confidence to refugees. It is also essential
that Myanmar allow the United Nations agencies to
provide humanitarian support for all its peoples.
Secondly, the parties should take concrete steps
to ensure that refugees will be able to return home
on a voluntary basis and with access to accurate
information. Refugees should not be sent to internment
camps, and Myanmar must set out how its restitution
of property and livelihoods will occur. Women and
girls have suffered sexual and gender-based violence
and face specific risks. They must be represented in
any decision-making process and their views given
special consideration.
Dismantling the camps for internally displaced
persons that have existed in central Rakhine since 2012
and supporting their inhabitants in returning home
would be a positive confidence-building measure.
Again, we believe that UNHCR is the only agency with
the necessary expertise and moral authority.
Thirdly, Myanmar must ensure the safety of all
communities in Rakhine. This means an immediate
halt to violence and human rights violations and steps
to reduce intercommunal tensions. It also means giving
refugees confidence that those who have committed
crimes will be brought to justice through an open and
transparent accountability process.
Instead, we have seen the arrest of two Reuters
journalists who reported on the Inn Din massacre and
the denial of access to United Nations-mandated human
rights bodies. The United Kingdom calls for the release
of the Reuters journalist and calls for the Burmese
Government’s full cooperation with the United Nations
fact-finding mission, the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Fourthly, Myanmar must demonstrate progress in
implementing the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State recommendations. These recommendations
continue to provide a blueprint for a more peaceful
and prosperous future for all communities in Rakhine.
Crucially, they address civil and political rights,
including pathways for the Rohingya to receive
full Burmese citizenship as well as addressing
socioeconomic development. Genuine progress in
implementation would demonstrate that the Burmese
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

Government is sincere about offering Rohingya
refugees a viable future to return to.
Before I conclude, I want to once more pay tribute
to Bangladesh for hosting the Rohingya community as
they fled in panic for their lives. But while they remain,
Bangladesh, supported by all of us in the international
community, must protect refugees and provide for their
needs. This includes getting children to school, helping
men and women earn livelihoods, and providing
support to victims of sexual violence. The humanitarian
agencies need to deliver services and prepare camps for
the monsoon season.
The United Kingdom stands with Bangladesh.
We have contributed £59 million in assistance. We
urge the international community to do more to
support Bangladesh as it helps these refugees and the
communities that host them.
The world watched in horror as the violence in
Rakhine forced the Rohingya to flee. The Council has
played a vital role in shining a spotlight on the situation
and encouraging action by the authorities on the
ground. We must not turn away or become distracted.
We ourselves should stand ready to visit, and we must
be ready to take further action.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset warmly to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi,
for their particularly illuminating briefings and for
their commitment.
The situation of the Rohingya in Rakhine state
remains a source of serious concern for France, and
I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this important
exchange of views.
In that context, I should like to share with the
Council three lines of thinking.
The first area relates to the central question of
the return of the hundreds of thousands of refugees
currently in Bangladesh. The considerable efforts
undertaken by Bangladesh, which is hosting almost a
million refugees, must be commended and supported
by the international community. The agreement of
23 November last between Burma and Bangladesh on
the return of refugees is a first step towards the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of Rohingya refugees to
their homes when conditions so permit.

S/PV. 8179

Here we must acknowledge that the conditions for
such a return have not been met and that major progress
remains to be made. It is crucial in particular that the
High Commissioner for Refugees be fully involved in
these discussions as part of a tripartite agreement with
Burma and Bangladesh and that it be able to assist both
countries in the implementation of the return process
in accordance with international standards. Moreover,
it is vital that measures to be taken in Rakhine to
promote reconstruction, reconciliation and respect for
human rights, as recommended in the report of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Mr. Kofi Annan.
Secondly, I should like to stress the need to
strengthen our commitment to and our collective
pressure for the full implementation of the demands
made by the Council in its presidential statement of
6 November last (S/PRST/2017/22). If those demands
are effectively implemented, they will contribute
to creating the conditions for a safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees.
The first requirement was to put an end to the
violence in Rakhine. While it must be recognized that
the level of violence has decreased recently, hundreds
of Rohingya continue to flee Burma to Bangladesh,
and those who have remained there are still subjected
to severe discrimination and intimidation. We continue
to receive disturbing reports about the appalling living
conditions of those who remain. Many villages have
been razed and burned to the ground. Protecting the
population must therefore remain our priority.
The second significant demand from the
international community is to ensure safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors. While the
International Committee of the Red Cross and, to a
lesser extent, the World Food Programme today have
access to Rakhine, it is far from sufficient to identify
and respond to all humanitarian needs.
A third essential element of the presidential
statement adopted on 6 November concerns violations of
human rights. We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly last December of the resolution on human
rights in Burma (General Assembly resolution 72/248)
and call for its full implementation. We condemn the
serious human rights violations that continue to be
committed in Burma, particularly in Rakhine.
A few days ago, a documented Reuters investigation
uncovered unacceptable atrocities in a Rohingya

18-040887/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

village — atrocities that could amount to crimes
against humanity. The two journalists conducting the
investigation are currently detained. We call for the
immediate release, just as we reiterate our commitment
to the freedom of the press and the protection of
journalists, who must be able to exercise their profession
freely, without fear of being intimidated or arrested.
Respect for those freedoms is one of the foundations of
any democratic society.
It is essential to shed light on human rights violations
and to combat impunity. In that regard, we call on the
Burmese authorities to cooperate with human rights
actors, including the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on Myanmar and the Special Rapporteur. We
further call upon the Burmese authorities to provide
all the necessary access to the team of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and to UNICEF. Human rights are
part of the solution, and guaranteeing its full respect
will help create the conditions for the voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable return of refugees.
That brings me to the last request of the presidential
statement — which I once again underscore
today — namely, the full implementation of the
recommendations drawn up by the Commission chaired
by Kofi Annan. Burma is faced with many challenges.
Those of democratic transition and reconciliation
among communities, which make Burma such a rich
and diverse country, are arguably the largest and
most important for the future of the country. National
reconciliation will lead to a solution to the crisis
in Rakhine state. Full citizenship, the freedom of
movement, equal access to basic services and respect
for the right to property should be granted to every
person without discrimination, regardless of their
ethnic or religious origin. The report of the Rakhine
Advisory Commission provides a road map for the
Burmese authorities to address the root causes of the
Rakhine crisis and create conditions for sustainable
coexistence among communities. France encourages
the Burmese authorities to continue to implement those
recommendations, with the support of the group of
independent experts appointed to that end.
My third, and last, comment touches on the
importance of the international community, and in
particular the United Nations, remaining fully mobilized
on that subject. While the steps taken by the Burmese
authorities are a first step, the commitments must
continue to be translated into action. Much progress
8/27

13/02/2018

remains to be made in each of the areas mentioned
in the presidential statement adopted by the Council
on 6 November. It is essential that the international
community, especially by means of the Council,
remain extremely vigilant and actively engaged. The
next appointment of a Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral will allow us to lend further support to that end.
France reiterates its support for the Burmese
democratic transition and the efforts of the Government
led by Aung San Suu Kyi in that regard. In the face of
the tragedy in Rakhine, France will continue to insist,
particularly within the Security Council, on the urgent
need to put an end to the violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya, deliver unhindered humanitarian
assistance to the population in need of it and facilitate,
when conditions are right, the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of refugees. France will continue its
dialogue with the Burmese authorities to that effect,
proceeding the visit made to Burma by Foreign Minister
Jean-Yves Le Drian last November.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefings delivered by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenča, and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and
noted their positive assessment of the progress achieved
in Rakhine state and the efforts made by Myanmar and
Bangladesh. Those undertakings should be sufficiently
affirmed. China is a friendly neighbour of Myanmar
and Bangladesh. We attach great importance to the
situation in Rakhine state and have provided emergency
humanitarian relief for the displaced persons. At the
same time, we have actively worked with both parties
to push for dialogue and consultations with a view to
finding a solution.
Since last November, the Foreign Minister of China,
Mr. Wang Yi, visited Bangladesh and Myanmar and
proposed a three-phase approach for the solution of the
Rakhine state issue. It has been unanimously endorsed
by Myanmar and Bangladesh. It pleases us to see that
some of the approaches are being implemented. The
goal of the first phase, which is to cease hostilities on
the ground and restore stability and order, has basically
been achieved. The goal of the second phase is to seek
viable measures to find a solution to the problem through
communication and consultations by both parties and is
also being pushed forward. The third phase is to adopt
measures to resolve the root causes of poverty through
development. I am confident that this goal can soon be
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

achieved through the efforts of Myanmar to alleviate
poverty in Rakhine state, along with the vigorous
support of the international community.
The problem in Myanmar’s Rakhine state has a
complex historical, ethnic and religious background. It
cannot be solved overnight. At present, the situation on
the ground has been visibly eased. Humanitarian relief
operations have been actively carried out. Myanmar
and Bangladesh have maintained dialogue and
consultations, held joint working group meetings on
repatriation and worked with United Nations agencies.
The Rakhine Advisory Commission visited
Myanmar recently and affirmed Myanmar’s efforts to
implement recommendations contained in its report.
Recently, Myanmar invited foreign missions and media
to Myanmar to visit the affected areas in Rakhine state.
China appreciates Myanmar and Bangladesh for those
efforts. China has noted that the process of repatriation of
the displaced by Myanmar and Bangladesh has recently
been delayed. We hope that the international community
can objectively observe the difficulties and challenges
encountered by the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh, remain patient and provide support and
assistance. We also hope it will encourage both parties,
Myanmar and Bangladesh, to appropriately solve the
problems that emerged in the process of implementing
their agreement through dialogue and consultations so
as to repatriate the displaced at an early date.
The Security Council adopted a presidential
statement in November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22) on
Rakhine state.
At the moment, the situation in Rakhine state is
generally stable. China has consistently maintained that
the appropriate way to resolve the issue of Rakhine state
is through bilateral efforts by Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Only when they reach a settlement that is acceptable to
the countries concerned will the agreement be capable
of being implemented and sustained and of obtaining
the understanding and support of every sector in those
countries. China hopes that Myanmar and Bangladesh
will continue to take appropriate steps and that the
Security Council and the international community will
play a constructive role in the process.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm my willingness to
work with all the parties to actively advance efforts
aimed at helping to restore order and achieve stability
and sustained development in Rakhine state.

S/PV. 8179

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to begin
by thanking High Commissioner Grandi and Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for their important briefings
this morning. As their remarks made clear, six months
after the initial mass displacements from Rakhine, the
situation in Myanmar and Bangladesh continues to be
seriously worrying, and the crisis has clear implications
for regional peace and stability. We joined with other
colleagues on the Council in calling for this meeting
today because we believe it is important to ensure that
the Security Council remains seized of the matter and
that the United Nations continues its active engagement.
The decision to flee one’s home and undertake
a dangerous journey to seek refuge in a foreign land
is driven by fear for oneself and one’s family. It is a
decision taken when no other options remain. We have
heard first-hand from those who have fled about the
violence and abuse that drove them from their homes.
However, we also know that when it is safe to do
so, refugees want to return home. In that regard, we
welcome the bilateral arrangement on the voluntary
return of refugees reached between the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
with its global mandate as the international refugee
agency, must be fully associated with the process,
including by supporting verification, and should be
invited to join the joint working group.
As we heard this morning, Rohingya refugees are
still arriving in Bangladesh. The situation in Rakhine
is clearly not yet ripe for their voluntary return. For
that process to begin, it is critical to ensure conditions
that will enable their return to be voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable, in line with international
law and the principle of non-refoulement. UNHCR
must be given access to Rakhine in order to assess
conditions on the ground and support return operations
from inside the country. Particular attention should
be given to the special needs of survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, including their need for
protection in the return process. Those who do decide
to return voluntarily should be able to go back to their
places of origin. The creation of new camps or camplike arrangements for internally displaced persons in
Rakhine must be avoided. Similarly, transition and
reception centres should be temporary, and UNHCR
and other organizations should have full access to them.
The Security Council presidential statement
adopted in November (S/PRST/2017/22) still has to be

18-040889/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

implemented in full, including by ensuring full and
unimpeded humanitarian access. But it will not be
possible to restore peace and stability in Rakhine state
without also addressing the conditions that led to the
violence and displacement in the first place. There is an
urgent need for security, reconstruction and livelihood
programmes that can benefit all the communities in
Rakhine. Implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission report’s recommendations must now
be stepped up, in cooperation with international
and regional partners. That will be critical if we are
to address the root causes of the conflict, which are
underdevelopment and discrimination. Implementation
must include a genuine process towards citizenship for
the Rohingya. While re-establishing the rule of law is
urgent and a precondition for safe and voluntary returns,
reconciliation between the communities in Rakhine
will be essential for long-term peace and development.
The numerous reports of systematic, widespread
and coordinated acts of violence are a strong indication
that crimes against humanity have been committed in
Rakhine. We are deeply concerned about the recent
reports of mass graves, which must be duly investigated.
Impunity for crimes against humanity in Rakhine
cannot be tolerated, and those responsible for them must
be held to account. The reports reinforce our awareness
of how urgent it is that all crimes be fully investigated.
In that regard, we urge Myanmar to cooperate with the
Human Rights Council’s fact-finding mission in order
to help establish the facts of what has taken place in
Rakhine. We look forward to the fact-finding mission’s
oral report to the Human Rights Council in March. If
the Myanmar authorities do not genuinely address the
issue of accountability, help should be sought from the
international community, including by considering a
referral to the International Criminal Court.
We want to pay tribute to the Government and
the people of Bangladesh for generously hosting such
a large number of refugees. While no effort should be
spared to create the conditions for voluntary return,
long-term planning and humanitarian support for the
refugees in Bangladesh must continue. The conditions
in the camps are dire, and with the monsoon rains
coming, there is a risk of a second humanitarian crisis
within the crisis. We welcome Bangladesh’s efforts
and its commitment to avoiding such a humanitarian
disaster, and we encourage international partners to
provide additional humanitarian support. It will be
10/27

13/02/2018

essential to ensure that the host communities that are
affected are also supported as part of those efforts.
There can be no doubt that the situation in Myanmar
continues to be very worrying and requires both shortand long-term solutions. We call on the Government
of Myanmar to fully engage with the United Nations
and with other regional and international partners who
want to provide assistance and can do so. Sweden and
the international community stand ready to continue
supporting Myanmar on its path towards peace,
democracy and prosperity.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this essential meeting
and the worrying presentations by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča and High Commissioner
Filippo Grandi.
Peru regrets and has been following with deep
concern the situation of Myanmar’s Rohingya Muslim
population, which has resulted from the wave of hatred
and violence they have endured in northern Rakhine
state. In the past five months the crisis has brought
more than 700,000 people to Bangladesh and to the
largest refugee camp in the world. While we welcome
Bangladesh’s generosity and efforts, we are concerned
about the likelihood that the forthcoming monsoon
season will worsen the situation, bringing the risk of
new disasters and diseases. We are also concerned
about the difficulties and delays in the implementation
of the repatriation agreement signed by both countries
in November, and especially about the lack of the
conditions needed to ensure that the refugees’ return of
refugees is voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable. In
view of the seriousness of the humanitarian situation, I
will focus on two specific points.
First, we believe that the recommendations that
the Annan Advisory Commission made in October
constitute a suitable framework for ensuring the
conditions for return. With the Advisory Commission’s
independent support for their implementation, the
Myanmar authorities must act swiftly to make them a
reality. Among other steps, that involves recognizing
the full citizenship of the members of the Rohingya
community and guaranteeing their safety, property
rights, freedom of movement and right to make
an informed choice about their place of return.
Discrimination and hate speech must not be tolerated.
Within the framework of the peace and national
reconciliation process, the country’s ethnic, religious
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

and cultural diversity should be safeguarded, along with
the rights of minorities. Building a sustainable peace
must also include ensuring access to basic services and
generating economic and social development projects.
Secondly, in our view it is essential that Myanmar
and Bangladesh’s efforts to end this complex
humanitarian crisis be supported by the international
community, and by the United Nations in particular.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) is the competent and best
disposed agency in that regard, and we advocate its full
participation in the return process, from conception
to execution, in line with the Council’s November
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22). We consider
it urgent that the Government of Myanmar ensure
full and unrestricted access for UNHCR and other
humanitarian agencies throughout Rakhine state.
We deem it essential that such assistance pay special
attention to the needs of women and girls, particularly
the survivors of sexual violence.
We consider it crucial that the Human Rights
Council’s fact-finding mission, in accordance with
its mandate, investigate the human rights violations
that have been reported in order to determine those
responsible, punish the guilty and prevent such events
from reoccurring.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank High
Commissioner Filippo Grandi and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for their briefings on the most
recent developments in Myanmar and the situation of
the Rohingya.
The situation of the Rohingya refugees continues
to be a source of grave concern. The complexity of the
challenge in Myanmar’s Rakhine state is very clear and
has deep roots. That means that the societal and the
humanitarian challenges are huge. Addressing the root
causes that forced the Rohingya to flee in the first place
will not be easy. However, efforts have to be made with
the required seriousness of purpose.
We want to be hopeful with regard to the efforts
being made to facilitate the voluntary return of the
Rohingya refugees in line with the memorandum
of understanding signed between the Governments
of Bangladesh and Myanmar. However, clearly, the
challenges are formidable, all the more so since they
relate to demands that the root causes be addressed.
As High Commissioner Grandi said earlier, that entails
the restoration of rights. That is why our approach

S/PV. 8179

to addressing the issue needs to change. As some
people are already saying, an international response
that consists primarily of assigning blame for the
humanitarian tragedy is no longer tenable. It is time
for the international community to find a realistic
workable solution.
In that context, there is a need to end the violence
in Rakhine state and to create conditions for the safe
and dignified return of the refugees and displaced
persons, as well as to ensure humanitarian access. In
that connection, we take note of the steps taken thus
far by the Myanmar Government. However, there is no
doubt that much remains to be done in order not only
to alleviate the suffering and frustration of the people
of Rakhine state but also to embrace all communities
and to ensure peace and harmony. We believe that
enhanced communication and cooperation between the
Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar are vital
to ensuring the implementation of the arrangement on
the return of persons displaced from Rakhine state in
conditions of safety and dignity.
The role of the international community, including
the United Nations and its various agencies operating
on the ground, as well as other organizations, such as,
inter alia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
is also very important in support of such efforts.
Ultimately, as we said earlier, what matters most is to
address the root cause of the problem.
The implementation of the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
will certainly contribute to tackling the long-standing
obstacles to peace and development in Rakhine state.
We commend the initial step taken by the Government
of Myanmar but it is necessary to accelerate the
implementation. That is a Herculean task, which
requires the sustained commitment and engagement
of the Government, as well as the support of the
international community, to ultimately ensure that
all communities are treated without discrimination,
regardless of religion or ethnicity, and to support
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced
individuals and refugees to their homes.
Finally, we appreciate the continued engagement
of the Secretary-General through his good offices.
We believe that a visit by the Security Council to both
Bangladesh and Myanmar could be useful in order to
gain a better appreciation of the situation on the ground
and to support the Governments of both countries in

18-0408811/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

their efforts to address the situation of the Rohingya
refugees. We take note of the briefing by Kuwait on this
issue, and we hope that future presidencies will take up
the matter.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this very serious issue on
our agenda. Allow me to express my appreciation to
Mr. Jenča and Mr. Grandi for their excellent briefings.
Today, I will focus on three issues: first, the current
situation in Myanmar; secondly, how to ensure the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of the Rohingya; and
thirdly, the humanitarian challenges in the camps in
Cox’s Bazar.
Regarding my first point, on the current situation
in Myanmar, every week that passes, we hear more
stories of atrocities perpetrated against the Rohingya
people following the events of last August — stories of
mass graves in the village of Inn Din, a coastal village
whence the entire Rohingya population of 6,000 people
fled; stories of young girls who are the victims of sexual
violence; stories of children who saw their parents and
siblings killed and had to find their own way to safety
in Bangladesh; and stories of almost 700,000 people
who had to flee from their homes.
It is often journalists who bring us such stories. In
that respect, as others have done, let me mention the
plight of the Reuters journalists Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe
Oo. Both were detained two months ago while working
on a report on the mass graves in Inn Din. We call on the
Government of Myanmar to respect their rights. They
should be released now. Furthermore, the Government
should allow journalists to work independently and
without undue interference, as stated in resolution
2222 (2015). Fundamental human rights are at stake, as
Mr. Jenča said earlier.
The recent testimonies of the situation in Myanmar
are shocking. They press upon us the need to address
the mass atrocities and to find a durable and just
resolution to the dreadful plight of the Rohingya.
The crisis continues to affect the security not only
of Myanmar but also of its neighbours. The situation
therefore warrants the close and continued attention of
the Security Council.
That brings me to my second point — the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of the refugees. We
welcome the steps undertaken by the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh to build a framework for
12/27

13/02/2018

eventual return. We emphasize the right of return of
all refugees to Myanmar. However, it is clear that the
conditions in Rakhine state are not yet sufficient to
start that process. Returns can take place only if they
are voluntary, safe and dignified. The independent
monitoring of that process is essential to ensuring that
it meets international standards.
Myanmar should allow the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to play a role
in the repatriation process. Access for United Nations
and other humanitarian aid organizations into Rakhine
state is key to establishing if it is safe enough to return.
The voices of the Rohingya themselves also need to be
heard. The large majority of Rohingya do not want to
go back yet. They fear a repetition of the abuses that
forced them to flee.
It is primarily up to the Myanmar authorities to
ensure the safety of their own population. They have
the primary responsibility to protect their own people.
The many reports of grave violations and abuses of
human rights, including by the military, need to be
thoroughly investigated and to be prosecuted. We need
accountability. That is crucial to ensure the long-term
stability of Myanmar. We call on Myanmar to allow
access for the fact-finding mission. We encourage
Myanmar to accept the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court through accession or self-referral.
The return of the Rohingya must be dignified
and sustainable. The root causes of the current
crisis therefore need to be addressed. We call on
Myanmar to establish a concrete action plan for the
full implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Kofi Annan. Living conditions need to be improved
and decades of discrimination must be brought to an
end. Returnees need access to appropriate shelter, not
in camps, but in the villages that they fled from, and
victims require proper rehabilitation. These are steps
that should be taken right now.
This brings me to my third point: humanitarian
challenges and especially the humanitarian situation in
the camps in Cox’s Bazar. We commend the generous
efforts of Bangladesh to welcome and shelter the refugees
on its soil. We are aware of the tremendous challenges
the situation creates for the host communities. The
international community will continue to depend on
Bangladesh, as long as safe, voluntary and dignified
returns remain impossible. The rainy season will only
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

increase the challenges in the Bangladeshi camps. We
should all stand ready to help Bangladesh overcome
these challenges, and we encourage Bangladesh to work
with United Nations agencies, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
to meet them.
In conclusion, for the Rohingya to be able to
return to their homes and to continue their lives
peacefully and sustainably in Myanmar, we call on
all parties to work on the following: first, a long-term
political solution that respects the rights of minorities;
secondly, accountability for perpetrators of violators of
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
thirdly, meeting the preconditions for a safe, dignified
and voluntary return of Rohingya refugees; and
fourthly, in the meantime, supporting the Bangladeshi
efforts to shelter the Rohingya on their soil.
The situation is so serious that we should keep this
issue high on the agenda of the Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Grandi and Mr. Jenča for their briefings.
The news reports from Burma have long been
brutal and heartbreaking. Because of the lack of access
granted by the Burmese Government, few reports
get out, but those that do are simply horrifying. The
Associated Press recently told the story of Kadir, a
Rohingya man from the village of Gu Dar Pyin. Kadir
and 14 of his friends were choosing sides for a game of
a traditional Burmese sport when the Burmese military
began shooting. Survivors reported that more than 200
soldiers descended on the village, burning homes and
shooting anyone who could not get away. Kadir got
away, but only he and two friends survived the shooting.
When he returned to the village six days later, Kadir
found his teammates partially buried in mass graves. In
all, there were reportedly five mass graves.
The Burmese Government regularly denies the
existence of massacres and mass graves and claims to
be fighting terrorists. But what Kadir found that day
indicated that the military knew what it was doing
was wrong and did not want the world to know. To
his horror, Kadir saw that not only were his friends
dead, but also their faces had been burned away with
acid. Some had been disfigured by bullet wounds. The
Burmese soldiers had also burned away the hands of the
dead so the bodies could not be identified.

S/PV. 8179

The Associated Press reporters who uncovered
these atrocities deserve our thanks and praise. It is
neither easy nor safe to report from Burma these
days. Two Reuters reporters uncovered evidence of
another massacre and mass grave in a fishing village
last September and they paid for it with their freedom.
They reported that the police ordered villagers to
participate in the killing, dismemberment and burial in
a mass grave of 10 Rohingya men and boys. Witnesses
said that some were still alive when they were thrown
into the grave. The police claim that they were acting
in self-defence, that the Rohingya men attacked them,
but the reporters compiled evidence, including photos,
that contradicted the police. For the crime of reporting
the truth, the Burmese Government arrested and
imprisoned the reporters. They remain incarcerated
in Burma without bail. We strongly call for their
immediate and unconditional release.
Like the soldiers in Gu Dar Pyin, powerful
forces in the Burmese Government have denied the
ethnic cleansing in Rakhine state. To make sure that
no one contradicts their preposterous denials, they
are preventing access to Rakhine to anyone or any
organization that might bear witness to their atrocities,
including the Security Council. The result is that they
are denying access to many organizations that the
displaced and starving in Burma desperately need today.
Even before the violence started, malnutrition
was a serious problem in Rakhine state, but now there
are reports from Rohingya who have found refuge in
Bangladesh that the military’s actions are leading
a campaign of purposeful starvation, forcing more
families out of the country. Homes are being looted.
Farmers are being denied the ability to harvest their
crops. Girls and women are being abducted into
sexual slavery.
We have urged Burma to work with the United
Nations and its agencies to allow the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other humanitarian organizations immediate
and unhindered access to Rakhine state. We repeat
that call today with even more urgency. The need for
humanitarian aid in Burma is dire and it is immediate.
The leader of Burma has been internationally
celebrated in the past for her commitment to peace and
to her fellow man. If any of that love of humankind
can still be found in the Government of Burma, it must
act now. The least it can do is allow humanitarian

18-0408813/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

groups access to those who are suffering. It costs the
Government nothing to allow food to the starving,
medical care to the wounded and psychological
services to the sexually abused. The world is watching
and waiting for Burma to act. What we have seen so
far is cruel and barbaric. To top it off, it has the gall to
blame the media. Unhindered media access is vitally
important. Journalists, like the two imprisoned Reuters
reporters, are an indispensable source of information.
I also call on the Secretary-General to quickly
appoint a special envoy for Burma, and I call on the
Burmese Government to allow a United Nations
fact-finding mission and the Special Rapporteur into
the country. Without the media and United Nations
personnel in Burma to shed light on the crimes being
committed, there is no hope for justice for the victims.
We are grateful to the people and Government
of Bangladesh for hosting hundreds of thousands of
refugees. We understand the burden that it creates,
and we ask Bangladesh to continue to work closely
with UNHCR and other international organizations to
ensure that repatriations of refugees are voluntary. We
ask that it continue to ensure the safety and security
of both those who choose to relocate and those who do
not. But, in the end, real progress depends on an end to
the terror and the killing. We cannot expect nor should
we ask refugees to return to Burma until it is safe to
do so. They must be confident that they will not fall
victim to the same horrors that drove them from their
homes in the first place. Right now, those refugees do
not have that confidence. Many are too scared to return
to their country.
The Government of Burma — and the Government
of Burma alone — has the power and the moral
obligation to correct that. It must create the conditions
to assure refugees that they can safely return to their
villages and their homes. Burma and Bangladesh have
had substantive discussions on repatriation and that
is a good thing. But we can talk forever and not make
progress, as long as the military and the Government
continue to make living in Burma a death sentence for
the Rohingya people.
I am profoundly grateful to my colleagues from
the United Kingdom for arranging this meeting today.
There are powerful forces at work trying to cover up the
unspeakable horror taking place in Burma, but we owe
it to both the victims and the rest of the Burmese people
to demand transparency, access and accountability. We
14/27

13/02/2018

need to honour the bravery of the Buddhist village elder
who provided Reuters with horrific photographs of the
atrocities at Inn Din because, in his words, “I do not
want it to happen like that in the future.” We need to
honour his hope for a better Burma, one in which such
behaviour is not tolerated against any person or group.
Unfortunately, the Security Council has so far
failed in its responsibility to act in response to the
clear threat to international peace and security that has
resulted from recent events in northern Rakhine state.
We cannot look the other way in this situation. What
happened and continues to happen in Burma is not
okay. The Council must hold the military accountable
for its actions and exert pressure on Aung San Suu Kyi
to acknowledge that those horrific acts are taking place
in her country. No more excuses.
I urge my colleagues to seize this opportunity to
end our inaction and live up to our responsibilities as
members of the Security Council. I call on all nations to
join the United States to do more than just demanding
an end to the atrocities in Burma, and to actually take
the steps we know are needed to put the crisis on the
path leading towards a solution.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation thanks Mr. Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
for their excellent briefings on the current situation
in Myanmar and for the work that they are doing in
managing the crisis in that country.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this meeting
dedicated to the crisis in Myanmar, a country in which
one of the most serious humanitarian crises of our time
is taking place. Today it is estimated that almost 888,000
internally displaced and refugees, most of whom are
women and children, are facing a major humanitarian
crisis. That situation calls for special attention from
the international community, in particular the United
Nations, which must take appropriate measures aimed
at finding a lasting and sustainable solution to the daily
tragedy that those segments of the population are living.
I would like to structure my statement on three
main points, namely, the return of Rohingya refugees to
their country, the question of the fight against impunity
with regard to serious human rights violations and the
need to maintain peace and security in the region.
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

With regard to the first point, my delegation believes
that the return of the Rohingya people to their homes
of origin is a moral obligation for the international
community. Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire is concerned
about recent developments concerning the reportedly
constant flow of people from Myanmar to neighbouring
Bangladesh. My delegation therefore calls on the
international community, as well as all other actors,
to act so as to find concrete solutions to the crisis, in
particular by providing needed humanitarian assistance
and facilitating the voluntary return of all those displaced
back to their land in a dignified and safe manner
pursuant to presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
issued on 6 November 2017. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the agreement of 23 November 2017
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
on the repatriation of displaced persons in Rakhine
state. Accordingly, my country now calls on the two
States to take all appropriate measures for the effective
and successful implementation of that agreement for
the well-being of the Rohingya people, and on all other
actors, in particular the international community, to
support those countries in their efforts.
My country is concerned about limitations that
have been placed upon humanitarian access, the
freedom of expression of the media and the freedom of
movement of independent observers. Needless to say,
such obstacles cast doubt on the possibility of a safe
return of refugees. Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire commends
the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
the humanitarian commitment that they are showing
towards those who have been affected by the crisis.
My country encourages the Government of Myanmar
to make greater efforts to ensure peace and security
in the country and improve the living conditions of all
segments of its population. Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes
the commitment of the Government of Myanmar to
implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan. Concrete solutions that ensure a
decent and sustainable future for returnees are needed
as part of an approach based on the inclusive economic
and social development of Rakhine state.
With regard to the fight against impunity, my
delegation condemns the serious human rights violations,
the incitement leading to religious and ethnic hatred and
the violence directed against Rohingya people. Côte
d’Ivoire is particularly concerned about recent reports
concerning the summary and extrajudicial executions

S/PV. 8179

of Rohingya individuals by the Government armed
forces, militias and self-defence groups. My country
urges the Myanmar authorities to halt such acts and
bring their perpetrators to justice.
With regard to the third point — the need to
maintain peace and security in the region — my
delegation condemns the attacks perpetrated by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army against the Myanmar
security forces. Côte d’Ivoire is concerned about how
terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State might exploit the situation under the pretext of
solidarity with Muslim communities, thereby leading
to destabilizing terrorist activities.
Before concluding, my delegation encourages a
regional approach to resolving the crisis. In that regard,
it welcomes the actions taken by the States of the region,
in particular the mission by the Parliamentarians for
Human Rights of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, which visited refugees on the ground. Similarly,
Côte d’Ivoire calls on the international community
to play a decisive role in supporting Myanmar in its
search for peace and stability, as well as in its national
reconstruction efforts.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Miroslav Jenča for their briefings,
which, unfortunately, continue to illustrate the very
troubling humanitarian situation of the Rohingya
people. We hope that the situation will continue to
improve since the Council meeting (see S/PV.8085) on
6 November 2017 during which presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, along with other appeals, urged the
Government of Myanmar to ensure that there would be
no further excessive use of the military force against
Rakhine state.
For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the issue of
the Rohingya people, which fundamentally dates back
to the colonial Administration of the previous century
and involve complex historical, national and religious
factors, requires a comprehensive approach. Current
objectives and temporary solutions must go hand in
hand with long-term goals and the search for a solution
that analyses the root causes. Poverty is a major source
of instability and conflict. The international community
should pay more attention to, and support the reduction
of, local poverty, focus on development by alleviating

18-0408815/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

poverty and seek peace through development in order
to definitively solve the problem.
The images and reports we are seeing on the
situation of the Rohingya people in Myanmar are truly
worrying and can only be described as a humanitarian
crisis. According to recent statistics, there are 680,000
Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, while 176,000 of
the Rohingya who remain in northern Rakhine suffer
from severe food insecurity. That the most vulnerable
population is going through such a difficult situation
is undoubtedly cause for great concern, and calls for
action to help the victims.
In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
calls on the Myanmar authorities to assume their
responsibilities and to seek an immediate solution
to the crisis that the Rohingya population is going
through. Serious accusations of ethnic cleansing and
other atrocities must be considered with the utmost
seriousness, and an investigation must be opened in
order to shed light on the situation and lead its possible
perpetrators to face justice.
Assuming their responsibilities also includes
ensuring peace and security in the country, especially
in northern Rakhine state. That means responding to
the terrorist attacks attributed to the militants of the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army, who deserve our
strongest condemnation. The Government of Myanmar
has an obligation to ensure that the population fully
enjoys its rights within its territory.
In that regard, we request the Myanmar authorities to
take steps to create the right conditions for the peaceful
coexistence of all ethnic and religious communities in
Rakhine state and to make preparations — with the
necessary guarantees — to receive those who wish to
return to their original places of residence. The Myanmar
authorities must be prepared to manage the potential
reintegration of the returnees, must ensure their rights
and must contribute to rebuilding. They must intensify
and promote activities that prevent the escalation of
violence, restore law and order throughout the country,
create normalized socioeconomic conditions and solve
the refugee problem.
The Myanmar Government should make every
effort to comply with the recommendations of the
Advisory Committee led by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, and work with the Bangladeshi authorities
on the repatriation of displaced persons in Rakhine state.
16/27

13/02/2018

We urge all parties to refrain from actions that
could lead to further degradation of the situation and
to continue the constructive dialogue at all levels
without politicizing it. That is the only possible way
to comprehensively solve the complicated problem
of the Muslim minority in Myanmar. Equatorial
Guinea supports all efforts to facilitate interreligious
interactions within the country by involving the
spiritual leaders of all religions.
We take note of the contributions and actions of
Bangladesh, which, despite its difficulties, provides
timely humanitarian aid and welcomes those in need.
Equatorial Guinea greatly appreciates the generosity,
efforts and contributions of Bangladesh. The
international community should provide additional
assistance to Bangladesh commensurate with its needs.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that, in
order to reach a concerted solution in the mass movement
of the population across the border between Myanmar
and Bangladesh, we must first secure the goodwill of
both countries. The two parties have met a number of
times and are expected to sign a repatriation agreement
aimed at finding an acceptable solution to both parties.
This issue must be adequately addressed by Bangladesh
and Myanmar through bilateral channels.
The international community, including the
Council, must offer favourable conditions and create an
adequate environment to promote bilateral consultations
between Bangladesh and Myanmar. We are convinced
that, with the support and assistance of the international
community, Bangladesh and Myanmar will surely be
able to improve the situation and find ways to solve the
problem through negotiation.
I would like to conclude my comments on behalf of
Equatorial Guinea by referring to the offer of support
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to both the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
and to the refugees in finding a long-term solution
that would benefit the refugees, the authorities of both
countries, the host community of Bangladesh and all
the communities of Rakhine state. The implementation
modalities of the agreement, which should be in
accordance with international standards, would
contribute significantly to resolving the problem.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking our briefers, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Filippo
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their informative briefings.
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the displaced Rohingya community. It is
up to the international community to maintain the
humanitarian and development assistance to both
Rohingya refugee camps situated in Bangladesh and
to Myanmar’s institutions, which provide assistance to
Rakhine state.
We would like to see the report of the FactFinding Mission of the Human Rights Council, which
is due in March. However, we regret that the FactFinding Mission was not allowed to visit the country.
While we appreciate the agreement concerning the
voluntary repatriation of the Rohingya community and
understand the desire to proceed rapidly, we can support
only returns that are safe, voluntary and dignified. We
understand that at this moment, regrettably, there are
no such conditions on the ground for returns. However,
it is the responsibility of the Government of Myanmar
to ensure that the displaced Rohingya will have a safe
place to return to and live in peace. We believe that
foreign humanitarian assistance will be key in fulfilling
that obligation.
We are of the view that the Rakhine Advisory
Commission’s recommendations remain essential
to addressing the ongoing security, human rights,
development and humanitarian crisis situation in
Rakhine state. We hope that the Government will
implement them without delay.
Poland remains ready, through the new United
Nation system, to provide the assistance needed to find
a long-term solution to the crisis for all communities
in the Rakhine state. We are deeply troubled by the
news of the existence of previously unreported mass
graves near the village of Gudar Pyin. We have to
remain focused on making sure that the perpetrators
of such criminal acts are held accountable. We urge the
Myanmar authorities to cooperate with an independent
and credible investigation into allegations of atrocities
in northern Rakhine.
In a situation of this kind, the most vulnerable
suffer the most. The situation of Rohingya women and
children is heartbreaking. We urge the Government to
fully comply with its national action plan to address the
grave violations against children, particularly to end
and prevent the recruitment or use of children in the
national army. Furthermore, we urge the authorities to

S/PV. 8179

grant access to the United Nations Country Task Force
on Monitoring and Reporting to armed groups listed in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1099).
In the light of these circumstances, we wish to
recall the importance of the freedom of the press and
the need to comply with resolution 2222 (2015), on
the protection of journalists in armed conflict. I wish
to underline that Poland and the European Union
are strongly committed to supporting Myanmar’s
democratic transition, peace, national reconciliation
and socioeconomic development.
I wish to thank and commend the Government
and the people of Bangladesh who have opened their
borders and homes by providing relief and refuge to the
Rohingya community. I would also like to repeat what
has already been said in this Chamber multiple times:
history will judge our actions as well as our inaction.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
delegation of Kazakhstan, I wish to express our deep
sympathies and condolences to the delegation of
the Russian Federation as well as the families of the
victims of the plane crash near Moscow on Sunday,
11 February, which resulted in the loss of lives of all 65
passengers and six crew members on board.
I would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenča, for their updates on the latest
developments in Myanmar and the plight of Rohingya
refugees who fled to Bangladesh. At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express its grave concern with
regard to the Myanmar Government’s inhuman treatment
of the Rohingya population and its sluggishness in
addressing the root causes of the problem.
My delegation has noted the signing, on
23 November, of the memorandum of understanding
between Myanmar and Bangladesh on the voluntary
return of refugees to Myanmar. We also praise the
work done by joint working group of Myanmar and
Bangladesh on implementing the memorandum, with
the timeline for the return of refugees commencing
on 23 January and designed to run over a period of
two years. However, the repatriation process has been
postponed due to the difficulties in compiling and
verifying the list of people to be repatriated and the
absence of necessary safeguards for potential returnees.

18-0408817/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

We see the value in the request of Bangladesh that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) be involved in verifying the
resettlement process to guarantee that conditions
are met on the ground for the return of refugees. The
Rohingya refugees have no trust or confidence in the
sincerity of the Myanmar authorities’ actions. Indeed,
there can be no durable or lasting solution for the return
of Rohingya refugees without addressing the questions
of the restoration of their rights and freedoms, including
access to education and employment, freedom of
movement and a path towards a just and sustainable
solution to the issue of citizenship.
I would like to reiterate that Kazakhstan is of the
firm view that unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the affected population is crucial in
Myanmar. We therefore call on the Government of
Myanmar to allow unfettered and safe access to United
Nations agencies that can help to provide emergency
assistance and alleviate the suffering of the victimized
population. Kazakhstan commends the efforts of
UNHCR, which has airlifted 1,500 metric tons of
emergency life-saving aid to Bangladesh to assist
250,000 refugees and helped to develop the Kutupalong
extension, a new site near Kutupalong refugee camp.
We laud the hospitality of the Government of
Bangladesh, which is helping refugees and providing
them with shelter, medical care, food and other forms
of assistance. We also find it very inspiring how other
States, international organizations and individuals
are giving a helping hand to those in need regardless
of distance, views or religion. The Government of
Kazakhstan has allocated a half a million dollars of
official humanitarian assistance for Rohingya refugees
from Myanmar in Bangladesh.
We note the efforts of the Myanmar Government to
stabilize the situation in northern Rakhine and organize
the visit for the diplomatic corps residing in Myanmar
to the reception centres at Taung Pyo Letwe and Nga
Khu Ya as well as a transit centre, which are all steps in
right direction. At the same time, Kazakhstan expresses
its deep concern about the revelation of mass graves
in the country. The journalists who reported on the
graves should be released and allowed to work freely.
We also take note of the statement by the spokesperson
of the Government of Myanmar that “actions according
to the law” would be taken against those members of
the security forces who killed 10 Rohingya men in the
northern Rakhine village of Inn Din.
18/27

13/02/2018

My delegation believes that it is necessary for
the Government of Myanmar to conduct credible
investigations into gross human rights violations,
and a United Nations fact-finding mission should be
organized so that the perpetrators are brought to justice.
Only through full disclosure of the atrocities and by
taking action against those responsible can we expect
the Rohingyas to have the confidence they need to
return home and for trust among all communities to be
re-established at the national level, thereby deterring the
recurrence of these kinds of violence in future. Finally,
my delegation is of the view that the recommendations
of the Rakhine Advisory Commission are valuable
and that their full implementation will be necessary
to restore intercommunal harmony, sustainable peace,
stability and prosperity in Rakhine state.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Filippo
Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Under-Secretary
General for Political Affairs, for their briefings on the
situation in the Rakhine state of the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar.
Despite some positive developments on the ground,
we reiterate our deep concern about the continuing
effects generated by the violence perpetrated in August
2017 against several minority ethnic groups in Rakhine
state, in particular against the Muslim ethnic group, the
Rohingyas. We are struck by the fact that, according
to the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees dated 9 February 2018,
the number of refugees has increased from 640,000
to 688,000 people, which means that, since the last
time the Security Council considered the situation,
in December last year (see S/2017/8133), 48,000
people were forced to flee to Bangladesh as a result
of the absence of conditions that would guarantee their
security and stability in Myanmar.
This increase in the number of displaced persons
and refugees implies a more serious challenge, in the
light of the precariousness to which these people must
be exposed, given that refugee camps in Bangladesh
are at the mercy of such potential climatic events as
floods or landslide that have the potential to worsen the
already complex humanitarian situation. In addition,
the outbreak of diphtheria in refugee camps in the town
of Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh continues to be a matter
of concern, as the World Health Organization has
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8179

reported more than 5,000 clinically recorded cases and
37 deaths from the disease as of 3 February this year.

solution to the issue, we must consider the root causes
of the conflict.

Furthermore, in order to prevent the further
worsening of conditions, it is crucial that wide and
unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance be
guaranteed to all the towns where internally displaced
persons are found, and we therefore call upon the
relevant parties, in particular the Government of
Myanmar, to fulfil their obligations. In that regard,
we want to emphasize the initial willingness that the
Government of Myanmar has shown to work with the
various United Nations agencies, and we urge it to
continue to greatly expand its coordination efforts.

Lastly, my delegation wants to highlight the
willingness and spirit of brotherhood that the
Government and the people of Bangladesh have
shown in dealing with this crisis. We call on regional
organizations, and the international community in
general, to continue their valuable collaboration on the
efforts to resolve this sensitive situation.

We have taken note of the agreements signed
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
in November of last year and this January aimed at
launching the process for the Rohingya refugees’
return, as well as the coordination that both countries
have begun on exchanging the information and
documentation needed to achieve that goal. However, in
our view it will be essential to ensure the establishment
of conditions that will enable the refugees to make a
voluntary, informed, dignified, safe and permanent
return to their places of origin, and to make quite sure
that there is no replication of the conditions that would
make their return one of isolation and confinement in
areas where they do not belong.
We want to emphasize the efforts of Myanmar’s
ministerial committee to start work on implementing
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, and we encourage it to continue its best
efforts to comply with them and produce concrete and
lasting results. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
the continuation and intensification of the investigations
needed to identify those responsible for the serious
violations of human rights committed against the
Rohingya population and to bring them to justice
to answer for their actions with no impunity, as was
established in the Council’s 6 November presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/22).
Bolivia would like to emphasize once again
that there is no alternative to dialogue for resolving
this crisis, and for that, the parties must commit all
their efforts to implementing strategies conducive to
negotiation, mediation, consultations and the exercise
of good offices and refrain from resorting to rhetoric
that may provoke confrontation or violence. We also
reiterate that if we are to achieve a stable and sustainable

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, for their substantive briefings. The
complex, multifaceted topics they touched on require a
painstaking and consistent approach on the part of the
international community and thorough and impartial
study by experts. Any labelling or attempts to use
contradictory and subjective media reports, often
hastily put together, to identify the guilty and condemn
them only make it harder for us to arrive at a solution.
In our opinion, the situation in the Rakhine
national region, including its northern areas adjacent
to Bangladesh, remains difficult but in general under
control. The Myanmar authorities’ planned social and
economic development efforts there have in large part
contributed to that, and steps are being taken to create
special economic zones in the region. In the town of
Maungdaw, in particular, the central market, which
has more than 400 trade outlets, has reopened, and 16
closed-circuit television cameras have been installed
for security and monitoring purposes. It is important
to note that the central and regional authorities are
prioritizing housing construction and modernization
of road and transport infrastructure. In northern
Rakhine, one transit and two reception centres for
receiving refugees have been built, with 640 shelters
that can provide temporary housing for more than
30,000 refugees.
Regarding the international community attention
to the efforts in Naypyidaw to implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission led
by Kofi Annan, we commend the work of the group
of advisers under the Myanmar ministerial committee
led by Thailand’s former Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Surakiart Sathirathai.
The expanded access to Rakhine state being
granted to foreign observers is a positive step. In

18-0408819/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

particular, a number of groups of journalists have
visited the region in recent weeks, including employees
of Russian television. On 6 February, representatives of
neighbouring states visited Rakhine, and the authorities
organized a similar trip for representatives of the local
diplomatic corps on 9 February. They visited the Kanyin
Chaung economic zone and Ngakunya settlement,
as well as refugee transit and reception camps. An
inspection of the border zone was even arranged for the
first of those groups.
The situation regarding the repatriation of refugees
continues to be very difficult, but we see some positive
signs there too. We note the steps taken by Naypyidaw
and Dhaka to implement their agreement, signed on
23 November 2017, on a programme for the return
of persons displaced from Rakhine, including the
convening on 15 and 16 January of the first meeting of
the bilateral working group and its adoption of a plan
for the return of Muslims who have fled to Bangladesh.
In our view, the document has laid a foundation for
solving the most difficult issues related to refugees’
repatriation to Myanmar. We believe that in the current
circumstances it is important to facilitate a resolution of
the Rakhine situation, focusing on practical assistance
to the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in a
spirit of equality and mutual respect. We would like
to emphasize that the Myanmar refugee situation is
a issue of bilateral relations between Myanmar and
Bangladesh that should be resolved through appropriate
consultations. We realize that the Dhaka authorities
are bearing a tremendous burden with regard to
hosting and sheltering this huge number of refugees
on their territory, one beyond the capacities of any
single country, and the international community must
therefore provide Bangladesh with all the support it
needs in this area.
However, we are very concerned about the attempts
to delay a resolution of the repatriation issue on the
pretext that Myanmar lacks the conditions for the safe,
dignified and sustainable return and resettlement of
repatriates. Needless to say, their living conditions
must comply with humanitarian standards, but the
arguments of those who are creating artificial obstacles
to the process and inciting refugees by fuelling their
anxiety are unacceptable. We will continue to urge
all the parties to refrain from violence, emphasize the
importance of respecting Myanmar’s sovereignty and
work to resolve the multilayered and complex problems
in Rakhine by exclusively political means, through a
20/27

13/02/2018

dialogue between Naypyidaw and Dhaka and between
representatives of all nationalities and faiths.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
I would first like to express our condolences to
the families of the victims of the plane accident that
occurred in Russia on Sunday.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for their briefings.
The world is following the proceedings of our
meeting in the Security Council today and expects
us to persist in our principled position supporting the
principles of international law and human values above
any political considerations, so as to deal with one of
the worst tragedies of our modern history: the tragedy
that the majority-Muslim Rohingya minority continue
to live.
This tragedy, which has resulted in the deaths
of many innocent people and the displacement of
hundreds of thousands more owing to their persecution
and forcible displacement, actions that can be described
as ethnic cleansing. The State of Kuwait condemns
and denounces these actions, which contravene
international norms and principles, carried out in
Rakhine state in Myanmar since August and which
has led to the displacement of approximately 650,000
people of the Rohingya minority. Here we emphasize
the need for the Government of Myanmar to assume
its primary responsibilities to protect its citizens and
ensure that excessive force is not used.
Moreover, I should like to express my country’s
appreciation for the considerable efforts that the
Government of Bangladesh is making in hosting these
innocent people on its territory. Last October, the State
of Kuwait co-chaired the donors conference for the
Rohingya refugee crisis and pledged $15 million. That
amount, contributed by official and civil-society bodies,
is part of Kuwait’s efforts to alleviate the severity of
the tragedy and of international efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the Rohingya refugees.
This tragedy has put an entire generation of children
at risk of losing everything and of not receiving an
education which determine their future, or any medical
services or health care — not to mention the destruction
of their homes and villages.
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

Since the Security Council issued its presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/22, on the situation in
Myanmar on 6 November 2017, we have been closely
following the ongoing developments in Myanmar. We
have taken note of the three agreements signed between
Bangladesh and Myanmar, which are aimed at ensuring
the voluntary return of refugees to their homes. Such
voluntary return cannot begin until additional, explicit
confidence-building measures have been taken in
order to ensure a safe return to and a dignified life in
Rakhine state. Here I would like to refer to some of
the measures that must be taken before there can be a
voluntary return of refugees.
The Government of Myanmar must take all
measures necessary to ensure the immediate cessation
of violence and prevent the excessive use of force
against civilians. Refrain from establishing new
refugee camps for displaced persons in the northern
part of Rakhine state. Adopt all measures to combat
any incitement to violence or hatred, and restore peace
and harmony among the various sects under the rule of
law. Allow access to United Nations agencies and its
partners and allow freedom of movement to all those in
Rakhine state in a safe and unhindered manner. Involve
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
the bilateral talks between Myanmar and Bangladesh.
These are some of the measures that we deem
important and that must be taken before the refugees can
return home. Moreover, we believe that these measures
must be accompanied by other arrangements, most
importantly a call upon the Government of Myanmar
to take all measures necessary to establish peace and
harmony among the various communities through
dialogue and within a comprehensive national process
for peace and reconciliation in which all segments
of society can take part. It must eliminate the root
causes of the plight of the Rohingya minority without
discrimination and regardless of ethnicity or religion.
Moreover, they must be granted their inherent right to
nationality, as confirmed by the General Assembly in
its resolution calling for the granting of full citizenship
rights to the Rohingya minority (resolution 72/248).
In conclusion, I would like to end my statement
today with a verse from the Holy Koran in which the
exalted and Almighty Allah The great and Almighty
decrees that:
“O mankind! We created you from a single
(pair) of a male and a female, and made you into

S/PV. 8179

nations and tribes, that ye may know each other ...
Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of
Allah is the most righteous of you. And Allah has
full knowledge and is well acquainted (with all
things).” (The Holy Koran, XLIX:13)
This holy verse confirms that Islam is a religion
of love and peace, and opens the way to human
unity, without any intolerance based on race, colour
or language. We here may speak different languages
and have different customs and views, but once we
sit in this Chamber we all become responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council, when united, has taken historic and memorable
positions. I invite all present to once again show our
ability to overcome all political divisions and intensify
our efforts to take measures and decisions that would
grant those innocent people the chance to live and offer
them a safe, dignified and free life.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing my delegation to participate
in this meeting. My delegation wishes to congratulate
you on the Kuwaiti presidency of the Council. I am
confident that under your able leadership, the Council’s
important debates will bear fruitful results. I assure
you of our support and cooperation.
I also thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča and High
Commissioner Grandi for their briefings on the
situation in Myanmar.
We appreciate the constructive approach adopted
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations in our
engagement. We will continue to cooperate with the
United Nations.
In this connection, we are glad that the visit of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
to Myanmar last December was very positive. We are
working closely with her Office for further cooperation.
My delegation is keeping in close touch with
members of the Council as well as with the Secretariat
to maintain a constructive partnership in the spirit
of cooperation.
Since the issuance of the presidential statement
on the situation in Myanmar on 6 November last
(S/PRST/2017/22), Myanmar has made great strides

18-0408821/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

towards the restoration of the rule of law, peace and
stability, and preparations for the repatriation of
displaced persons from the Maungdaw area. The
implementation of the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State has gained momentum
in the process of promoting sustainable peace, stability
and development in Rakhine state.
Myanmar and Bangladesh have made significant
progress in our bilateral efforts for the repatriation of
displaced persons. After the signing on 23 November
last of the memorandum of understanding on the
arrangement on the return of displaced persons, on
19 December 2017 the terms of reference for the joint
working group were signed; the first meeting of the
group was held on 15 January. The physical arrangement
for repatriation agreement was signed by the two
sides on 16 January. According to that agreement,
the repatriation process was scheduled to commence
on 23 January. The returnees will be received at two
reception centres and then temporarily accommodated
at a camp before permanent settlement.
As an initial step, Myanmar will receive 300
returnees a day to ensure a smooth and safe return.
The number will be increased based on the progress of
the return and will be reviewed in three months. The
number of transit camps and reception centres may be
increased based on requirements as the repatriation
process progresses.
In the process of repatriation, Myanmar will draw
on the services of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as needed and
at the appropriate time. Recently, on 5 and 6 February,
UNHCR conducted its second workshop on voluntary
repatriation in Myanmar.
In an effort to expedite the implementation of the
repatriation process, Myanmar provided to Bangladesh
a list of 500 Hindus and 750 Muslims, verified as
Myanmar residents, to be included in the first batch
of repatriation.
In addition, on 30 January the Myanmar Ministry
of Foreign Affairs provided the Bangladeshi side with
information relating to a resettlement plan, the provision
of livelihood assistance, access to basic services, and
safety arrangements for verified returnees.
We have made the necessary preparations and are
now ready to receive the first group of returnees. We will
continue to work in close consultation and cooperation
22/27

13/02/2018

with Bangladesh for the voluntary, safe and dignified
repatriation of displaced persons in accordance with
the bilateral agreement.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that the Minister of Home Affairs of Myanmar
will be visiting Bangladesh on 15 February to discuss
with his counterpart matters relating to cooperation
in repatriation and to find a solution to the problem of
people being stranded on the zero line of the border.
Officials from both sides of the border will also be
meeting at the border on the same day to encourage
people to return to their villages, because the building
of houses or habitations on the zero line of the common
border is prohibited in the boundary agreement. We
appreciate the traditional good-neighbourly relationship
with Bangladesh and we are confident that we will be
able to overcome all problems arising between the two
neighbours with a spirit of friendship and cooperation.
In recent days, members of the diplomatic corps and
representatives of United Nations agencies — including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, World Food Programme, the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World
Bank — have been given access to the Maungdaw
areas to observe the preparations for repatriation and
the situation on the ground. The Government has
arranged a day trip for all diplomatic corps members
residing in Myanmar, including United Nations agency
representatives, to Rakhine state in three groups. The
first and second groups went on 6 and 9 February,
respectively. The third group will be going on
15 February. Likewise, visiting dignitaries, such as the
Foreign Minister of Japan and the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom, have also visited the area with
their accompanying media.
We are fully aware that the Government has the
primary responsibility to protect its own people. As
lives in the affected areas, especially the Maungdaw
area, return to normalcy, the police forces have largely
taken over the security responsibility in most parts of
Maungdaw district. Although no major clashes with
terrorists have been reported in the past six months,
there is always a threat posed by Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army terrorists, who are taking refuge among
innocent people. They will take every opportunity to
undermine law and order and public security. They will
not hesitate to use their brutal tactics of intimidation
and killing of innocent people who want a peaceful life
in harmony with other communities in Rakhine. The
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

recent media reports of the killing of two camp leaders
from refugee camps in Bangladesh sent a warning to
those who want to return to their villages.
Under such circumstances, and in order to establish
the rule of law and sustain peace and security, the
capacities of the security forces must be strengthened.
It is regrettable that, at a time when we most need
international support for building the capacities of our
security personnel, some countries have adopted new
restrictions and sanctions on Myanmar with regard to
cooperation in the security sector. Such actions could
have negative effects on the maintenance of peace and
stability in conflict areas.
On humanitarian assistance, the Government and
the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine have been
providing food and household needs to all communities
in Rakhine state, in addition to building infrastructure
and increasing business activities for the economic
development of the region. The Red Cross Movement
continues to play an important role in providing services
to address the urgent need of humanitarian assistance
in affected areas.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management is also actively
participating in the Government-led mechanism to
deliver humanitarian assistance. We highly appreciate
ASEAN’s understanding, support and constructive
engagement in our efforts to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the Rakhine issue.
The Government of Myanmar has embraced the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State as a road map to resolve the root causes
of the problem of Rakhine state and achieve sustainable
peace and development for all. The Government is
committed to implementing the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission, as well as
other recommendations made by the Maungdaw
Region Investigation Commission. The Committee
for Implementation of the Recommendations on
Rakhine State has begun taking steps towards their
implementation. The Committee has recently published
its first report on the progress of the implementation of
the recommendations.
The
Union
Enterprise
for
Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement, and Development has been
spearheading various projects with great momentum

S/PV. 8179

in the implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission. One of the most significant
developments in that regard was the formation on
14 December of a 10-member advisory board to the
Committee for Implementation of the Recommendations
on Rakhine State, headed by Mr. Surakiart Sathirathai,
former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Thailand. The primary purpose of the board
is to provide an external perspective and advice to
the Committee for a more effective and efficient
implementation of recommendations.
The board has also already provided five points
of advice to the Implementation Committee as
preliminary reflections. The points made by the board
concern the sustainability of implementation projects,
the wider participation of United Nations agencies
in the repatriation and resettlement process, and the
granting of full humanitarian access, among others.
We are encouraged by the board’s conviction that
constructive and positive work can be done to help
bring peace, reconciliation and economic progress to
all communities in Rakhine state.
Concerning allegations of human rights violations,
the Government of Myanmar has always made its
position very clear that it will not condone any action
of abuse. If there is concrete evidence, action will be
taken against the transgressor in accordance with the
law, no matter who or what he is. With regard to the
Reuters report of December last year on the finding
of 10 bodies in a cemetery in Inn Din, Maungdaw, the
Tatmadaw immediately formed a high-level enquiry
team and conducted an investigation of the incident.
It was found that 10 Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army members had been arrested by security forces
on 1 September 2017, soon after the terrorist attacks
on 25 August. The next day, 2 September, they were
executed and buried in the village cemetery without
being handed over to the police. Therefore, actions
are being taken against 16 individuals, including
army and police officers and some villagers who
acted in violation of standard operating procedures
and rules of engagement. The action taken on the part
of the Tatmadaw is a positive step forward in taking
responsibility, and deserves encouragement.
Recently, the Associated Press and the BBC reported
widely on alleged mass graves in the village of Gu
Dar Pyin, in Buthidaung township. The Rakhine state
Government sent a 17-member inspection team to the

18-0408823/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

village, comprised of regional administrative officials,
local Rakhine and Muslim community elders, doctors,
immigration officers and security officers. According
to the interviews and area inspections, no mass grave
was found in the reported area. Moreover, the local
elders confirmed that there had been no such incidents
in the village. However, the Rakhine state Government
is now extending the investigation to nearby villages.
The Government of Myanmar will continue to ensure
accountability for all crimes committed, as no one is
above the law.
The case of two Reuters reporters has attracted
much attention in recent weeks. Myanmar recognizes
the freedom of the press, and they were not arrested
for reporting. The two reporters are charged under the
Official Secrets Act for illegally possessing confidential
Government documents. Every citizen is bound by the
existing law of land. It is important that the action of
a journalist also be within the bounds of the law. In
accordance with judicial procedure, they have full legal
rights as defendants in the course of legal proceedings.
Achieving
durable
peace,
harmony
and
development in Rakhine state will be contingent on
nationwide peace and the success of the democratic
transition of Myanmar. The greatest national endeavour
for Myanmar today is to forge lasting peace. Without
peace, stability and the rule of law, the country will not
be able to realize its ultimate goal of building a genuine
democratic federal union that will guarantee security,
freedom and progress for all people.
To that end, the previous Government initiated the
Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement with ethnic armed
groups to sustain peace. Eight out of about twenty
armed groups signed the Agreement during the previous
administration. I am pleased to inform the Council that
today, 13 February, another two ethnic groups — the New
Mon State Party and the Lahu Democratic Union — have
signed the Agreement in Naypyidaw, bringing the total
number of signatories to ten. The People’s Republic of
China, India, Japan, Thailand, the European Union and
the United Nations have also signed the Agreement as
international witnesses.
The 21st Century Panglong Conference is the
forum bringing together all stakeholders to undertake
political dialogue towards peace and lay the foundation
for a democratic federal union. The first session of
the Panglong Peace Conference, held in 2016, was the
most inclusive peace conference in Myanmar’s history.
24/27

13/02/2018

The second session of the Conference took place in
May 2017 and reached an agreement on part 1 of the
37-point Pyidaungsu Accord, which will constitute part
of the basis for a future democratic federal constitution.
Preparations are now under way for the third session of
the Panglong Conference.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
the Myanmar Government’s sincere appreciation to all
our friends around the world and to the United Nations
for supporting the peace process. We hope that we can
count on the continued support and encouragement
of the international community in our efforts for
lasting peace, sustainable development and democratic
nation-building.
The current humanitarian crisis, which involves
the Muslim people of Rakhine state, did not result
from communal violence, as happened in 2012. It
is the consequence of terrorist attacks on security
posts, which triggered the security response of the
Government forces. Such attacks were a clear and
real threat to the security, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Myanmar. The matter is not a religious
issue, as some people are trying to portray. The majority
of Muslims in other areas across Myanmar have lived
peacefully and in harmony with people of different
faiths throughout history.
The challenges facing Rakhine state include
poverty, resource competition, human rights,
citizenship and immigration perspectives, to name a
few. There is no easy quick fix to those highly complex
challenges. Ultimately, it is up to the people of Myanmar
to determine how to achieve a peaceful and prosperous
Rakhine state. The solution must come from within. It
must not be imposed from outside.
We appreciate the concern expressed by our
friends and welcome the constructive cooperation
of the international community. We need a solution
to solve the problem. We would not allow action that
would exacerbate the problem. In the policymaking
process, we should not become hostage to the one-sided
media and activists. Important judgments and policy
decisions should be based on a careful examination of
the information.
I would like to conclude by expressing my delegation’s
sincere appreciation to the members of the Security
Council who have demonstrated an understanding
of the complex challenges that we face today. We are
grateful for their support and encouragement, which
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

we will continue to need. We believe that only mutual
understanding and constructive cooperation will bring
about positive results. The Government of Myanmar
is determined to overcome all the challenges with the
full support and contribution of the entire population of
Myanmar. We will not allow the immediate challenges
to undermine or to delay our ultimate goal of building a
fully democratic federal union, with lasting peace and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
brotherly delegation of Kuwait for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council. We are grateful to
the Council members that supported the call for this
meeting. We appreciate the comprehensive briefings by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Assistant Secretary-General of the Department
of Political Affairs.
Bangladesh continues to acknowledge the
international community’s support in providing
life-saving humanitarian assistance to more than
1 million people forcibly displaced from Myanmar’s
Rakhine state. In the coming months, we will further
strengthen efforts to improve shelters in preparation for
the onset of the monsoon. We are providing informal
education for children and adolescents in order to
develop enabling skills and expanding spaces accessible
to women and girls in order to help to further amplify
their voices in decisions that impact on their future.
We appreciate the Council’s sustained engagement
through the implementation of presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, adopted by consensus last year.
Among other priorities, it is evident that our shared
objective is to ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of the people forcibly displaced from Myanmar’s
Rakhine state to their original homes, or somewhere
close. That critically depends on their perception of the
situation on the ground to be conducive to their safe
and sustainable return, with their rights restored and
without the fear of reprisal. Our experience with the
verification process for return so far makes it apparent
that that has not been the case, as also recounted by the
High Commissioner for Refugees. A series of emerging
investigative reports about evidence of targeted killings
and the discovery of mass graves in Rohingya villages
in northern Rakhine state last year also perhaps explains

S/PV. 8179

the prevailing reluctance to repatriation among those
forcibly displaced.
We are currently in discussions with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) with regard to the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the Rohingya. We continue to
urge the Myanmar authorities to involve UNHCR in
the repatriation process in order to build confidence
and trust among the returnees. We are also working
closely with other relevant United Nations agencies
and humanitarian actors to deal with the daunting
challenges to provide succour to the Rohingya.
As envisaged in the bilateral documents concluded
between our two Governments, it would be helpful to
see tangible progress in realizing the commitments
made by the Myanmar side, including with regard
to implementing the practical and far-reaching
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Mr. Kofi Annan. However, on that
particular aspect, we have yet to see any specific results
beyond a professed intention in the form of setting up a
number of high-level entities. As recommended by the
Advisory Commission, without a comprehensive rightsbased approach, finding a lasting peaceful solution to
the situation in Rakhine state will continue to pose a
challenge to the Myanmar authorities.
One major restraining factor to voluntary return
among the forcibly displaced is the fact that, despite
Myanmar’s claims to the contrary, the influx of the
Rohingya into Bangladesh continues unabated to
date. According to reports, the remaining Rohingya
based in northern Rakhine state continue to cross the
border to escape from hunger, hostility and abuse. In
only the first 10 days of this month, a total of 1,500
new arrivals have been recorded on the Bangladesh
side. Those latest entrants have cited the following as
grounds for their continued exodus: persistent threats
from both security forces and armed vigilantes and the
occurrence of sporadic and indiscriminate violence;
an acute food shortage and forced starvation due to
the constraints imposed on harvesting their crops; the
burning down of and denial of access to local markets,
the cut-off of essential supplies, theft of livestock and
restriction on humanitarian assistance; the forced
closure of businesses and a lack of livelihood options;
and the alleged abduction of girls and young women, as
well as sexual violence and enslavement.

18-0408825/27

S/PV.8179

The situation in Myanmar

That unfolding situation is largely corroborated by
the case of approximately 6,000 displaced Rohingya,
who are currently staying in no man’s land or on
the zero line of the border between Bangladesh and
Myanmar. So far, those people have refrained from
entering Bangladesh and have reportedly expressed
their willingness to return to their own villages in safety
and to gain access to their lands and other livelihood
opportunities. They have also reportedly asked for the
restoration of their basic rights, including freedom
of movement. Regrettably, however, the Myanmar
authorities appear to have opted for compelling those
people to leave the area and have proposed verification
as a precondition for their return despite the fact that
they have not crossed over to the other side of the
border. We reiterate that, given the current situation on
the ground, the early resettlement of those people from
no man’s land could in fact work as a crucial test for
rebuilding the confidence to return among the forcibly
displaced people in Bangladesh.
In order to carry out advocacy among the prospective
returnees, Bangladesh has sought information from
Myanmar about the preparations made in Rakhine state
with regard to the rebuilding of villages, resettlement
plans, the provision of livelihood assistance, access to
basic services and safety arrangements, as envisaged in
the arrangement signed between our two Governments
last month. In response, the Myanmar authorities have
shared information related to the construction of two
reception centres and a transit camp on their side of
the border. The repatriation process was scheduled to
begin on 23 January. The process in fact started by
establishing joint working groups on 15 January.
The prospective returnees have made it clear that
they do not expect to go back to Myanmar to stay in
camps. They would like to have assurance from the
international community about the possibility of the
following: first, resettlement in their original villages,
not in closed camps; secondly, the restoration of their
agricultural land and business ventures; thirdly, the
right to cultivate and harvest their land and to run their
business ventures; fourthly, the right to traditional
fishing; fifthly, access to local markets; and sixthly,
freedom of movement to conduct a normal life.
A number of forcibly displaced people in Bangladesh
have also put forward claims for compensation for the
arson and damage to their homes and property during
the most recent cycles of violence. In the aftermath of
the arson, there have been reports of confiscation of
26/27

13/02/2018

land and abandoned property by the local authorities,
which understandably acts as a deterrent to return.
There have also been reports of the bulldozing and
clearing of villages in northern Rakhine state that would
not only eliminate features of recognition to establish
ownership rights, but would also seek to wipe out
any remaining proof or evidence of alleged atrocities
committed against the forcibly displaced people.
It remains a matter of concern that the Human
Rights Council’s fact-finding mission continues to be
denied access to Rakhine state. It is imperative that
demonstrable efforts be made to ensure accountability
for alleged crimes as part of efforts to heal the trauma
suffered by the Rohingya and restore their confidence
in the possibility of sustainable return. It is a matter of
ongoing concern that northern Rakhine state remains
out of the reach of international media and that very
little humanitarian access to the affected people is
allowed through relevant United Nations agencies and
their local and international partners.
As recommended by the Council, Bangladesh
remains engaged in good faith with Myanmar to
create a situation conducive to the sustainable return
of the Rohingya and other displaced communities. We
have based our pronouncements and approach only
on facts and steered clear of vilifying any individual
or the friendly people of Myanmar. Even though the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis is often projected as a
bilateral issue between Bangladesh and Myanmar, it
needs to be acknowledged that the present crisis is the
result of systematic discriminatory and abusive policies
pursued by the Myanmar authorities over decades. Our
Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina therefore
categorically said in her statement at the General
Assembly last year, “The crisis has its root in Myanmar
and its solution has to be found in Myanmar”.
To that end, we urge the Security Council to
act as the custodian of the process on behalf of the
international community. Council members have once
again demonstrated their readiness to do so by offering
a number of constructive recommendations that we
hope the Myanmar authorities will duly acknowledge
and act upon. We are confident that the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy will be able to serve as a
conduit for the international community’s meaningful
engagement with Myanmar.
In this context, we reiterate our suggestion that the
Council undertake a visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar
18-04088

13/02/2018

The situation in Myanmar

in order to witness the humanitarian situation on
the ground and add momentum to the repatriation
process in response to the legitimate aspirations of
the Rohingya and other displaced communities. The
voluntary return of forcibly displaced people can take
place only under the assurance of non-criminalization,
non-discrimination and sustainable resettlement and
reintegration. For its part, Bangladesh will continue
to seek the international community’s engagement in

S/PV. 8179

making sure that the bilateral instruments that we have
so painstakingly put in place will deliver desired results
for the most persecuted minority in the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

18-0408827/27
