IX,

33/95.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 11
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of great
importance and of mutual concern to the Member
States, including the host country, as well as to the
United Nations as a whole,
Expressing its concern over the incident and all its
aspects which resulted in a diplomatic representative
of a Member State of the United Nations being unilaterally required to leave the host country,
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country;
2. Considers that the security of the missions accredited to the United Nations and the safety of their
personnel are indispensable for their effective functioning, notes with satisfaction the assurances given by
the competent authorities of the host country and recognizes the usefulness of the various measures taken
to this end;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures without delay in order to prevent any acts
violating the security of missions and the safety of
their personnel or the inviolability of their property
and in order to ensure normal conditions for the existence and functioning of all missions;
4. Urges the host country to continue to take measures to apprehend, bring to justice and punish all those
responsible for committing criminal acts against missions accredited to the United Nations as provided for
in the 1972 Federal Act for the Protection of Foreign
Officials and Official Guests of the United States;12
5. Calls upon the missions of Member States to
co-operate, with a view to facilitating the course of
justice, as fully as possible with the Federal and local
United States authorities in cases affecting the security
of those missions and their personnel;
6. Calls upon the host country to avoid actions
not consistent with meeting effectively obligations undertaken by it in accordance with international law in
relation to the privileges and immunities of Member
States;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into
consultations with the host country concerning procedures for consultations between the host country
and the Member States or the Secretary-General, pursuant to section 13 ( b) of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 13 and
to report to the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country in 1979;
8. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
Supplement No. 26 (A/33/26 and Corr.I).
States Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871 /Rev.I).
13 Resolution 169 (II).
11 /bid.,

12 United

219

9. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems and notes, in this regard, the desirability of missions making reasonable efforts to utilize
off-street parking facilities;
10. Expresses the hope that efforts will be continued and intensified with a view to implementing an
information programme in order to acquaint the population of the City of New York and its boroughs with
the privileges and immunities of the personnel of the
missions accredited to the United Nations and with
the importance of the international functions performed
by them;
11. Notes that there have been difficulties concerning unpaid bills for goods and services rendered by
private persons and organizations to certain missions
accredited to the United Nations and certain individual
diplomats attached to those missions, and suggests that
the Secretariat and others concerned work together to
solve these outstanding difficulties;
12. Expresses its appreciation to the New York
City Commission for the United Nations and for the
Consular Corps and those bodies which contribute to
its efforts to help to accommodate the needs, interests
and requirements of the diplomatic community, to
provide hospitality and to promote mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the people
of the City of New York;
13. Decides to continue the work of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of
15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining on
a more regular basis all matters falling within its terms
of reference, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the Committee with all necessary assistance;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33 /96.

Report of the Special Committee on
Enhancing the Effediveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International
Relations 14

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976,
in which it invited Member States to examine further
the draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in
International Relations 15 submitted by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, as well as other proposals
made during the consideration of this item,
Recalling in particular its resolution 32/ 150 of
19 December 1977, whereby it established the Special
14 As a result of the replacement of Argentina, Brazil and
Chile by Nicaragua, Panama and Peru (see A/32/500, annex
111), the Special Committee is now composed as follows:
Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Guinea,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Poland, Romania, Senegal,
Somalia, Spain, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
l!'i Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/33/41 and Corr.I), annex.
