S/PV.7833

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7833rd meeting

Tuesday, 13 December 2016, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasso Matoses/Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43387 (E)
*1643387*

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to present my Office’s twenty-fourth
report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005).
Six months have passed since my last report to the
Council (see S/PV.7710), and indeed nearly a decade has
passed since the first warrant of arrest was issued by
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the situation
in Darfur. As I present this twenty-fourth report before
the Council today, it is with immense regret that I
acknowledge once again that all five suspects against
whom warrants of arrest have been issued by the
International Criminal Court in this situation remain
at large.
As the longing for justice of the victims of Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur remains unfulfilled, the
suspects Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Hussein and
Mr. Ahmad Harun continue to occupy high-ranking
positions within the Government of the Sudan without
subjecting themselves to the scrutiny of the law so that
their guilt or innocence can be established. What is
more, Mr. Ali Kushayb continues to be active in the
Government of the Sudan’s aligned militias operating
in Darfur, while another suspect, Mr. Abdallah Banda,
also remains at large in the Sudan.
Time may lapse, but time does not erase the fact that
serious crimes have been committed in Darfur, resulting
in the untold suffering of victims. And time will not
2/18

13/12/2016

change the fact that those five men stand accused of
multiple crimes against humanity and war crimes, and
additionally, in the case of Mr. Al-Bashir, genocide.
Those constitute the world’s most serious crimes. We
must ensure that time also does not erode this fact in our
memories, nor our obligations to hold those responsible
for those egregious crimes accountable.
Let me recall by way of a few examples the gravity
of the crimes. It is alleged that between August 2003 and
March 2004 in the town of Mukjar, West Darfur, over
70 men were summarily executed after being detained
and tortured by the Janjaweed and the Sudanese Army.
In that same period, women and girls were raped and
sexually assaulted. Civilians were attacked, forcibly
expelled from their homes and herded into camps for
internally displaced persons.
In an attempt to stop the violence and restore peace,
the African Union (AU) deployed a peacekeeping
operation in Darfur. Yet despite their protected status,
in September 2007 rebel forces under the command of
Mr. Banda are alleged to have attacked and murdered
AU peacekeepers at their base in Haskanita, including
one peacekeeper from a State that is currently a
member of the Council. The courageous women and
men who risk their lives in international and regional
efforts to maintain peace deserve not only our respect
and admiration, but also the best protection we can
afford them. That protection surely includes holding
those who target and attack peacekeepers accountable
for such crimes.
Those are a just a few illustrations of the many
crimes I am trying to prosecute as a result of the
referral from the Security Council — crimes that the
Pre-trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court
have determined there are grounds to believe were
committed by the Darfur suspects.
I refer to those crimes because it is critical that
we do not lose sight of the ultimate purpose of these
half-yearly briefings. These briefings should be more
than a simple routine in fulfilment of a prescribed
timetable. They should be seen as an opportunity for
dialogue and an exchange of views between my Office
and the Council on how best to achieve the objectives
of resolution 1593 (2005), so that independent and
impartial justice can be delivered to the Darfur victims.
As my report makes clear, the Rome Statute system
has two essential pillars, namely, a judicial pillar,
provided by the International Criminal Court, and an
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

execution and enforcement pillar, provided by State
parties, and in the context of the Darfur situation,
also the Council. The Office’s reports are intended not
only to provide relevant updates, but also to galvanize
and mobilize the Council to enforce the obligations
created by resolution 1593 (2005) and the Rome Statute
legal framework.
Resolution 1593 (2005) was intended to enable my
Office to establish the truth and deliver justice to the
victims of Rome Statute crimes in Darfur. Instead, as
time passes, ICC fugitives continue to travel across
international borders unimpeded by the failure of the
Sudan, other States, including — I regret to say — some
States parties, to enforce the Court’s arrest warrants.
A further aggravating factor is the Council’s
inaction. It is no surprise then that victims and witnesses
of the Office are slowly but surely losing faith in the
process of international criminal justice in Darfur. We
must ask ourselves some tough but honest questions.
What are we to say to victims who continue to suffer in
Darfur, to the individuals who have uprooted their lives
to be witnesses and had the courage to tell their story?
How can we maintain their trust in the judicial process
when they continue to observe Mr. Al-Bashir and other
suspects traversing the globe with impunity? Victims,
including some I have met with personally, are puzzled
and dismayed by the Council’s lack of action.
It is almost eight years since the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the International Criminal Court issued
the first warrant of arrest against Mr. Al-Bashir. Yet
during each reporting period, Mr. Al-Bashir travels
to different States, attending events ranging from
presidential inaugurations to international sporting
events. According to my Office’s information,
Mr. Al-Bashir has crossed international borders on 131
occasions since March 2009, and on 14 occasions to
State parties and on 117 occasions to non-State parties.
His movements are traceable. The world knows where
he is, where he travels to — often in advance, from the
media. There is ample opportunity for Mr. Al-Bashir
to be apprehended — if the political will exists among
States, and indeed the Council. As I stated to the
Council in June, the lack of action by this organ has
emboldened States to continue to host Mr. Al-Bashir.
It also emboldens the Darfur fugitives to travel, as
demonstrated by a recent visit by Mr. Al-Bashir,
together with Mr. Hussein, to a non-State party. This
open display of impunity undermines resolution 1593
(2005) and the credibility of the Council.

S/PV.7833

The legal position regarding the obligation of
States parties to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
should he travel to their territory could not be clearer.
As Pre-Trial Chamber II stated in its non-compliance
decision of 9 April 2014,
“[n]owhere in any decision issued by the Court is
there the slightest ambiguity about the Chambers’
legal position regarding Omar Al-Bashir’s
arrest and surrender to the Court, despite the
arguments invoked relating to his immunity under
international law”.
As the Council will recall, South Africa failed to
arrest Mr. Al-Bashir during his visit in June 2015. On
8 December 2016, the Chamber issued a decision to
convene a public hearing, to be held on 7 April 2017,
in relation to a possible finding of non-compliance
for South Africa’s failure to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court. The Chamber has not only
invited South Africa and my Office to make written and
oral submissions, but has also invited the United Nations
to attend the hearing and be heard. That opportunity
will allow the United Nations to set forth its position on
non-compliance with Security Council referrals to the
Court and the role to be played by the Security Council
in non-compliance proceedings. The Chamber further
invited all interested parties to provide any relevant
submissions should they wish to do so.
More recently, the Court found States parties
Uganda and Djibouti in non-compliance for failing to
arrest Mr. Al-Bashir during visits to those countries in
July of this year, and referred the matter to the Council.
In those decisions, the Court emphasized the critical
role of the Council when non-compliance findings are
referred to it. Specifically, it stated,
“[i]n the absence of follow-up actions on the part of
the Security Council, any referral to the Court under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
would become futile and incapable of achieving its
ultimate goal of putting an end to impunity”.
I can only underscore the necessity of the Council
taking swift and concrete action to ensure compliance
with all arrest warrants against the fugitives in the
Darfur situation. That includes action against the Sudan
for its continued and open defiance of the Court’s orders
and resolution 1593 (2005). The Pre-Trial Chamber has
now issued 13 decisions finding non-compliance and/
or requesting for appropriate action to be taken against
the Sudan and States parties for failing to arrest Mr

16-433873/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Al-Bashir and other fugitives. At a minimum, the
Council should consider referencing those decisions
in a separate draft resolution, as has been done in the
Libya situation when this organ adopted resolution
2213 (2015).
It is not enough for Council members to continue
calling for support for the Court. Such calls have to be
matched with concrete action. In that regard, serious
consideration should be given to New Zealand’s
recommendation on 9 June. New Zealand stated that,
when a finding of non-compliance is received, the
Council should consider using the tools at its disposal,
such as a draft resolution, statement, letter or meeting
with the country concerned. And let us not forget that the
failure to execute warrants of arrest is not limited to the
case of Mr. Al-Bashir. To date, the ICC arrest warrants
against Mr. Harun and Mr. Kushayb have remained
outstanding for almost 10 years, against Mr. Hussein
for almost five years, and against Mr. Banda for a little
more than two years.
I take this opportunity to call on all States to fully
cooperate with the Court in the arrest and surrender of
suspects against whom ICC arrest warrants have been
issued. Allowing suspects to travel across international
borders with impunity not only severely undermines the
Council’s credibility and that of the Court but equally
erodes public confidence in our common responsibility
to end impunity for the world’s most serious crimes,
as well as our ability to ensure that victims attain the
justice they so rightly deserve.
In the face of the failure to arrest the Darfur
suspects, it is no surprise that allegations of the
commission of new crimes under the Rome Statute
continue to be reported in Darfur. According to the
information that my Office has obtained, hundreds
of civilians have been reportedly killed since April
2016. The area of Jebel Marra continues to be one of
conflict and instability, and that has a dire impact upon
civilians. Since June, there have been new clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra,
resulting in aerial bombardments by the Government.
Approximately 80 civilians were allegedly killed as a
result of these bombardments, mainly in Jebel Marra.
Moreover, as the Council is aware, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) reported on 1 July that women and
girls continue to suffer from sexual and gender4/18

13/12/2016

based violence, including conflict-related violence.
Particularly worrying is the recent, and as yet
unconfirmed, allegations by Amnesty International
that the Government of the Sudan may have deployed
chemical weapons against civilians during several
attacks on Jebel Marra over the course of 2016. It is
alleged that 200 to 250 people, including many children,
may have died from exposure to chemical weapons. My
Office is taking the steps that it can to verify whether
the allegations are true. I note that the Government of
the Sudan has denied the claims, and to date both the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and UNAMID have not come across evidence that
supports those claims.
However, it must also be noted that the Government
of the Sudan severely restricts access of UNAMID and
other organizations to the Jebel Marra region. Denying
access to the United Nations, the African Union and other
international humanitarian actors prevents aid from
getting to the victims and internally displaced persons,
and potentially enables the parties to the conflict to
cover up crimes against civilians committed in the
conflict zones. It is imperative for the Government of
the Sudan to facilitate access to Jebel Marra. Consistent
with its policy of total non-cooperation with the Court,
the Sudan also denies access to my Office to prevent it
from investigating alleged crimes.
I also feel compelled to say a few words about
resources. With the Office’s multiple situations and
cases, it will be increasingly difficult for the Office to
allocate needed resources to the Darfur investigation
in the coming year given the recently approved 2017
budget of the Court. Nevertheless, despite limited
resources, the total lack of cooperation by the Sudan
and the inability to investigate in Darfur, my Office
continues to conduct inquiries and investigations. The
team assigned to the Darfur situation has interviewed
additional witnesses since my previous report and
obtained further evidence regarding not only previous
crimes, but also allegations of current crimes. Further
efforts are being made to identify potential witnesses.
Overall, despite many challenges, my team continues to
make progress. The support of the Council in obtaining
additional funding from the General Assembly would
significantly increase the investigative capacity of
my team.
On every occasion that I report to the Council on the
situation in Darfur, I am forced to voice my concerns
about the very same challenges, the sum total of which
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

amounts to justice still eluding the victims in Darfur. I
wish I could be here today to inform the Council and
the victims that the judicial process has significantly
advanced. But I cannot. As long as the Council does not
take direct action to induce the Sudan and other States
to execute the arrest warrants, I will likely be here next
June delivering the same message. The lack of progress
must weigh heavily on our collective conscience and
must not be allowed to continue.
I end on this point, and I ask the members of the
Council to consider it carefully: it was a watershed
moment for international criminal justice when the
Council voted in favour of referring the situation
in Darfur to the International Criminal Court. The
referral signalled to the world and to the victims the
Council’s determination to fight against impunity
and foster justice and accountability in Darfur. That
determination must guide the Council today as it did
then. I ask the Council to give new life to resolution
1593 (2005) by giving my Office the support that
it needs in order to advance its investigations and
prosecutions in the Darfur situation. For the sake of
the victims in Darfur, the members of the Council must
break the current impasse. Under the critical watch of
history, we must not allow “never again” to ring hollow
and taunt the memory of the victims in Darfur. To be
sure, the world yearns to see the Council employ its
authority with confidence and conviction in full support
of international criminal justice. This body’s effective
follow-through in the Darfur situation is the litmus test
of the Council’s ability to fulfil that promise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements. I would
like to remind speakers that, if possible, they should
limit their statements to no more than five minutes.
After five minutes the speaker’s microphone will start
blinking. The Council’s agenda today is very full and
intense, so I would request that speakers with long
statements give a condensed version in the Chamber and
circulate the full text to the other members separately.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Security Council
and by thanking her for her briefing today. The United
Kingdom is grateful for her twenty-fourth report,

S/PV.7833

and we thank her and her Office for their continuing
investigation of the situation in Darfur.
The United Kingdom supports the ICC in its vital work
of challenging impunity and ensuring accountability
for those who bear the greatest responsibility for the
most serious crimes of international concern. It is a
tragedy that crimes such as these continue in Darfur.
The Prosecutor’s report notes that lately crimes have
decreased, but we have still seen worrying reports of
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, notably in Jebel Marra. We remain
particularly concerned about reports of attacks on
civilians by the rapid support forces and other militias.
We call on all the parties to end violence against
civilians, violations of international humanitarian law
and violations and abuses of human rights.
The United Kingdom welcomes the signing of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
Roadmap Agreement by both the Government of the
Sudan and the opposition parties, but we remain deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Darfur,
where 2.6 million people are still displaced, with no
solution for the root causes of their displacement.
This year saw a spike in displacement in the wake of
conflict in Jebel Marra that strained humanitarian
actors’ capacity to meet the needs of suffering Darfuri
civilians, particularly in the face of obstacles to their
access. Civilians continue to be the main victims of the
ongoing instability, and the United Kingdom urges the
Government of the Sudan to allow access throughout
Darfur, including all parts of Jebel Marra. That will
enable the Prosecutor to carry out her investigation and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians
and facilitate humanitarian assistance. There is an
urgent need to address the gaps in the rule of law and
accountability, which breed violence and instability, as
witnessed in inter-communal clashes and widespread
allegations of gender-based crimes and serious sexual
violence against women.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) to
cooperate fully with the ICC, execute outstanding
arrest warrants and fulfil its international obligations.
The United Kingdom is frustrated about the fact
that fugitives from the Court, including President
Al-Bashir and Mr. Hussein, have been able to travel
unhindered to a number of States that are parties to
the Court, and therefore under an obligation to arrest

16-433875/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and surrender them. Together with our international
partners, we will continue to raise our concerns with
the relevant Governments and make it clear that we
expect compliance with the arrest warrants for all those
indicted by the Court. Such non-cooperation with the
Court weakens the rules-based international system.
We agree with the Prosecutor that the Council
should play a more active role in the area of compliance,
and we support effective measures to ensure that
instances of non-cooperation with the Court are
taken seriously. The United Kingdom believes that
achieving justice for victims should be at the heart
of the international community’s response to mass
atrocity violence. It is essential to ensure that fugitives
from international justice do not enjoy impunity. We
call on all States parties to the Court to cooperate with
it and abide by their Rome Statute obligations. We
commend the ongoing investigations of the Office of
the Prosecutor, and welcome the fact that despite these
challenges, real progress has been made and significant
additional evidence gathered. We recognize that the
investigations are complex and take place in very
difficult circumstances.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom would like
to take this opportunity to renew its commitment to
supporting the Court both as a State party to the Rome
Statute and as a member of the Security Council. We
recognize the financial constraints that the Prosecutor’s
Office faces and respect her independence in deciding
on the best use of those resources.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
to the Security Council today on her twenty-fourth
report, in implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

13/12/2016

586 and 590, adopted at its twenty-fourth, twentyfifth and twenty-sixth sessions, respectively. Based on
those resolutions, the AU stresses, among other things,
that since it is committed to combating impunity in
accordance with the African Union’s Constitutive Act,
the ICC’s measures against President Omar Al-Bashir
of the Sudan should be suspended.
Secondly, successive resolutions adopted by the
African Union have urged the Security Council to
withdraw its referral of the situation in Darfur to the
ICC and have expressed deep concern about the fact
that for a number of years now the Council has not
taken into consideration the African Union’s calls on
the matter.
Thirdly, in the light of African States’ reservations
about the Rome Statute in particular, the Court should
not take any measures that could affect peace, security,
stability, sovereignty or territorial integrity in African
States. At the same time, it should respect the norms
of international law pertaining to the immunity
of Presidents and high officials during their terms
of office.
Fourthly, it should reject any measures to be taken
against any African States based on their non-compliance
with the Rome Statute or non-cooperation with the
provisions of resolution 1593 (2005) through a refusal
to arrest President Al-Bashir or to hand him over to
the ICC, which is a commitment on the part of African
Union member States in accordance with AU resolutions
and its Constitutive Act.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I want to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her report and briefing.
I commend her for the candor of her remarks and for
the challenge that she has made to the Security Council.

In her report, the Prosecutor reviews a number of
challenges and makes some comments about the Court’s
performance with regard to Darfur. It concludes with
two fundamental requests to the Security Council,
the first being that the Council, through the United
Nations, facilitate financial support to the Court for its
investigations on Darfur, and the second that it act to
ensure that justice is done to a number of the accused. I
would like to address the following points.

New Zealand has long supported the need for an
effective international accountability framework. Our
experience on the Council over the past two years
has reinforced our view that, without an effective
accountability mechanism, too many of the conflicts
that wind up on the Council’s agenda will never be
adequately resolved. Rather, they will flare up as
people will react to the unaddressed injustices that they
will have suffered.

First, there is a united African position on dealing
with the ICC on various issues related to the African
continent, and it is reflected in a number of African
Union (AU) resolutions, including resolutions 547,

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role in that framework. It provides the
international community with an important tool for
ensuring that serious international crimes do not go

6/18

16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unpunished. The Council’s ability to refer situations to
the International Criminal Court plays a vital role. At
the same time, the Council needs to be very careful that
it is not using referrals as a political tool or as the only
possible resource in an otherwise intractable situation.
Such actions risk politicizing the Court, and can prolong
both the conflicts concerned and the process of seeking
accountability. Moreover, when referrals are made,
they need to be accompanied by a clear commitment to
providing the Court with the support, cooperation and
resources it needs to discharge its mandate.
The need for sustained follow-up is particularly
evident in the case of the Council’s referral of the
situation in Darfur. The Prosecutor’s twenty-fourth
report on this issue makes for depressing reading.
The Prosecutor’s briefing today has underlined the
bleakness of the situation. Little has improved in the
past six months. All five ICC indictees remain at
large. Civilians in Darfur continue to suffer from the
shocking consequences of conflict. If confirmed, the
recent reports of the use of chemical weapons would
represent yet another crime against the people of
Darfur. We know that the environment for the ICC in
taking forward the Council’s Darfur referral remains
extremely challenging.
Resolution 1593 (2005) requires the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor and to provide them with the necessary
assistance. It also urges Member States to cooperate
with such efforts. Those obligations are being ignored.
There has also not been any meaningful accountability
at the national or regional levels. The Government of
the Sudan’s continued non-cooperation with the Court
amounts to non-compliance with Council resolutions
and with its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. And yet the Council has not responded to any
of the 13 findings of non-compliance referred to it in
any meaningful way.
Not every member of this Council is a party to
the International Criminal Court. But we all share
a common interest — and indeed a responsibility
for — in ensuring compliance with the Council’s
decisions. When that is absent, the credibility and
effectiveness of this institution are undermined, and the
message is sent that Council decisions can be ignored
with impunity. That should be of concern to all those
who value the role, legitimacy and authority of this
organ. As the Prosecutor reminded us this morning,

S/PV.7833

last year New Zealand made two proposals for action to
address this situation.
First, we called for the Council to take a more
structured approach in considering findings of
non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice. In our view, the Council should, at a
minimum, discuss any finding of non-cooperation
with a view to determining which of the tools that it
has at its disposal, if any, offers the most appropriate
response. As Ms. Bensouda recalled, those options
include the adoption of a formal draft resolution or
statement, the dispatch of a letter or a meeting with the
country concerned. To continue ignoring ongoing acts
of non-compliance is neither productive nor credible.
We urge Council members to take a more active and
consistent approach in response to future reports of
non-compliance, and we look forward to working with
other Council members in the coming days on how to
address to this most recent report.
Secondly, we also need to find a way through the
current impasse in the Council’s relations with the
Government of the Sudan. While we recognize the
challenges involved in doing so, there is a clear need for
the Council to build a new relationship with Khartoum.
We hope Council members will give serious thought as
to how that might be achieved in the coming year.
There is no escaping the fact that referrals made
by the Council have contributed to current tensions
between the International Criminal Court and some
of its African members. New Zealand recognizes
the unique role of the ICC and the fundamental
importance of preserving its judicial and prosecutorial
independence. Equally, we know that we all stand to
gain from more frank and robust engagement aimed at
resolving key challenges facing the Court. That means
honestly acknowledging concerns that have been raised
by African State parties. It means fostering greater
mutual understanding on those and other issues. It
means identifying ways in which we can collectively
address and strengthen the Court and end impunity.
The Council needs to play its part in supporting such a
dialogue. However, it goes without saying that dialogue
does not mean forgetting our search for justice and
ensuring accountability.
We hope that we will see emerge from these
current tensions a strengthened and more productive
relationship between the Council and African States

16-433877/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on matters relating to the International Criminal Court
that are of mutual interest and importance.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the updates on her Office’s
activities since June.
Ukraine remains deeply concerned about
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
indiscriminate killings and other crimes committed in
Darfur. Gender-based violence, including ethnically
motivated sexual crimes, continues to take place
in Darfur as signalled by the relevant report of the
Secretary-General. In our view, that warrants the special
attention of the Security Council. Unfortunately, like
previous reports, this report still notes that States have
failed to arrest people sought after by the Court. Article
27, paragraph 1, of the Rome Statute provides that the
Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any
distinction based on official capacity. In particular, in
an official capacity as a Head of State or Government,
a member of a Government or Parliament, an elected
representative or a Government official shall in no case
exempt a person from criminal responsibility under
the Statute.
It is well known that the Court does not possess
any enforcement mechanism and can fulfill its mandate
only in cooperation with States. Resolution 1593 (2005)
includes a clear requirement for the Government of the
Sudan to fully cooperate and provide any assistance to
the Court. Yet the reality is that the Government of the
Sudan has not responded to requests from the Court.
The Court often gets those requests back unopened.
Ukraine considers such a stance inappropriate and
disrespectful to the Court. We call on the Government
of the Sudan to provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor.
Irrespective of being party or non-party to the
Rome Statute, all Member States should consolidate
their efforts to ensure accountability and prevent
grave crimes in Darfur and elsewhere from happening.
Non-cooperation with the ICC in such situations is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Our
common failure to bring to justice those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law and abuses
of human rights can stimulate violence in the rest of
the world.
Finally, in such turbulent times for the authority
and activities of the ICC in Africa, Ukraine would like
8/18

13/12/2016

to express its full support to the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICC on this case, as well as other
important cases. I again thank Prosecutor Bensouda.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
listened to the briefing of Prosecutor Bensouda.
Lately, the situation in Darfur has, on the whole,
calmed down. The Sudanese Government is dedicated
to maintaining peace and stability, pushing forward the
political process and promoting economic and social
development. China welcomes all of those developments.
The question of Darfur involves a host of
factors — namely, political, security, development and
humanitarian. As such, it requires integrated solution,
of which the political process represents the basis. It is
the key to the question of Darfur.
Thanks to the mediation by the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel, a road-map agreement
was signed by the Justice and Equality Movement,
the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and other
armed groups. The priority at hand for the international
community is to support the implementation of the
agreement by the Sudanese Government and the armed
opposition groups, help them reach consensus on
outstanding issues through negotiation, and at the same
time urge the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, to
participate in the peace process unconditionally, in a
joint effort to seek a comprehensive political settlement
of the question of Darfur.
The international community should take an
objective and fair stance, respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan, and
play a constructive role in the political settlement of the
question of Darfur.
China’s position on the handling of the question of
the Sudan by the International Criminal Court (ICC)
remains unchanged. We welcome the fact that the
African Union has set up a council of ministers to deal
with the ICC’s handling of the question of the Sudan. We
support the legitimate concerns of the African Union
and the Sudanese Government on the handling of the
question of the Sudan by the ICC. Those legitimate
concerns must receive adequate attention.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
comprehensive presentation of the twenty-fourth report
on the activities of her Office on the situation in Darfur,
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1593
(2005). We believe that such transparent and frank
reports give added value to the consideration of issues
falling within the purview of the Security Council.
Uruguay sees this as a timely opportunity to reiterate
its full support for the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) as an institution created to strengthen the
rule of law at the international level by bringing to
justice those responsible for the most serious violations
of the rights common to all humankind. In this vein,
we call once again on States Members of the United
Nations that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute
to join it, which will contribute to its universalization
and thus help to fight impunity and defend victims of
heinous crimes, which pose a serious threat to peace
and security for all humankind.
We deplore the fact that the situation around this
issue has remained practically unchanged since June,
when we last considered it (see S/PV.7710). Having
heard the briefing of the Prosecutor a few minutes
ago, we wish to express our dismay at the lack of
cooperation of the parties to the ICC and the failure to
observe and implement the Rome Statute. Uruguay, as
a State party to the Statute, is concerned at all cases of
lack of cooperation with the ICC. Here we would recall
resolution 1593 (2005), adopted by the Council, which
in its paragraph 2 states that the Government of Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur must
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor, and
also urges all States and regional and other competent
international organizations to cooperate fully.
There is a shared responsibility between States that
do not cooperate and the Council, which does not act
to support and enforce compliance with its resolution
1593 (2005), in violation of the provisions of article 87
of the Rome Statute.
Uruguay is prepared to work to ensure that the
Council plays a more active role in considering cases
of lack of cooperation with the ICC and that arrest
warrants are complied with, which is an indispensable
condition for the Court to be able to fulfil its mandate.
We are grateful for and deem valuable the proposals
made by New Zealand that would enable concrete
action on the part of the Security Council in this regard.
I wish to encourage and congratulate the Office
of the Prosecutor for its work in investigating the
crimes committed in Darfur, which without a doubt
promotes the strengthening of the rule of law and the

S/PV.7833

establishment of a minimal basis for the international
community to reject impunity in cases of flagrant
violations of human rights.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to begin by thanking the Prosecutor for her
report and for her presence here.
The goal of combating impunity, as set out in
resolution 1593 (2005), remains as necessary as ever.
The numerous acts of violence that the Prosecutor lists
in her report remain unacceptable, and the reference to
allegations of the use of the chemical weapons in the
report, which of course must be investigated, should
push the Security Council to ensure greater coherence
and determination in the implementation of its own
decisions. In that context, it is more important than
ever that justice be done and guilt assigned so as to
prevent and deter any recurrence of such acts. That is
why France deplores the fact that the arrest warrants
issued by the Court have not been executed.
The Council and the international community are
fully aware of the decisions that need to be taken to
restore stability and peace in Darfur.
First, the resolution of the conflict must be
political. It must involve the Government and the rebel
groups. We regret in that respect the absence of any
genuine progress in establishing an inclusive process
allowing a sustainable peace to be achieved. France
supports the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel to that end.
Secondly, the protection of civilians must be
ensured. It is important to recall here that the primary
responsibility for protecting the population lies with
the Sudanese Government, and to call on all parties to
the conflict to respect international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. We regret that the
Prosecutor’s report once again lists restrictions on
access for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as well as obstacles
to its functioning. The Sudanese authorities must
provide full cooperation so as to allow the Operation to
discharge its mandate.
Thirdly, safe, immediate and obstacle-free
humanitarian access to the civilian population and
displaced persons must be guaranteed.
Fourthly, and finally, it remains key that the
perpetrators of the crimes committed be prosecuted
and brought to justice. France reiterates in this respect

16-433879/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the importance of the obligation for cooperation by all
States parties to the International Criminal Court and
by all States Members of the United Nations with the
Court, in accordance with the resolutions adopted by
the Council. Without such cooperation, the prosecution
of the most serious crimes by the Court will remain a
dead letter.
This obligation falls primarily on the Sudan,
which must implement the arrest warrants against its
nationals for crimes committed on its territory and
cooperate with the Court, as demanded by resolution
1593 (2005). The States parties to the Rome Statute also
have a key role to play with regard to their statutory
obligation to cooperate with the Court and to execute
arrest warrants when the persons concerned are present
on their territory. We regret that in recent months this
obligation has not been respected by certain States, and
we are grateful to the Office of the Prosecutor for its
follow-up on this major challenge.
France regularly reiterates, in the context of its
bilateral relations with those States and with the Sudan,
the importance it attaches to the fight against impunity
and its support for the Court, and it calls on those States
to uphold their international commitments in terms of
cooperation with the Court.
In that context, the responsibility of the Council
is clear, and it is two-pronged. Cooperation with the
Court must be made effective, and it must be ensured
that arrest warrants are executed. As the Prosecutor
stressed, it is up to the Council to respond to cases of
non-cooperation with the Court. In that regard, we are
ready to consider modalities that would allow action by
the Council.
It is also vital that the Assembly of States parties
remain mobilized on cases of non-cooperation with the
Court, as must international organizations. Here it is
necessary to limit contacts with persons who are subject
to arrest warrants to those who are deemed essential, in
line with the policy of the Secretary-General as defined
in his two directives of April 2013. France reiterates
the importance of the pursuit by the United Nations
as whole of the implementation of those directives
and of the application of the relevant provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005).
Finally, we should continue efforts to ensure a
cessation of violence against civilians and the quest for
an inclusive political solution. That is the only possible
way to achieve peace and stability in Darfur in the long10/18

13/12/2016

term. To that end, UNAMID has a significant role to
play and must accomplish its mandate. It is essential that
free, unrestricted access to the entire Darfur territory
be granted to it. We will give particular attention to that
point during the next UNAMID mandate extension.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her briefing. We have taken note of the twenty-fourth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution
1593 (2005) and the judicial activities of the Office of
the Prosecutor since its previous report.
Malaysia remains concerned about the protracted
conflict in Darfur, which has continued to bring about
dire consequences in prolonging human suffering, the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situations
and large-scale displacement of civilians in Darfur.
Attacks on civilians, including sexual and gender-based
crime, continue to be reported in Darfur. We wish to
remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian
laws to refrain from all acts of violence against civilians
and humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.
Malaysia has always maintained that dialogue is
the only way to achieve a resolution of the conflict
in Darfur. In that regard, we welcome the signing of
the Roadmap Agreement by the Government of the
Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement/Minni Minnawi, the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North and the
National Umma Party on 16 March and 8 August,
respectively. We furthermore commend the effort of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
in achieving the Roadmap Agreement. The signing
of the Roadmap Agreement marked an important step
forward in the Darfur peace process. All parties must
seize the opportunity presented by the Agreement,
as its implementation offers a means to resolve their
differences and address the protracted conflict in Darfur.
To that end, Malaysia looks forward to the resumption
of dialogue and urges all parties to intensify their
efforts to reach a comprise on a cessation of hostilities,
ensuring humanitarian access in the Darfur region and
reaching a comprehensive and final political settlement.
At the same time, parties that have yet to join
the Roadmap Agreement should be encouraged to
do so urgently and to engage constructively in the
dialogue. In order to achieve that, it is incumbent upon
the Government of the Sudan to create an enabling
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

environment where trust and confidence can be built.
In that respect, efforts by the Government of the Sudan
to demonstrate compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and their commitment to hold those
responsible for violations of international human rights
and international humanitarian laws accountable would
be the necessary prerequisite.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her report and briefing, which I have read and listened
to carefully. On the occasion of the previous briefing in
June (see S/PV.7710), we stated that we regretted that
justice had not been achieved for the victims in Darfur,
despite the efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is very regrettable that we must again repeat
that today.
As the Prosecutor stresses, the ICC cannot fulfil
its mandate without the cooperation of States. That is
precisely why resolution 1593 (2005) required the full
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties. Japan urges the full implementation of
the resolution to achieve justice in Darfur. A continued
failure to implement resolution 1593 (2005) would
undermine the credibility of the Security Council.
Follow-up on non-compliance is called for. In that
connection, this year, Japan, together with Australia,
the Czech Republic, Peru and Senegal, and in close
consultation with interested parties, prepared a
toolkit to assist the States parties of the Rome Statute,
explaining the various actions that can be taken in case
of non-compliance with ICC. We hope that the toolkit
will be a useful contribution in preventing and dealing
with non-cooperation.
On a positive note, we are encouraged by the
progress on the investigation and collection of evidence.
We look forward to further progress during the next
reporting period.
Progress in the political process is essential to
bringing stability to Darfur and justice to the victims.
Japan welcomes the Sudan’s signing of the Roadmap
Agreement in August, which the Council long called
for. It is regrettable, though, that an agreement on a
ceasefire has yet to be concluded. Japan hopes that both
the Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition
groups will engage constructively so that negotiations
for a ceasefire can be concluded without further delay
based on that framework.
We also welcome the extension of the unilateral
cessation of hostilities by the Government of the

S/PV.7833

Sudan and armed opposition groups. The cessation of
hostilities should be closely monitored, especially as
the dry season begins. While the report notes that the
level of violence seems to have decreased, the scale of
civilian attacks still requires the attention of ICC.
The Prosecutor’s report referred to allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in Jebel Marra — that
needs continued attention and follow-up. Unhindered
fact-finding access should be provided.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
Our country strongly supports the Prosecutor’s
efforts to ensure justice and accountability in the fight
against impunity, as well as to promote a comprehensive,
transparent and effective justice system. More than
10 years have past since the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005), by means of which the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
However, little progress has been made with regard to
its implementation.
With regard to the political situation, great
strides have been made through the implementation
of the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and thanks to the mediation efforts of former
President Thabo Mbeki of the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel. Such progress, as stated
in the Prosecutor’s report, has led to a reduction in
instances of violence on the ground. However, we share
the Prosecutor’s concern regarding sexual and genderrelated violence in the armed conflict in Darfur, which
make strengthening the rule of law difficult to achieve.
For our country, accountability is a sine qua non
condition to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan. Hence,
we insist that those who have violated international
humanitarian law and human rights law within the
context of the armed conflict in Darfur be brought to
justice. That would contribute to not only breaking
the prevailing cycle of impunity, but also to fostering
confidence in the State institutions of the Sudan.
In that vein, we believe it would be worthwhile,
inter alia, to encourage effective dialogue between the
International Criminal Court and the African Union
with a view to considering practical steps that would
facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and the Court,
including the possibility of taking action in the region

16-4338711/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and achieving agreements based on mutual respect and
full respect for international law. We believe that such
cooperation would complement regional initiatives to
fight impunity. And it would do so all the more at a
time when the legitimacy and impartiality of the Court
have been called into question by several countries of
the region, including Burundi, the Gambia and South
Africa, which recently decided to withdraw from the
Court, which sits in The Hague.
With a view to supporting the work of the Prosecutor
to ensure that justice and accountability are a reality, we
also encourage the Court to assess the situation on the
ground in an objective and impartial fashion. Its role in
the impartial investigation of the actions of all parties
to the conflict is of the utmost important to increase
the credibility of such legal authority. To that end, the
International Criminal Court must work in a balanced
fashion, in favour of promoting justice and achieving
a firm and lasting peace from a comprehensive and
indivisible point of view. However, we are concerned
by the attempts of some factions to politicize the work
of the International Criminal Court, which affects
the principles on which the Court is based, such as
autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity.
The arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court against President Omar Al-Bashir
undermines the right to jurisdictional immunity
for Heads of State of those States that are not party
to the Rome Statute. The process to suspend the
jurisdictional immunity of a President in exercising
his office so that he can be tried is a matter of course
by judiciary of his country represents a procedure set
out in the Constitution of the Republic of the Sudan.
In that regard, we share the calls of the African Union
to request a suspension of the Court’s proceedings
regarding the arrest warrant against the President of
the Sudan. However, we call upon the Government
of the Sudan, the competent regional authorities and
neighbouring States to cooperate effectively with the
International Criminal Court with respect to the arrest
of those alleged suspects who do not enjoy jurisdictional
immunity and who are currently being investigated by
the Office of the Prosecutor for alleged crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide and whose arrest
warrants have been issued by the International Criminal
Court in the case of the situation in Darfur.
In conclusion, we encourage the strengthening
of cooperation between the International Criminal
12/18

13/12/2016

Court and the Government of the Sudan, as well as
by the countries of the region, in order to help to find
a political solution to the conflict in Darfur whereby
the objectives of peace and justice are achieved for the
benefit of the Sudanese population, in accordance with
international law.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): We
commend the Prosecutor and her Office for her deep
dedication to the pursuit of justice for the victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur, even in the face of tremendous
political and logistical challenges.
It is clear that the need for justice continues. In
that regard, it is far too easy to miss the tremendous
suffering of victims, especially when the tempo of
conflicts in Syria, South Sudan and elsewhere has
meant that the long-lasting conflict in Darfur can all
too often slip off the front pages.
However, we should be alarmed that there has
been far more attention of late paid to criticizing the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
Darfur than to seeking justice for the Sudanese victims
of mass killings, widespread rapes and destruction of
communities, which led this organ to refer the situation
in Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor. We also remain deeply
concerned that President Al-Bashir and others who face
arrest warrants in the ICC situation in Darfur continue
to be welcomed by certain Member States. The
hundreds of thousands of victims of atrocities in Darfur
who saw their loved ones injured or killed, their homes
burned and their communities destroyed must see us
stand with them. Justice can succeed if we persevere in
focusing on the interests of victims and in supporting
the institutions with a mandate to bring truth to light
and power to account.
We have been reminded over and over again of
that fact after turning Cambodia into a grave yard
for almost 2 million people decades ago. Nuon Chea
and Khieu Samphan will serve the remainder of their
lives in prison for their crimes against humanity, and
Hissene Habre, under whose rule 40,000 people were
killed and others were subject to widespread sexual
violence and forced disappearances and torture, is now
serving his sentence in Senegal. In that vein, we are
heartened by the many States that continue to refuse
to welcome to their countries the individuals subject to
ICC arrest warrants in the Darfur investigation, and we
commend those who have spoken out against President
Al-Bashir’s continued travel.
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

There is a path forward for a peaceful, stable
future in the Sudan. A comprehensive peace process
that addresses the political, security and humanitarian
issues at the root of the Sudan’s conflict is critical. We
welcome the recent decrease in fighting in many parts
of Darfur and the announcements that the Government
and three of the four largest armed groups in the Sudan
have committed to extend their cessation of hostilities
through the dry season. We call on the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid faction to do the same. It is
critical that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur have access throughout Darfur to
ensure that any alleged violations of the cessation of
hostilities can be investigated.
Ultimately, accountability for the atrocities
committed in the Sudan is essential for building
adherence to the rule of law and breaking the cycle
of impunity, where past crimes beget future crimes.
Instead, justice can give us a different path of breaking
that cycle of impunity and restoring dignity to victims
and their families through a public acknowledgement
of the gravity of the wrongs done to them. Now is a
time for all of us to recommit to the pursuit of justice
in the Sudan.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her report.
As a member of the African Union (AU), Angola
reiterates its commitment to the fight against impunity,
in accordance with the Constitutive Act of the African
Union, and aligns itself with the African Union decision
on the International Criminal Court, adopted at the
Kigali Summit in July.
We welcome the activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor related to monitoring and investigating
crimes. However, we do not welcome the fact that
a whole chapter of the report is based on allegations
and reports from that source, and is not based on
investigations conducted by the Court. Some of those
allegations have been challenged by the Government
of the Sudan, and have not been confirmed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. That can
potentially affect the report’s credibility.
Angola will uphold the position of the African
Union on that issue, while advocating for dialogue as
the only solution to adverse political disputes in Darfur,
the Sudan, Africa and all over the world.

S/PV.7833

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-fourth report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the investigation of the situation in Darfur.
First of all, we are rather taken aback by the
demands made to the Security Council during the socalled follow up on the situation in Darfur. We consider
such attempts to lecture the Council to be inappropriate.
Even among States parties to the Rome Statute there
has been no unity when carrying out certain ICC arrest
warrants. In particular, certain members of the African
Union have repeatedly pointed out that requirements
of the ICC in a number of cases are at odds with the
commitments derived from international legal norms
regarding the immunity of State officials.
Our delegation has always been considerate of
that position. However, certain States, as well as the
Court itself, have preferred to exert pressure on African
countries, instead of taking on board their concerns.
In the light of that, the recent decision by a number
of countries to withdraw from the Rome Statute is no
surprise. The political and legal rationale for those
steps is understandable and should be respected. That
again vindicates the criticism that is increasingly been
aimed at the work of that legal body.
The report of the Prosecutor again raises the issue
of the resource support for the Court from the United
Nations. In that regard, we would like to reiterate once
more that the main initiators of transfer by the Security
Council to the ICC of the situation in Darfur, and in
Libya, were certain States parties to the Rome Statute
and of the Prosecutor, who should have recognized the
financial implications of such a step. Attempts to shift
that burden onto the United Nations are unjustified.
As to certain factual elements in the report, it rightly
notes the significant decrease in the levels of violence
in Darfur recently. According to the United Nations,
the situation in four of the five states is relatively calm.
Thanks to the efforts of the authorities, the number of
inter-communal clashes has fallen, as has the crime rate
in towns. The exceptions to that are various parts of
Jebel Marra, in central Darfur, where there is continued
resistance from the Sudan Liberation Movement-Abdul
Wahid faction, which has rejected any possibility of
dialogue with the Government.
We should also recall that the Panel of Experts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, has

16-4338713/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

confirmed Sudanese rebels’ violations of international
humanitarian law, including the recruitment of child
soldiers. Nevertheless, the report places particular
emphasis on assertions about the allegedly ongoing
attacks on civilians by Government forces. The ICC’s
one-sided assessments, which are exclusively directed
at the legitimate Sudanese authorities, can hardly
improve that judicial body’s credibility or contribute to
the reconciliation process.
The same can be said of the Prosecutor’s assertions,
borrowed from Amnesty International, on the use of
chemical weapons in Darfur. It is well known that
they are based on phone and Internet interviews with
unnamed people, as well as photographs and videos.
We are in agreement with the competent opinion of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
that at the moment we cannot draw any conclusions
from this report in the absence of further information
and evidence. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, whose representatives are
in constant contact with thousands of displaced persons
from Jebel Marra, has not confirmed those rumours.
In our view, if chemical weapons were being
repeatedly used in the area, it would be impossible
to hide the fact. The accusations have also been
categorically rejected by Khartoum. The Sudan acceded
to the Convention on Chemical Weapons in 1999 and
has officially announced that it is complying with its
obligations by refraining from producing or storing
chemical weapons on its territory.
In conclusion, and speaking not just to the Darfur
investigation but more generally, we would like to
emphasize once again the importance of reaching a
delicate balance between the interests of dispensing
justice and of achieving sustainable peace and a stable
situation. The two problems are equally important,
and an integrated, balanced approach is needed to
solve them.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing today’s briefing, and to welcome
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda. We are grateful for her
report and her briefing on the progress of her Office’s
investigations and proceedings in Darfur, in compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Senegal would like to
reiterate to her its unwavering support.
Senegal recognizes the role and importance of the
International Criminal Court in a world where millions
14/18

13/12/2016

of victims of atrocious crimes long for justice. The
fight against impunity and respect for the rule of law
are fundamental principles in which we firmly believe
and that are anchored in the Constitutive Act of the
African Union. We consider respect for human rights
and their universal nature to be particularly important.
In our view, not only are the requirements of peace
and of justice not incompatible, they actually go hand
in hand. That is why we work to satisfy the demands of
the victims in Darfur for justice and reparations, while
also aspiring to achieve peace through dialogue. And
that is why my country, while upholding the principles
of responsibility and justice, believes firmly that it is
essential to go through dialogue and reconciliation if
a comprehensive and lasting peace is to be achieved.
Incidentally, that is the position of the African Union
when it calls for the restoration of peace and justice
in Darfur.
The Prosecutor’s report that we are considering
today describes alarming levels of attacks, including
sexual and gender-based crimes, on civilians in Darfur.
My country condemns all acts of violence against
civilian populations and urges all stakeholders to take
the measures needed to ensure that those responsible
for such acts are punished. Senegal remains deeply
concerned about the restrictions that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
dealing with in carrying out its mandate.
On another subject, we believe it will be difficult
for the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate
without an adequate budget. That is why my country
will continue to work to ensure that the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute provides the Court
with the means necessary for its efforts to succeed. My
delegation would also like to recall that it is the Security
Council’s duty to ensure that the United Nations makes
the proper financial contribution for the cases that the
Council refers to the Court.
There is no need to recall that the situation in
Darfur continues to be a significant challenge for both
the African Union and the rest of the international
community, and that it requires greater efforts on
the part of all of us. A definitive solution to the
crisis requires participation by the Sudanese parties
themselves, who are called on to create the conditions
for lasting stability in an open, comprehensive dialogue
involving every sector of society. It is incumbent upon
us to work to create security and political conditions
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that can enable the Sudanese to take charge of their
peace process themselves. But the role and place of
justice in that settlement cannot be ignored, for a sense
of injustice is the principal source of instability. While
the primary responsibility for ensuring access to justice
belongs to the State, when justice is not to be found
there, the victims are free to seek it wherever it may
be found.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
The founding Charter of our Organization affirms
faith in fundamental human rights and in the dignity
of the human person. It also establishes that Member
States are obliged to comply with the Security Council’s
decisions. However, none of those assertions seems to
apply to Darfur, and to a large degree it is the Council’s
responsibility to deal with that.
I wish to recall that 11 years have passed since the
Council referred the situation in Darfur. We therefore
reiterate our call to the Government of the Sudan to
comply with the mandate in resolution 1593 (2005) and
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, in
compliance with its obligations as a Member State. We
would also like to remind States parties to the Rome
Statute of the obligation to cooperate that they assumed
upon ratification of the Statute.
While the decline in violence in Darfur is positive,
the situation is still very far from satisfactory. The
continuing clashes, especially in Jebel Marra; the
persistence of violations of international humanitarian
law and of violations and abuses of human rights;
the continued obstacles to access for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
humanitarian organizations; and the persistent climate
of impunity are all unacceptable. We reiterate our call
to all parties to join a peace process, which should be
inclusive. We remind the Sudanese Government of its
special responsibility to protect the population. We also
reiterate our conviction that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.
This is the last statement that my country will make
in the Security Council when Ms. Bensouda is present,
and I would like to reiterate Spain’s commitment to the
Court, which for my country is first and foremost a
commitment to victims. It is clear that the Court’s work
with regard to Darfur has played a role in the crisis
that has arisen thanks to the decision of three States
parties to withdraw from the Rome Statute. Spain,

S/PV.7833

which last year enacted a law on immunities expressly
guaranteeing respect for obligations arising from its
membership in the Court, would like to reaffirm its
readiness to participate in a constructive dialogue that
can build bridges. The International Criminal Court is
the best instrument we have for combating impunity in a
world where respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is lacking, and where violations have
reached intolerable levels. In that context, the Court is
our last hope, and the last hope of thousands of victims.
After some 12 years without results, it is easy to
give way to discouragement and frustration. But it is our
obligation — that of members of the Security Council,
of States parties and of Ms. Bensouda herself — to
safeguard and continue seeking avenues for dialogue
between the Council and the Court that would enable
us to return to the path of cooperation. We owe it to
the victims of Darfur. It is up to us to restore their
confidence in the authority of law and justice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
hope that I will be given an opportunity to make my
statement in response to the report of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and her briefing
to the Security Council.
I congratulate Spain on its presidency of the
Council this month and thank its predecessor for the
excellent leadership last month. Again, I also thank the
President for this opportunity to address the Council
in response to the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC.
This is the twenty-fourth report delivered since
2005 pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), which provides
for two reports per annum, thereby leaving the ICC and
its Prosecutor with no option but to repeat a pointless
monologue about the deterioration of conditions in
Darfur and compelling the Prosecutor to fake blatant
lies in order to rally Council support on an issue that
has long been settled — first, by the conclusion of the
comprehensive agreement, which was welcomed by
the Council in resolution 2003 (2011), and, secondly,
by the agreement’s implementation across the board,
whose completion was celebrated three months ago,
in September.
In that regard, we should like to call the Council’s
attention to the records of the implementation follow-

16-4338715/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

up commission of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, which meets every six months. It is paradoxical
that the Prosecutor also presents her report every six
months, theatrically gearing up absurd presentations
that are completely contrary to the facts cited by the
commission, whose membership includes permanent
members of the Security Council, in addition to the
State of Qatar, neighbouring African States, the United
Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and the European peace partners.
I should like to stress at the very outset that the
Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.
Let me also state that that Court is not an organ of the
United Nations, in spite of fervent attempts by some
parties to paint it otherwise in the meetings of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly. Again, I want to
emphasize that the Sudan is not a party to the Statute
nor to the ICC, in spite of such statements.
I would like to hand out two documents in English:
one on the issue of access to all areas of Darfur and
another on the fallacy of accusing the political leadership
of genocide. They have been prepared on the basis of
credible and well-documented international testimony,
to which I would like to draw the Council’s attention.
This last accusation is no different in nature from
other erroneous accusation made by the ICC, but in
this instance there is a strange urgency on the part of
the Prosecutor and a suspicious keenness on the part
of some international non-governmental organizations
to manipulate this accusation in a bid to inflict as
much political harm as they can on the Sudan and its
existence and integrity.
Since 2005, reports of the Prosecutor of the ICC
have repeatedly demonstrated an inclination to address
the President of the Republic of the Sudan — who,
as we have previously stated and as is enshrined in
our Constitution, “personifies the sovereignty and
authority of the State” — in an inappropriate and
derogatory manner. That is inappropriate in general
and unacceptable to us in particular. It is deplorable in
the light of our national and human dignity, and indeed
unprecedented in our history.
As evidenced by successive trivial reports, the ICC
is completely disoriented. It is plagued by institutional
failure and corruption. It has made an enemy of the
Sudan and of the Sudanese Government in a manner
completely unbefitting an institution that proclaims
itself to be of the highest calibre at the international
16/18

13/12/2016

level. We shall duly come to prove the fickleness of
the foundations on which the ICC is built, foundations
that are driving more and more nations and countries to
withdraw from the Court.
The 2005 Interim Constitution of the Sudan is, in
essence, a peace agreement, one adopted by consensus
following the proclamation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed that same year with South
Sudan. That Agreement clearly and equally addressed
both principles: justice and peace. Therefore, the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur is a compilation of
virtually all the principles universally agreed upon for
the voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, for the implementation of the principles of
transitional justice, and remedial measures for victims,
ensuring the prosecution of human rights violators and
providing for compensation and reparation to victims.
Guided by those principles, the Government of the
Sudan established a special tribunal for the prosecution
of crimes perpetrated in Darfur, and the Sudanese
Department of Justice appointed a special public
prosecutor for that very purpose. We have formally
provided the United Nations and the Security Council
with the statistics on the achievements of the tribunal.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention to
this year’s report of the Joint Tripartite Commission,
made up of the United Nations, the African Union and
the Govenrment of the Sudan, which states
(spoke in English)
“the Joint Working Group acknowledges the
efforts of the state Governments and Prosecutor
for Darfur Special Crimes Court to address the
crimes committed during the conflict and restore
law and order through the deployment of additional
police, corrections and judicial human and material
resources across the five states of Darfur, including
legal advisers, prosecutors, legal aid assistants and
family child protection units”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Although the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC
stresses the significance of resolution 1593 (2005),
which referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, it has
nonetheless deliberately ignored what I mentioned with
regard to paragraph 5 of the same resolution:
16-43387

13/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(spoke in English)
“The Security Council also emphasizes
the need to promote healing and reconciliation
and encourages in this respect the creation of
institutions, involving all sectors of Sudanese
society, such as truth and/or reconciliation
commissions, in order to complement judicial
processes and thereby reinforce the efforts to
restore long-lasting peace, with African Union and
international support as necessary”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Contrary to arrangements by the Government of
the Sudan to achieve justice and peace together, and the
Security Council’s keenness to maintain that balance,
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC issued policy
papers in 2007 giving political interpretation to article
53 of the Rome Statute. The latter stipulates that the
Prosecutor has the right to not — I repeat, not — proceed
with an investigation if that is detrimental to the
interests of justice, stating that such interests do not
mean peace. The Prosecutor alone created a statute
and imposed it on States parties to the Statute. That is
very dangerous. It gives the Prosecutor discretionary
political power to prematurely abolish peace initiatives
and agreements.
The report presented to the Council contains
many examples of inconsistency, contradiction and
unworthiness. As we have previously stated with
regard to the situation in Darfur, the ICC and its
Prosecutor have become an adversary and judge both
at the same time. According to some international law
jurists, the ICC is a kangaroo court. The following are
examples of those contradictions.
First, as we explained in our response to the
previous report, the Court was transformed into a
monitoring mission with a political agenda in Darfur,
as opposed to a judicial body. The twenty-fourth report,
submitted today, states in paragraph 25,
(spoke in English)
“[t]he Office of the Prosecutor continues to
monitor” — I repeat, “to monitor” — “and inquire
into current crimes allegedly being committed
in Darfur”.
(spoke in Arabic)
It should be noted that this report relies on the
reporting of mechanisms put in place by the Security

S/PV.7833

Council, such as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan, and even on reports of
non-governmental organizations. We have taken up
various aspects of those reports in the Security Council,
and disagreed with many of them. The members of the
Council, as I have said, have themselves disagreed
with many of the paragraphs in those reports. We have
shown on numerous occasions the self-contradictions of
those paragraphs, which render them invalid testimony
before any credible judicial body.
Secondly, the same International Criminal Court,
which refers cases of noncompliance to the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute, refused to refer
to that Assembly the case of its first Prosecutor, Luis
Moreno Ocampo, who is alleged to have committed
rape in 2006. It refused to refer it to the Assembly of
State Parties. Furthermore, it ordered the destruction
of incriminating evidence and approved the dismissal
of Christian Palme, an employee in the Office of
the Prosecutor, who came forward about the case of
rape. Mr. Palme later contested his dismissal at the
Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour
Organization, which decided he should be compensated.
Thirdly, in paragraphs 18 and 35, the twenty-fourth
report is cheaply appealing to emotions by shedding
tears for the victims, knowing very well that justice for
the victims is fully incorporated in the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. I hope that the Council will look
carefully at paragraph 35. It states that
(spoke in English)
“the Office will continue to do everything it can
to deliver justice to the countless victims of Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur”.
(spoke in Arabic)
The Court is ultimately political; it therefore is not
qualified to achieve any kind of justice. In the 14 years
since its establishment it has ruled on four — just
four — cases, all of them concerning African nationals,
after rejecting more than 9,000 other complaints.
Fourthly, certainly no one was surprised that the ICC
hailed the report of Amnesty International concerning
allegations that the Government of the Sudan, between
January and September 2016, used chemical weapons
in Jebel Marra in Darfur. In that connection, I would
like to refer the Council to the statements by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

16-4338717/18

S/PV.7833

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(OPCW), to the fact that at its annual meeting it
welcomed the report of the Government of the Sudan.
In addition, the members of the OPCW renewed the
Sudan’s membership in the Executive Council of the
OPCW for another two years.
I believe there is no need to concern the Council, or
myself, with such vexations and fabrications. However,
I am duty-bound to mention that the establishment of
an international criminal court was advocated by the
international Coalition for an International Criminal
Court. The Court is indebted to Amnesty International,
an organization that boasts in its statements that it
pushed the Security Council in 2004 to constitute the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, whose
report (see S/2005/60) was the basis for referring the
situation in Darfur to the ICC. Amnesty International
also prides itself on forcing the Court to rescind the
decision of the Trial Chamber 1 that no crime of
genocide was committed in Darfur.
We cannot entrust to the International Criminal
Court, under its present Statute, with the important and
noble goal of combating impunity for many substantial
reasons. I will mention only three, since time is short.
First, the text of the Statute enshrines the inequality
among those who are subject to its jurisdiction,
because it differentiates among them according to their
nationality and not by the evidence presented against
them. Exceptions in the Statute are not implemented
with regard to nationals of developing States. Moreover,
referrals of cases on the basis of article 13 of the Statute

18/18

13/12/2016

cannot, and do not, take place except for nationals of
developing States — and African States alone.
Secondly, fully half of the budget of the Court
comes from voluntary contributions from States and
non-governmental organizations, and indeed even
individuals, and those parties ultimately exercise
control over the ICC.
Thirdly, the Court’s policy papers, as well as its
practices since 2002, have driven a wedge between the
principles of justice and peace. They have suspended
one of the most fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law relative to internal conflicts, that
being amnesty, and all of that results in the ongoing
killing and violations of all forms, which brings us
back, regrettably, to the hellish circle of impunity.
The African Union, as represented by the African
Ministers of Justice, since 2009 has been seeking an
answer to a fundamental question: Has the Rome Statute
annulled the immunities enjoyed by officials according
to international law? The African Union has yet to
receive a reply. Furthermore, and regrettably enough,
the African Union High-level Committee of African
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, headed by the Ethiopian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, which was mandated to
meet with the Security Council, was not able to hold
its agreed meeting in September. I will not go into the
details of that regrettable episode, which was preceded
by the contempt displayed by the ICC towards African
States and Africans.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-43387
