S/PV.7816

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7816th meeting

Friday, 18 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndiaye. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Coleman
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2016/780)
Identical letters dated 22 September 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council (S/2016/809)
Letter dated 10 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/966)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39153 (E)
*1639153*

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Union, as well as to document S/2016/809, which
contains identical letters dated 22 September 2016
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2016/780)
Identical letters dated 22 September 2016
from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/809)
Letter dated 10 November 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/966)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. E1-Ghassim Wane, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
the African Union; and His Excellency Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for the
Peace Fund.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2016/780, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the African
2/31

18/11/2016

I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/966, which contains a letter dated
10 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): On behalf of UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous, I would like to
thank the Senegalese presidency for convening this
very timely discussion. I must also admit, as a former
staff member of the African Union Commission, where
I worked for over 20 years, that I feel particularly
honoured and grateful to be able to brief the Security
Council on a subject of vital importance not only for
Africa but also for our system of collective security.
It is an issue on which I have been working diligently
throughout my entire career within the African Union
(AU), and obviously I feel strongly committed to
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, because I firmly believe that there is
no alternative to a close partnership between the two
organizations. In the context of my new functions at the
United Nations, I am grateful to be able to contribute
towards strengthening that partnership. Once again, I
thank, you, Mr. Minister, for having taken the initiative
of convening this very timely meeting.
(spoke in English)
I would like to begin by making several statements of
fact. First, the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union on peace and security is not new
and has grown into a strategic partnership — a stronger
partnership based on an innovative and forwardlooking reading of Chapter VIII of Charter of the
United Nations. Today’s debate will, without any doubt,
contribute to that partnership. Mr. Ladsous addressed
the Security Council during the open debate (see
S/PV.7694) last May to measure the progress achieved
in strengthening the partnership in the area of peace
and security on the continent. That debate took place
on the tenth anniversary of the beginning of annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The Secretary-General has repeatedly underscored
that strengthening global and regional partnerships
is absolutely critical, especially in Africa. His report
(S/2016/780) on the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, which Special
Representative Haile Menkerios will present shortly,
is testimony to the mutual efforts made over the years
towards building the strategic relationship between
the two organizations. The relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is also of primary importance. I note
that both Councils now meet annually in New York and
Addis Ababa. While further harmonization of efforts
could be still further encouraged, it is unanimously
acknowledged that there are plenty of areas of common
interest for the African Union and the United Nations
to work on together.
The Secretariat and African Union Commission
have also enhanced their cooperation at the strategic
level — through the Joint Task Force, which meets
twice a year, and through the annual desk-to-desk
meetings, the next one of which is scheduled for
December in Addis Ababa. That also includes monthly
director-level video tele-conferences and daily
working-level interactions. In an innovative move, AU
Peace and Security Council experts will be hosted later
this month here at Headquarters by the Secretariat for
a familiarization visit, with a view to forging better
knowledge and understanding of its internal processes.
My second point follows logically from the
partnership to its operational dimension. In that regard,
I would like to mention the considerable progress made
in the area of operational support, as was already been
highlighted by the report (see S/2015/446) of the HighLevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations. For
more than 10 years, strong cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations on planning
and supporting peace operations has become the norm.
That has included experiences relating to transitions
from AU operations to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, such as in the Central African Republic
and Mali, the joint management of hybrid operations
in conjunction with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and through providing
logistical support packages funded through assessed
contributions to African Union-led missions, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
In assessing the 13-year history of cooperation at
the operational level, the September report (S/2016/809)

S/PV.7816

entitled “Report of the joint African Union-United
Nations review of available mechanisms to finance
and support African Union peace support operations
authorized by the United Nations Security Council”
provides Member States with the first comprehensive
account of mechanisms used in the past and still
readily available, as well as more general concluding
observations on key lessons learned. I wish to draw
the Council’s attention to the fact that two out of the
five concluding observations from the report relate
to the need for the United Nations to adapt to the
increasing complexity of the security challenges that
the international community is facing, particularly in
Africa, either in its own interventions or in support of
African Union peace support operations.
I would like to cite several statistics to illustrate the
importance of Africa for peacekeeping, and vice versa.
Nine out of 16 of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed in Africa. Those missions alone
account for 83 per cent of all uniformed personnel
and 86 per cent of the financial resources approved
for United Nations peacekeeping missions. As of July,
African States represented 20 of the top 30 contributors
of uniformed personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Approximately 50 per cent of all uniformed
peacekeepers come from African Union member States.
This brings me to my third point. The complexity of
the current conflicts in Africa and the trends observed
highlight the need to strengthen further the United
Nations operational cooperation with and in support of
African Union peace support operations. In doing so,
we ought to be pragmatic and results-oriented, driven,
as we should be, by the imperative to respond to the
needs on the ground, assist countries and shattered
communities to turn the page of violence and conflict,
and consolidate peace where it has been achieved.
This, in our view, reinforces the calls made several
times in the past by the Council and by the African
Union Peace and Security Council to seek ways to
ensure predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for African Union peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council.
In his report dated 2 September 2015 on the future
of United Nations peace operations (S/2015/682), the
Secretary-General commended the African Union’s
commitment to self-reliance, including to financing
25 per cent of future African Union peace operations. He
then urged Member States to give urgent consideration

16-391533/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to how the United Nations can respond to that initiative.
On 18 July, the Secretary-General welcomed the historic
decision taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union in Kigali, setting
out concrete steps towards self-reliance, particularly in
relation to the AU peace and security budget.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for Member States
to initiate a response. In so doing, they will enhance the
role of the United Nations and strengthen the regional
response.
For our part, we in the Secretariat will continue
to work closely with the African Union so as to
generate, as much as possible, harmonized approaches
between the Secretariat and the Commission. For this
purpose, we will naturally rely on our Office to the
African Union, which I should like to commend for its
central role in strengthening the partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Having
worked with the Office in Addis Ababa in connection
with my former responsibilities at the African Union
Commission, I can testify to the quality and the strength
of the contribution that the Office is making to the
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations. Whatever efforts can be made to enhance the
capacity and resources of the Commission are of course
welcome steps towards a stronger partnership between
the two organizations.
It may sometimes seem simpler for each
organization to work on its own given the obstacles that
may surface as soon as concrete steps towards closer
cooperation are contemplated. The tendency has often
been to highlight the challenges rather than innovative
mechanisms for cooperation, but it is, rather, such
innovation that we need to encourage and spur in order
to circumvent these challenges.
Whatever the challenges in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
and this is my final observation, there is in fact no
alternative to a stronger partnership. There is now a
clear recognition of the fact that no single organization
can effectively address on its own the increasingly
complex, multifaceted peace and security challenges
of today, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
report dated January 2012. Our only option is to
overcome these challenges. While the United Nations
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the African Union
is one of our most important partners in confronting
4/31

18/11/2016

common challenges in Africa. It has also expressed a
willingness to play a role in, and has put efforts into,
building the peace and security architecture. The path
to the future is therefore one of innovation, creativity
and pragmatism.
Let me once again sincerely thank Senegal for
having convened this meeting and also thank the
members of the Council for their continued commitment
to a stronger partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in our joint efforts to address
the peace and security challenges confronting us on the
African continent.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, I wish
to pay tribute to you, Mr. Minister, for having taken
the time to travel to New York in order personally to
preside over this important Security Council debate. I
should also like to pay tribute to your country, Senegal,
whose presidency has focused in particular on the issue
of strategic cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations, with specific attention devoted
to the African Union (AU).
(spoke in English)
Numerous reports have highlighted the fact that the
current international peace and security architecture
is under significant pressure given the complexity
of the peace and security challenges that the world
faces today. The complexity of today’s crises is likely
only to increase, placing ever-greater demands on
this architecture. Forging an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is
therefore of the greatest strategic importance to our
collective security.
The African Union’s proven ability to act as
first responder is a critical element of the evolving
international peace and security architecture. Since
the establishment of the Union in 2002, the AU and
the subregional organizations have demonstrated a
clear comparative advantage in two particular types of
situations: first, in missions where offensive operations
are needed and the United Nations is unable to deploy
forces in a timely manner; and, secondly, where the
Security Council is unable to mobilize the requisite
political consensus to initiate action. The AU has blazed
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7816

a path in its deployment of missions to Burundi, Darfur,
Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic.

Union peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council” (S/2015/446, para. 249 (a)).

However, while the AU has the mandate,
experience and political will to deploy rapidly in
order to deliver in these cases, it is unable to sustain
such missions over the medium to long term because
it lacks sufficient means. For this reason, in 2015 the
African Union Heads of State and Government made
a commitment at the twenty-fourth ordinary session of
the Assembly to finance 25 percent of the cost of AUled peace-support operations from AU member States’
assessed contributions. This decision was reaffirmed at
the twenty-fifth ordinary session of the Assembly and
culminated in the Assembly’s financing decision in
July this year, at the Kigali Summit.

It should be noted that the joint African
Union-United Nations review of available mechanisms
to finance and support AU peace-support operations
authorized by the Security Council concluded that
access to United Nations-assessed contributions had
provided a reliable, predictable and sustainable means
of financing AU peace-support operations. From that
perspective, we can all agree that it is critical that
African Union peace-support operations authorized by
the Security Council be given the necessary support to
effectively address increasingly complex mandates in
increasingly challenging environments. The evidence
also shows that both the United Nations and the AU have
already shown considerable innovation and pragmatism
in identifying modalities to provide financial and
materiel support to AU missions, including through
assessed contributions in specific cases. It also shows
that access to United Nations-assessed contributions
provides the greatest predictability and sustainability
for certain types of missions.

Against this background, the AU has consistently
argued for predictable and sustainable financing
through United Nations assessed contributions for AUled peace operations that the United Nations cannot
itself undertake but that are regarded as critical to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The AU’s view is that in deploying such missions, it
is doing so on behalf of the Security Council, which
retains primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international security in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.
There is general agreement that the current financing
arrangements for AU-led peace-support operations are
neither reliable nor predictable, especially in the context
of high- tempo combat operations. While partners have
demonstrated much flexibility and innovation — and I
wish to take this opportunity to express the profound
appreciation of the African Union for the support of
our partners — there is nonetheless a consensus that
the current financing arrangements continue to be
unsustainable. That is borne out by current experience
as partners, facing their own financial pressures back
home, are forced to cut back on the support provided,
most notably to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).
In that respect, the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO),
which are consistent with the Common African
Position of the AU itself, are pertinent. In particular, it
will be recalled that the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446)
recommended that
“United
Nations-assessed
contributions
be
provided on a case-by-case basis to support African

Agreement on the principle that United Nationsassessed contributions could be made available
to support United Nations-authorized AU-led
peace-support operations is therefore not a new
proposition. It is already being implemented in the case
of AMISOM, albeit in an ad hoc and partial manner.
The fact that we are having this debate on that critical
question today demonstrates that there is the strategic
imperative and the collective political will to move away
from ad hoc financing arrangements to a partnership
based on greater predictability, mutual accountability
and the two organizations’ respective authorities,
competencies and capacities. The detailed proposals in
the report of the AU High Representative for the Peace
Fund, known as the Kaberuka report, provide a solid
foundation for the evolution of the strategic AU-United
Nations partnership in the area of peacekeeping.
This is a necessary evolution that will only enhance
the overall effectiveness of our international peace and
security architecture. We appreciate and recognize
the fact that there is much detail to be worked out
over the coming months, and we are confident that
our two institutions can quickly establish a joint
process to develop more detailed implementation
modalities to move us towards a substantive framework
draft resolution on predictable financing for AUled peace-support operations in 2017. We will need

16-391535/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to think deeply about the nature of the missions that
could benefit from that type of support from the United
Nations. It is clear that broader partnerships will still
be required to support the AU in that complex area,
but the AU-United Nations partnership will remain a
central pillar.
I would like to conclude by encouraging all
Council members to support the adoption of the draft
resolution under consideration, which, among other
things, expresses the Security Council’s willingness
to consider how such a partnership could be realized
and identifies the tasks to be completed by the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
to take the process forward. We also wish to recall
that this is an issue that has been on the agenda of the
African Union since 2007, having emerged initially
through the difficult experience of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan, which had to transition into the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur as a result of the AU lacking the funds to sustain
the Mission.
Experience has clearly shown that the lack of
financial support for AU missions has had a direct
impact on the overall success of those missions and
subsequent United Nations missions, since the AU
is forced to transition to United Nations missions
prematurely. Greater predictability would allow the
AU to properly stabilize the situation before handing
matters over to a United Nations mission, which could
be in the best interests of the AU, the United Nations
and peace and security in general.
The international system is going through a period
of profound reassessment, as old certainties are being
questioned and new fault lines of conflict emerge,
linked to growing inequality, migration, climate change
and governance issues, among other things. The United
Nations cannot, on its own, adequately respond to
those challenges; therefore, partnerships with regional
organizations such as the African Union will only
grow in importance. It is therefore vital that we work
to ensure that together we put in place the appropriate
architecture to meet those weighty challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. António for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: I would like to begin by
expressing, on behalf of the Secretary-General, my
6/31

18/11/2016

profound appreciation to the Senegalese presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
debate on the topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security, including
the African Union (AU). The presence at this debate
of His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, is an illustration of the
importance that your country, Sir, and the Security
Council attach to the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.
In September, the Secretary-General issued his first
report (S/2016/780) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the African
Union. In that report, the Secretary-General notes that
“[t]here is an urgent need for new and stronger
ways to address international peace and security
challenges. Stronger partnerships with regional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
can enable us to respond early, swiftly, coherently
and decisively to prevent and manage conflict.”
(S/2016/780, para. 58)
On 29 September, the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union held a briefing on strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, which I was invited to address on behalf of the
Secretary-General, and the Peace and Security Council
subsequently issued a communiqué that welcomed the
report of the Secretary-General and commended the
significant progress achieved in the AU-United Nations
partnership in the past five years. In order to strengthen
it further, the Peace and Security Council called for a
more systematic, predictable and strategic partnership
between the two organizations.
It should also be recalled that the Security Council
and the General Assembly have repeatedly called for
stronger engagement between the United Nations, the
African Union and the regionaleconomic communities
in conflict prevention, management and resolution
in Africa. Indeed, the principle of partnership with
regional organizations is enshrined in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. Article 3 of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union also encourages
international cooperation, taking due account of the
Charter of the United Nations.
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As the Council is well aware, the conflicts that we
face in Africa today have grown in scale and complexity,
thereby posing a greater threat to international peace
and security. Those conflicts cause intolerable loss of
life and widespread destruction of resources, desperate
humanitarian situations and unimaginable human
suffering. We have witnessed the erosion of political
and civic rights, while economies regress and social
development gains are reversed.
Terrorism and violent extremism, transnational
organized crime, piracy and other threats to maritime
security, as well as threats caused by weak or
ineffective governance institutions, electoral disputes
and political and economic exclusion, are some of
the challenges that African countries face. Poverty,
unemployment, demographic pressures and climate
change are also increasingly having an impact on their
peace and security.
Dealing with such complex threats is not an easy
feat. While the Security Council has the ultimate
responsibility for international peace and security
and has invested greatly in addressing those threats
in Africa, and the AU and its regional economic
communities continue to exert every effort to do
the same on the continent, it is clear that neither the
United Nation, nor the AU or the regional economic
communities can address those threats by acting
separately. Collaboration between the United Nations
and the AU and the communities is an absolute necessity.
Increased collaboration between the United
Nations, the AU and regional economic communities
in addressing conflicts throughout the past decade has
produced a large body of practice, particularly in the
area of peace operations and mediation. I am pleased to
note that the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission are making good progress in
strengthening cooperation and collaboration between
the two organizations.
We have better coordinated interventions, for
instance in the Sudan and South Sudan, where the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, led
by former President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa,
has ably led mediation efforts with the support of the
United Nations Special Envoy and many other partners.
Another example is Burundi, where both the United
Nations and the African Union support the efforts of the
East African Community facilitator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania.

S/PV.7816

In addition, we have daily working-level
interactions, weekly and monthly meetings at various
levels, including via a video teleconference link
between both headquarters, and the Joint Task Force
of senior United Nations Secretariat and African Union
Commission leadership twice a year.
In peace-support operations, the United Nations
continues to support the African Union Commission’s
efforts to manage and operationalize African-led peace
operations mandated by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and authorized by the United Nations
Security Council. They range from the African Union’s
engagement in Somalia to the Multinational Joint Task
Force initiative against Boko Haram and the Regional
Task Force’s engagement against the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Our collaboration also includes supporting the
AU as the first responder in crises such as those in the
Central African Republic and Mali.
A review of the United Nations-African
Union partnership so far, which is characterized
by an expanding series of ad hoc collaborative
engagements, amply demonstrates that it is time that
the two organizations move towards a more structured,
systematic and predictable partnership — in short, a
strategic partnership. We should not have to reinvent
the wheel every time we face a new conflict on the
continent. A structured, systematic and predictable
partnership would mean that mechanisms are in place
and working in both organizations to ensure joint early
and continuous engagement, from early warning and
conflict prevention to mediation and peace-support
operations to post-conflict reconstruction and
development.
Instead of the two organizations engaging in a
series of ad hoc engagements, they would need to adopt
predictable and structured processes to address threats
to international peace and security in the continent,
based on common principles and burden-sharing that
takes into account comparative advantages.
I must emphasize the value of the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission
undertaking joint assessment and analysis of emerging
and current conflict situations, developing coherent
strategies for conflict prevention or any other form
of conflict management or resolution and providing
the relevant facts, interpretations and proposals to the
two Councils. The two Councils are, as a result, more

16-391537/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

likely to decide on common approaches that promote
collaborative engagement.
Although the Security Council will always address
each conflict on a case-by-case basis, there is more that
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission can do to bring a level of predictability
and sustainability to managing peace operations in
this manner. The conclusion of a joint framework for
enhanced partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which already exists in draft form,
can potentially institutionalize and further strengthen
the strategic partnership between the two organizations.
The United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council of course
play pivotal roles in strengthening the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security.
There has been significant progress over the past few
years in strengthening collaboration between the two
Councils. The tenth consultative meeting between the
two Councils, held in New York in May, provided an
opportunity for a constructive and candid exchange of
views.
The recent joint meeting of the Councils to discuss
South Sudan, which took place in September in Addis
Ababa, is also an indication of the progress that has
been made over the past few years. The three African
members of the Security Council play an important role
in strengthening and facilitating Security Council and
African Union Peace and Security Council relations.
I firmly believe that, if the two organizations were
to adopt a structured and predictable partnership,
that would tremendously facilitate and enhance
such engagement.
The decisions of the African Union Summit
in Kigali in July on financing the AU and the Peace
Fund should provide the means for Africa to finance a
greater share of its conflict-prevention and mediation
initiatives, as well as peace-support operations. I
strongly believe that the implementation of those
proposals will strengthen the United Nations-African
Union partnership, because a stronger African Union
will be a more effective partner for the United Nations.
The 2016 African Union Summit decisions on
financing must therefore be welcomed and positively
responded to within the context of the strategic
partnership proposed. Predictable and sustainable
funding remains a major challenge for the African
8/31

18/11/2016

Union, particularly in the three focus areas of the Peace
Fund, namely, conflict prevention, capacity-building
and peace operations. The adoption of a strategic
partnership and the implementation of AU proposals in
that context would enable the United Nations and the
African Union to engage more effectively and exercise
our comparative advantages so as to address conflicts
and sustain peace in Africa.
Importantly, the proposals on financing the AU and
the Peace Fund also envisage a governance mechanism
for the Peace Fund to ensure strong accountability and
management systems, which are necessary in order to
build the confidence of African Union member States
and partners. The Finance Ministers of the African
Union have decided on an implementation phase for
those proposals throughout 2017. While the full details
are still being outlined, we believe we should commend
the African Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government for their political commitment, and be
prepared to provide technical support, as required and
if requested.
The United Nations Office to the African Union
(UNOAU) is the conduit through which the United
Nations can enhance the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union in peace and
security matters. Under the guidance of the SecretaryGeneral and in collaboration with the United Nations
departments responsible for peace and security,
UNOAU will continue its close interaction with
the African Union Commission and AU member
States, so as to build understanding and enhance
communication between the two organizations. As
stated earlier, UNOAU will also continue to conduct
joint horizon-scanning exercises and develop joint
analysis and early warning with the AU, with a view
to developing common understanding and action on
conflict-prevention, mediation and peacekeeping.
UNOAU will also continue to support the institutional
strengthening of the AU Commission, as required, so
as to make the partnership more effective and assist
the AU in delivering on its mandates for the common
purpose.
Strengthening the partnership requires intensifying
our day-to-day engagement aimed at sharing views and
analyses, seeking common understanding of the issues
and developing proposals for joint or coordinated
action to address them. It involves reaching out to the
whole of the United Nations and the African Union
in order to ensure that both organizations draw on all
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the relevant contributions and, as much as possible,
ensure coherence. We look forward to the continued
support of the Security Council to ensure that UNOAU
is adequately resourced so that it can effectively fulfil
its mandate. The Secretary-General stated in his report
on strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa, including the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union, that he plans
“to conduct an assessment of United NationsAfrican Union cooperation, including the structure
and resource capacity of the UNOAU to meet the
growing demands of the partnership.” (S/2016/780,
paragraph 57)
We call on the Council to support his plan.
I wish to thank you once again, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for inviting us to make
this statement. Through you, Sir, we thank all Security
Council members for their continued commitment to
peace and security in Africa and for their support for
our common effort. I also wish to place on record our
appreciation to the AU Commission, specifically the
Peace and Security Department and the Political Affairs
Department, for their strong and steadfast support to
the consolidation of our practical collaboration.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Kaberuka.
Mr. Kaberuka: It is an honour and a privilege
to be here for this important debate. I would like to
thank the presidency of Senegal and His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Senegalese Abroad, for his leadership. I thank the
membership of the Council for the invitation to make a
contribution with a special emphasis on the emerging
architecture of the African Union (AU) for financing
peace and security.
Peace and stability is the prerequisite for
socioeconomic development in a continent that has
begun to turn a corner and has demonstrated a new
dynamism after years of economic decline. Several
speakers have already referred to a number of highlevel reports that have established three very important
facts. First, the crises that the world faces today are
often so complex that no one single organization is
able to provide the needed response. Secondly, regional
organizations bring a comparative advantage to the
table. Thirdly, there is a need for financing mechanisms

S/PV.7816

that are predictable and sustainable, rather than
voluntary and ad hoc. A well-funded African Peace and
Security Architecture is not simply an African priority,
it is a global strategic imperative.
When the African Union came into being it was
determined to address the root causes of conflicts, and
it instituted a Peace and Security Architecture to that
end. It also adopted a vision to silence the guns by 2020.
However, even long before that, the Organization of
African Unity, the precursor to the African Union, had
put in place a mechanism to finance its peace activities,
mainly in the form of upstream preventive diplomacy
and, occasionally, a few stabilization missions pending
the maturation of a global response.
That was the idea behind the setting up of the Peace
Fund established over 20 years ago in 1993. That was
the time when Africa was beginning to confront major
crises, to which the global community was not always in
a position to respond in a timely manner. Nonetheless,
despite the goodwill, the deep economic crises of
the day and the proliferation of crises in subsequent
years led to a situation where the Fund fell short of
its objectives. The limited resources of the Fund were
quickly overwhelmed by the needs, thereby hampering
the organization’s ability to manage continental peace
and security priorities.
It is opportune here to highlight and appreciate
the support provided by the international community,
bilateral partners, regional organizations and the United
Nations, as well as the innovative ways in which that
was done, including through United Nations-managed
trust funds. There have sometimes been frustrations on
both sides, and lessons have been learned that will no
doubt inform the future.
Early this year, the leadership of the African
Union appointed a Special Envoy with the mandate to
develop ideas and proposals on how the African Union
could revitalize the Peace Fund. As that Envoy, I was
requested to put forward ideas on how the facility could
be funded, structured and governed for the challenges
of today in a much more predictable way that would
avoid overreliance on multiple unpredictable funding
channels. It is important to emphasize that, while
the Union’s members were seeking to undertake that
initiative in a spirit of greater ownership and reduced
dependence on ad hoc voluntary and unpredictable
external sources, they also conceived of the Fund as

16-391539/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

a means to strengthen and provide the international
community with a more effective tool for partnerships.
At the AU Assembly of Heads of States and
Government held in Kigali in July, the Union’s
leadership deliberated on the revitalization of the
Peace Fund and took a number of key decisions. The
conclusions reached were by consensus and sought to
reflect the principles of self-reliance, solidarity, ability
to pay, equitable burden-sharing, greater compliance
and predictability. The Fund will focus on four main
priorities: first, on preventive diplomacy, as experience
has shown that that is by far the most cost-effective way
to maintain peace, which in the case of the AU would be
around $35 million per year, a modest but very effective
expenditure; secondly, on institutional capacity to
address institutional gaps in the implementation of the
Fund, estimated at $30 million per year; thirdly, on
peace-support operations, when that becomes necessary
and appropriate and as approved by the competent AU
organs; and, fourthly, on a crisis-reserve facility to
enable the AU to respond to the rapid onset of crises in
a timely manner.
I want to emphasize that it is on the third
priority — peace-support operations — and that
priority alone that the AU is seeking support and
cooperation from the United Nations through assessed
contributions for Security Council-authorized, but AUled, operations. A number of scenarios were considered
as to what financial commitment that translates into,
given the unpredictable nature of such undertakings.
Those scenarios are being shared with the competent
United Nations and AU administrative organs. African
Union members fully appreciate that getting the Fund
fully operational is a complex task at the technical,
administrative and political levels. Nevertheless, that
task is under way. An implementation mechanism is in
place, led by 10 Finance Ministers. We have agreed to
phase in the mechanism, using 2017 as a transition year,
so as to allow countries to go through the legal, fiscal
and institutional mechanisms and to ensure compliance
with national requirements and international
obligations.
As far as cooperation with the United Nations is
concerned, both sides appreciate that there is much
work to be done by both organizations to refine the
ways in which that cooperation should be realized,
including the consideration of a number of scenarios to
define, first, what the 25 per cent African contribution
would imply and, secondly, under what conditions
10/31

18/11/2016

the 75 per cent United Nations contributions would
be requested. Both the African Union and the United
Nations fully appreciate what that would mean in terms
of the administrative, fiduciary and governance angles,
including full compliance with AU and United Nations
norms as well as international obligations.
The recent joint review by the two organizations
has provided further lessons for reflection. There is
a need for further innovation and mutual learning.
However, African countries are determined to take
ownership of the maintenance of peace and stability
on the continent. Today the world faces threats that
cannot be confined to a particular geographical
area, and it is critical to have all hands on deck. The
African Peace Fund provides a robust mechanism and
unified governance and reporting lines to deal with the
numerous channels that complicate accountability and
the frameworks that raise transaction costs and reduce
effectiveness for all. As the United Nations Security
Council considers a strengthened partnership between
the two organizations, I hope members will agree that
the revitalized AU Peace Fund provides a more coherent
framework and a more articulated instrument, through
which the continent of Africa and its friends in the
international community can work together to promote
the cause of peace and stability in Africa and the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kaberuka for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad.
We have gathered once again to review the
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU). We remain convinced of the importance
of the strategic partnership, which covers our mutual
efforts aimed at maintaining peace and security in
Africa. Based on that conviction, the President of the
Republic of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall,
felt that the matter of strengthening the partnership
should be a priority item on the Security Council’s
agenda during the Senegalese presidency this month.
Today’s debate therefore enables us to reflect on
how best to use that cooperation so as to meet the
current challenges. That leads me to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations ElGhassim Wane, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations Téte António, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union Haile Menkerios, as well as the African Union
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, for their very relevant briefings, which
have strongly highlighted the challenges linked to
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. I would also like to
welcome the continuous commitment of the United
States and France to assist African States in seeking
solutions to the security challenges facing the continent.
The need to bolster cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, has been one of the joint recommendations to
come out of the various reviews aimed at making United
Nations peacekeeping operations more effective. As a
strategic partner of the United Nations in the areas of
peace and security, the African Union has demonstrated
its determination and ability to act as a first responder
to African crises. Indeed, the African Union has shown
its willingness and ability to provide primary responses
to the crises proliferating on the African continent.
That means that the African Union has become a
major player in collective security and is, furthermore,
endeavouring to create a structure for collective
security and to strengthen that security by way of
the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
is a comprehensive tool that seeks in particular
to prevent, combat and manage conflicts on the
continent. Establishing the African Peace and Security
Architecture represents a symbolic expression of the
African Union’s genuine desire to tackle issues of peace
and security on the continent. That intention is clear,
in spite of the number and scope of the difficulties to
overcome, and is demonstrated by the adoption of the
AU Road Map 2016-2020, which seeks, among other
things, to prevent and remove obstacles impeding the
full functioning of the African Peace and Security
Architecture.
The peacekeeping operations of the African Union
are local responses to global challenges. Enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
would therefore certainly assist the AU in acquiring the
appropriate means to conduct effective action, which is
in everyone’s best interests. In that regard, strengthening
the partnership at the strategic and operational levels
is necessary for greater synergy and coherence, in the
light of the evolving security challenges facing the
African continent.
Analysis indicates that, since its effective
implementation in 2004, the AU Peace and Security

S/PV.7816

Council, as well as the mechanisms of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, have been active in
various crises, in particular those in Burundi, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Comoros, Darfur and Somalia. However,
their actions are often limited by various constraints,
especially the crucial issue of financing. The African
Union is currently shouldering greater responsibility for
peace and security on the continent, and it is troubling
to note that the absence of predictable and sustainable
financing hampers the potential of the institution.
On that matter, in document S/2015/682, entitled,
“The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on peace operations”, the
Secretary-General acknowledged, and rightly so, that
the growing responsibilities of the African Union and
the regional economic communities, as well as regional
mechanisms, in peace and security are a significant
human and financial burden for African countries.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau is relatively
symptomatic of the type of difficulties that regional and
subregional organizations face in securing predictable
and sustainable financing. I thank the European Union
for its invaluable contribution to the activities of that
ECOWAS Mission.
The constraints I just mentioned point to the need
to define the channels and ways to share the burden. In
other words, the United Nations should better support
the laudable efforts of the African Union in handling
the crucial issue of the financing of peacekeeping
operations, as well as in ensuring the operation of its
Peace and Security Architecture. With that in mind,
Senegal believes that the United Nations should invest
and play a more active role in ensuring the success of
African Union activities, as a strategic partner to assist
in finding often urgent solutions to shared concerns.
That requires, among other things, greater support
to the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
that are endorsed by the Security Council, as well
as through more predictable financing. That type of
approach is particularly appropriate, as the African
Union has resolutely committed to making significant
headway in resolving the issue of predictable
financing by committing to providing 25 per cent of
peacekeeping operation costs. The African Union High
Representative for the Peace Fund has just recalled
that those recommendations were adopted during
the twenty-seventh Assembly of Heads of State and

16-3915311/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Government of the African Union, held in Kigali in
July. Such laudable efforts must not be in vain. I would
like to hope that draft resolution S/2016/977, which
we are to adopt following this debate, will provide a
solid foundation for definitively settling the crucial
issue of financing for peacekeeping operations in
African Union countries. We are further encouraged by
the fact that the draft resolution rightly welcomes the
efforts of the African Union to bring its contribution
to 25 per cent for peacekeeping operations. That is a
strong political message from the Security Council to
the African Union, expressing the Council’s readiness
as it moves in that direction. It offers genuine prospects
to better reflect on the best way to ensure lasting and
predictable financing for peacekeeping operations in
African Union countries.
To conclude, my delegation would like to welcome
the issuance of the Secretary-General’s report in
document S/2016/809, on the United Nations-African
Union joint review of existing financing and support
mechanisms for African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council. The conclusions of
the report stress the importance of access to assessed
contributions as a way of providing reliable, predictable
and sustainable financing to cover the support costs of
African Union peacekeeping operations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in French):
It is quite a pleasure to have the Foreign Minister
of Senegal here to preside over this meeting of the
Security Council to guide and shape our discussions
on a matter that occupies a unique place within the
deliberations of the Council and is, of course, a matter
of great importance to Africa.
(spoke in English)
I would like to begin by commending Senegal and
the Senegalese presidency for convening this debate
on strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and African Union on peace and security.
We thank the briefers, namely, Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations;
Mr.
Haile
Menkerios,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union; Mr. Тéte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for the
Peace Fund. Their comments, remarks and proposals
12/31

18/11/2016

have very much enriched our debate this morning on a
theme that is very dear to the African continent and to
the entire global community, given the threats to peace
and security facing the world.
The contemporary and evolving challenges posed
by violent conflict, humanitarian crises, extremism,
terrorism, war crimes and crimes against humanity call
for a more coordinated response and complementary
action on the part of all stakeholders in addressing
issues related to peace and security at the international
and regional levels. In that regard, cooperation between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations based
on a shared vision, goals and comparative advantages
plays a critical role in tackling the numerous conflicts
on the African continent.
The Council has just returned from a mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where members
of the Council were able to personally observe the
challenges that we face, and I think that the debate this
morning will provide valuable insights into what we
are called upon to do. The Addis Ababa Declaration
of 2006, which established a 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union, provided the basis
for cooperation between the two organizations and
the establishment of an institutional framework,
inter alia, the United Nations Office to the African
Union, the annual joint consultative meetings, African
non-permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council coordination group, the joint framework
between the United Nations and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union, and the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security. Important Council
resolutions have been adopted, in particular resolutions
2023 (2011) and 2067 (2012), which seek to strengthen
the relationship between the two organizations and
develop a more effective partnership. Those were
positive developments that we are now called upon
to refine by improving the mechanisms established,
and the debate today provides a unique opportunity
to enhance our joint responsibility to render our
cooperation more effective.
In that connection, bearing in mind the need to
further develop the relationship from a level based on
cooperation to one consisting of a strategic partnership,
the Assembly of the African Union adopted a decision
in July 2015 to establish the 2017-2028 framework
for a renewed partnership on Africa`s integration
and development agenda, based on, among other
provisions, the guiding principles of African ownership
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and leadership. The agenda is built upon important and
strategic policy decisions taken by the African Union,
namely, Agenda 2063, which is aimed at creating the
conditions for the sustainable development of the
African continent, and Vision 2020, which together
provide the AU framework to put an end to all conflicts
on the continent by 2020.
In its fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration, the
AU proclaimed the need for a stronger commitment
by African States to efforts to address conflicts on
the continent and to review their policies on peace
and security. The African Union member States
have expressed a clear commitment to engage in
peacekeeping missions with robust mandates aimed
at deterring violence and, if necessary, enforcing
peace. That endeavour can be achieved only with
close coordination and complementarity with the
United Nations and the Security Council, given the
Council’s premier responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In 2015, we adopted
the African Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap
for the period 2016 to 2020, which is a strategic blueprint
putting particular emphasis on effective delivery by
all stakeholders involved in the peace and security
architecture, including partners and external actors.
The Roadmap aims at covering the various phases
of the conflict cycle through five strategic priorities:
conflict prevention, conflict management, post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding, strategic security
issues and coordination and partnership. The central
question remains: How can the United Nations Security
Council support the successful implementation of those
priorities?
The United Nations went through a review of
peacekeeping operations. The High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations presented a comprehensive
report (see S/2015/446), regarding which the African
Union was extensively consulted by the Panel, and the AU
was given an opportunity to lay out its common position
focused on priorities, including crisis management
by regional institutions, a recognition of the Security
Council’s primacy in authorizing enforcement action,
the need for permanent consultations and exchanges of
information relating to ongoing crises and conflicts, and
the need for better coordination and the strengthening
of complementarities.
In the search for African solutions to the conflicts
affecting the continent, given the unprecedented
threats faced by some African countries and the delays

S/PV.7816

in the operationalization of the African Standby Force,
which was initially due to global events of 2008,
some AU member States launched discussions on the
establishment of the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crisis, so as to provide the African
continent with the means to ensure their ownership
in tackling conflict situations on the continent and
capabilities for immediately responding to crises.
In finalizing those strategic operational decisions
based on African Union-led experiences, some
common denominators became apparent: first, the
joint commitment by the AU and the United Nations
to strengthen their strategic partnership on issues
related to peace and security, and, secondly, the need
to explore options for ensuring predictable, reliable and
sustainable funding for peace-support operations in
the continent. Angola commends the AU Peace Fund
report entitled “Securing predictable and sustainable
financing for peace in Africa”.
On the long road towards finding more
appropriate responses to the unprecedented threats
to peace and security globally, particularly in Africa,
considering the need for predictable funding in order
to ensure peacekeeping operations in Africa, the High
Representative of the AU Peace Fund, who is present
here this morning, has presented a commendable
proposal that the Council has been called upon
to consider.
We reiterate our support for the draft resolution
(S/2016/977) to be adopted shortly. We look forward to
options on the operationalization of the commitments
by the African Union and the outcomes of today’s
discussion on the issue and the follow-up action by the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, as well as
later on by the African Union Summit to be convened
in January in Addis Ababa.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
the Senegalese delegation for having convened today’s
debate. I also wish to thank Messrs. Wane, António,
Menkerios and Kaberuka for their briefings.
Bearing in mind that the Security Council
continues to focus most of its attention on responding
to issues that threaten peace and security in the African
continent, there is clearly a need to consolidate and
strengthen the operational and strategic links between
the two multilateral forums, that is, the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), so as to enable the United

16-3915313/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Nations-AU partnership to flourish and bear fruit on
the basis of mutual respect.
My country recognizes the key role played by the
African Union in the peaceful settlement of disputes
in Africa as part of the AU 2063 Agenda and the
African Peace and Security Architecture 2016-2020
Roadmap. Against that backdrop, it is essential that
the Security Council grant a larger role to the African
Union in measures involving the African continent.
Unfortunately, we have noted with concern a tendency
within the Council to apply measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, rather than
giving priority to Chapters VI and VIII.
We therefore call upon the Council to address
conflict situations in Africa in a balanced manner,
based on peaceful measures for settling disputes, and
to include the African Union’s participation in such
efforts. Ongoing interference in the domestic affairs of
African countries is a key factor in the destabilization
and conflict that we see in the continent. It is unfortunate
that the national interests of some Council members in
situations involving some countries and conflicts in
Africa have transformed the Council into a body for
meddling and exerting pressure. As an example, I would
note the precipitate action taken in 2011 in the form of
coercive measures in Libya under Chapter VII of the
Charter. That was carried out despite mediation efforts
already undertaken by the African Union to address
the situation. However, those efforts were ignored by
the Council.
Five years later, we are still witnessing the
serious consequences that resulted from the Council’s
misguided decision and from errors on the part of the
international community in Libya. Foreign intervention
led to the destruction of that State’s institutions, as well
as to the current instability in North Africa. Together
with other factors, that intervention contributed to
the growing presence of violent groups, as well as
terrorism, illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, and human trafficking, and has transformed
the Mediterranean Sea into an enormous, bloody burial
ground for thousands of migrants.
It is therefore paradoxical that, while the African
Union is a key partner of the United Nations in peace and
security matters, we are not taking its assessments and
views into account on relevant items that are discussed
in the Council, such as the issues of Western Sahara and
the migrant crisis. We recall that Venezuela abstained
14/31

18/11/2016

in the Council’s adoption of resolution 2240 (2015) (see
S/PV.7531), concerning the migrant crisis, because the
resolution did not take into account the concerns of
the African countries that are the most affected by the
issue. The Observer of the African Union was not even
allowed to participate in the debate, and Chapter VII of
the Charter was invoked to address a multidimensional
problem that continues to affect the African population.
In the case of Western Sahara we have seen refusals
on the part of some Council members to allow the
Permanent Representative of the African Union for
Western Sahara to address the Council. I believe that it is
worth recalling that resolution 690 (1991) confers upon
the African Union a key role to play in supporting the
United Nations as a facilitator in Western Sahara and in
supervising the referendum for the self-determination
of Western Sahara, the last remaining colony in Africa.
In the light of all that, the relationship between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council needs to be improved and
strengthened. That is one of the key points made as part
of the 2015 broad analysis of peace operations and of
the peacekeeping architecture. Moreover, we highly
value the progress made in peacekeeping operations,
the exceptional role of the United Nations Office to the
African Union, and United Nations support to regional
organizations in policy development and guidance
and training in areas such as security-sector reform,
post-conflict reconstruction, women and peace and
security, the protection of civilians, including children,
and preventing and combatting sexual and genderbased violence. It is our hope that those key aspects
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union will be strengthened in the future.
We need to make greater headway in strengthening
the link between our two organizations and in
developing the holistic and common strategies needed
to respond to the emerging challenges in Africa, based
on mutual responsibilities and comparative advantages,
with a view to achieving bettercoordination and synergy
between the two bodies. We also look forward to the
speedy adoption of a United Nations-African Union
framework for an enhanced partnership for peace and
security. We have also taken note of the African Union
commitment to contributing 25 per cent of the financing
of peace support operations in the region, which is
an important step towards ensuring the predictable,
sustainable and flexible support and funding that peace
operations require.
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In conclusion, it is important to support the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
finding peaceful and political solutions to conflicts,
as well as preventing them and coordinating efforts
to maintain and consolidate peace. In any case, it
is clear that outside interference is pernicious and
unacceptable, that the Security Council alone cannot
address challenges to peace and security in Africa,
and that the African Union must be recognized as
a legitimate political authority in the region. The
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union must therefore focus on strengthening
the strategic alliance between both entities in order to
address conflicts and uphold peace in Africa.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like
to thank Mr. Ndiaye for convening today’s meeting
on an important subject and to acknowledge Senegal’s
role as one of the most significant contributors to
United Nations peacekeeping forces. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Ambassador António, Special
Representative Menkerios and Mr. Kaberuka for their
briefings, which have conveyed a clear and consistent
set of messages for the Council to consider. New
Zealand looks forward to the Council’s adoption later
this morning of draft resolution S/2016/977, prepared
by Senegal and the United States, which we believe will
send a strong signal of the Security Council’s political
support and encouragement of the recent efforts of the
African Union (AU) to strengthen our partnership.
Over the past two decades, the States members of
the African Union have demonstrated their willingness
and intention to lead the way in preventing and resolving
conflict and securing peace in their region. Effective
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union is essential to ensure support for those efforts and
to maximize their chances of success. As others have
said, it is therefore critical that the United Nations and
the African Union take a structured, complementary
and integrated approach to tackling peace and security
challenges on the continent.
Various models for such cooperation have been
tested, with varying degrees of success. In Somalia,
we have seen an African-led peace operation, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
operate with support from bilateral donors, backed by
a United Nations support office. In Darfur, we have
seen a hybrid United Nations-AU force achieve some
progress, but it has also encountered serious challenges
in implementing its mandate. Those missions have

S/PV.7816

enjoyed some success, and we pay tribute to those who
have contributed to that. But they have also highlighted
some of the ongoing challenges facing United NationsAU cooperation, particularly where arrangements for
financing, logistical support and mission leadership are
concerned. The missions initially led by the African
Union in Mali and the Central African Republic are
also a clear case in point.
Although different in nature, the case of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin
also demonstrated the need for a model that can enable
a more robust response to critical security threats, such
as that posed by Boko Haram to the countries of that
region. In the case of AMISOM, despite the success
of the United Nations logistical-support package,
troop-contributing countries in the region continue to
be frustrated by the lack of predictable financing for
troop stipends. Such approaches are neither sufficient
nor sustainable, which is why New Zealand welcomes
Senegal’s initiative in focusing attention on that critical
issue today.
Over the past decade, we have all made obeisance
to the need for cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations. It is time to move beyond the
rhetoric of cooperation to arrangements that will have
practical, meaningful application and deliver concrete
results. I want to focus today on three specific areas
where the United Nations-AU partnership should
be strengthened.
First, we should foster shared analysis and
understanding of security challenges between the
United Nations and the African Union. We share the
view of Special Representative Menkerios that early
engagement on building a common analysis and
understanding of security challenges and conflict
situations creates an essential foundation for effective
cooperation. If the United Nations and the African
Union — and for that matter the regional economic
communities — can agree on objective analyses of the
fundamental causes and drivers of conflict, decisions
on possible responses, solutions and respective roles
should flow more naturally. But how can we achieve
that? Secretariat-to-secretariat connections are critical.
The United Nations Office to the African Union plays
a vital role in United Nations engagement with the
African Union, and should be further strengthened.
Joint assessment missions, information exchanges,
training and secondments are also useful tools for

16-3915315/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

building connections, mutual trust and understanding
between the two secretariats.
Enhanced cooperation between the executive bodies
of the two organizations — the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council — is also very important. New Zealand
recognizes the significance of regular, structured,
formal exchanges between the Councils, such as their
annual joint meeting. But we believe that it is much more
useful to have regular informal engagement between the
two bodies, and that will deliver greater value. In our
experience, such interactions have been most successful
when they focus on specific issues, often after field
missions, when the two bodies can focus on what has
been achieved and what the problems are, rather than
the areas where each believes that the other is letting
it down. Greater use of joint visiting missions would
be another practical way to enable the two Councils to
gain a shared appreciation of situations and lend their
combined weight to joint political messaging on what is
required. We urge the African Union and the Security
Council, including next year’s incoming members, to
make greater use of joint visiting missions in 2017.
Secondly, we must work together to help strengthen
the relevant capacities in the African Union. If we
are to deepen cooperation, it is essential to ensure
that the African Union and the United Nations share
standards and approaches for key aspects of their field
missions. In addition to due-diligence requirements
for human rights in peace operations, we should think
through other challenging and complex issues, such as
standards for conduct and discipline, financial controls,
resource management and environmental standards.
That will require significant effort in building relevant
capabilities within the AU. What the United Nations
will get in return is a stronger partner able to help tackle
shared challenges, often significantly more cheaply
than the United Nations can.
Thirdly, as we have already heard today, we must
tackle the fundamental issue of financing for Africanled peace operations. New Zealand acknowledges
the challenges involved in reaching agreement on a
new, more sustainable financing model in the current
environment of austerity. But continuing to rely on ad
hoc arrangements each time a new African Union-led
mission is deployed is simply not sustainable. Time and
again, we have found ourselves reliant on temporary
fixes and improvised arrangements in order to mobilize
and sustain a response to critical security threats. That
16/31

18/11/2016

often leads to critical delays in establishing a mission
and to ongoing capability gaps and uncertainties
around funding. The result is less effective missions
and longer, more costly conflicts. Finding a mechanism
for providing sustained, predictable financing for
African-led peace operations is therefore an urgent
priority. That is why we strongly support the proposals
put forward by the African Union to address the issue,
particularly the road map outlined by Mr. Kaberuka
whereby 25 per cent of the cost of African Union-led
peace operations would be financed by African States.
We are also supportive of proposals to utilize United
Nations assessed contributions for financing African
Union-led missions in defined circumstances.
We realize that those are ambitious proposals.
Moreover, we understand what would have to be put in
place as prerequisites for making them work. Meeting
such challenges will need to be a priority for the new
leadership of the United Nations and African Union,
when they assume office next year. In the meantime,
Member States will need to take the difficult decisions
necessary to advance the partnership with the African
Union in a meaningful way.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s very important meeting
and I thank Senegal for its leadership in peacekeeping
in general. I also thank today’s briefers — Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios, High Representative
Mr. Kaberuka and Ambassador António.
Today marks a significant milestone after many
months, in fact, many years, of discussions on ways
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) could
work together to build and even stronger partnership to
address collective threats to peace and security. While
the Charter of the United Nations has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the AU has been an indispensable partner
in responding to crises on the African Continent, often
deploying its troops and police in some of the most
challenging and urgent threat environments.
We recall the early days of the conflict in Mali,
in 2013, when African troops rapidly self-deployed
overland as part of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali, in some cases with only the
most basic equipment; or the Central African Republic
in 2013, when despite lacking logistical support to
deploy outside of the capital, the African-led operation
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

contained the spread violence. Let us recall Somalia,
where brave AU-led forces have helped transform a
country, once associated with State failure, into one
where earnest State-building efforts are under way.
Together the AU and the United Nations have partnered
to try to address such crises, a reflection of shared
responsibilities for restoring peace and security. But, in
looking back on those past missions and, more broadly,
on the United Nations-AU partnership, I think we can
agree on two truths.
The first is that, unfortunately, such kinds of
operations are unlikely to dissipate any time soon.
To the contrary, more than a dozen sub-Saharan
countries are now confronting threats from violent
extremists, while civil war and unrest continue to
threaten civilians in places like South Sudan, Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second
truth, and what draft resolution contained in document
S/2016/977 affirms today, internationals the need to
strengthen the financial and operational underpinnings
of the United Nations-AU partnership to better support
African-led peace operations. Ad hoc arrangements,
cobbled together whenever crises arise, are not a recipe
for success or a good use of resources, which is why
President Obama pledged during his July 2015 visit to
AU headquarters in Addis Ababa, to help develop a new
partnership that would transform how we work together
to promote peace and security in Africa.
AU High Representative, Donald Kaberuka, has
spearheaded that strategic effort by advancing plans
to operationalize the AU peace fund and to fulfil the
AU commitment to self-finance 25 per cent of the
cost of AU-led peace operations by 2020. In July, at
the AU Summit in Kigali, AU Heads of State took a
historic decision, endorsing Mr. Kaberuka’s plans. That
significant commitment not only builds up African
self-reliance in the AU’s own words and ownership
over African operations but is integral to a broader AU
effort to ensure that the AU and its member States are
in charge of their own destiny, including the use of its
funds. The decision also sets an important cornerstone
for advancing the AU-United Nations partnership
by setting out operational, human rights and conduct
frameworks to strengthen AU policies and procedures.
We recognize that United Nations peacekeepers
are not always best positioned to respond to a crisis in
Africa, especially when there is no peace to keep or
armed groups threaten civilians, but we also recognize
that the AU does not have sufficient capacity, in part

S/PV.7816

because of insufficient and unreliable international
support to respond effectively on its own. A stronger
United Nations-AU partnership promises to leverage the
comparative advantages of each for the benefit of all in
the pursuit of peace and security across the continent.
To realize the full potential of that partnership, more
work needs to be done to build mutual trust, enhance
complementarity and put in place new ways of working.
I would like to focus on three factors that would be
critical to get right for this partnership to reach its
full potential.
The first factor is up-front mission planning,
which my colleague from New Zealand has already
highlighted. In cases where the Security Council
is considering authorizing support for an AU-led
operation under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations as the most effective way to respond
to a crisis, the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council must work closely together
from the outset. That requires consultations between
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council, the deployment of the joint United NationsAU assessment team to evaluate the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights situations on the ground
and joint planning, including on the strategic concept,
the concept of operations, forced generation and cost
implications. Success will be enhanced by making sure
that United Nations experts with critical experience
and know-how, including financial and procurement
expertise are fully integrated into those planning
stages. That will ensure that both councils are working
together to build the backbone of a mission that both
institutions can support.
The second success factor is a fully implemented
set of AU human rights and conduct and discipline
compliance policies. That includes putting in place
rigorous procedures for troop and police screening and
selection, training, monitoring, reporting, independent
investigations and holding perpetrators of violations
and misconduct accountable. Such measures are
critical for harmonizing AU policies and practices,
with international legal obligations and standards, so
that both the AU and the United Nations have clear
systems in order to prevent abuses and misconduct and
to promote accountability if and when allegations arise.
The third factor is ongoing mission evaluation and
reporting. Meaningful mission evaluation requires joint
evaluation and benchmarking exercises, throughout the
duration of a mission. In that way, the AU Peace and

16-3915317/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Security Council and the Security Council would be
informed of the progress made towards achieving the
mission mandate and able to make recommendations for
adjusting the mandate as needed. It would also require
regular reporting by the AU to the AU Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council on its implementation
of the Mission’s mandate, in compliance with AU
human rights and conduct and discipline policies. Such
reporting would include allegations of human rights
abuses, international humanitarian law transgressions
and conduct and discipline issues and actions taken by
the AU and troop- and police-contributing countries
in response to allegations. That transparency would
demonstrate the commitment of the AU in its troopand police-contributing countries to upholding human
rights and would serve as a critical step in achieving
accountability for actions that undermine the legitimacy
of peacekeeping and prey upon vulnerable populations.
Taken together, those three factors would form the
foundation for a future partnership that we all have a
strong, collective interest in seeing built. Such factors
should be addressed in the AU and United Nations
implementation details requested in the resolution to
be adopted today, along with specific benchmarks and
steps that would be taken to ensure that the AU Peace
Fund is consistent with member State World Trade
Organization obligations. Ultimately, to achieve those
three elements, we will need to shake ourselves out of
old biases and routines and work, hand in hand, to build
that foundation together. Otherwise we risk needlessly
losing more lives because the institutional status
quo prevailed. The stakes for the AU’s courageous
peacekeepers and for the vulnerable civilians that they
protect are simply too high.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Senegal for convening today’s meeting and
we welcome Foreign Minister Ndiaye as he presides
over today’s meeting. We listened very attentively to
the statements by Assistant Secretary-General Wane,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios, Ambassador António and Mr. Kaberuka.
The African Union (AU) is committed to African
countries’ strength in unity, cooperation, solidarity
and to promoting the resolution of African issues in
African ways and safeguarding peace and stability on
the African continent. The international community
universally commends its efforts.
18/31

18/11/2016

In recent years, the United Nations and the AU
have continued to advance cooperation in the area of
peace and security, jointly work towards a political
settlement of the questions of South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, together deploy
forces in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, engage in post-war reconstruction
in Liberia and Sierra Leone and play a positive role
in safeguarding peace and stability on the African
continent. China supports the strengthening of AU
and United Nations cooperation in the area of peace
and security and building partnerships of cooperation
to safeguard regional peace and security. China would
like to highlight the following points with regard to
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in the area peace and security.
First, we should jointly uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. The
AU is an important platform for African countries to
collectively respond to threats and challenges in the
region. In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the strengthening of cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations is conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in Africa. The
United Nations should continue to support the African
Union in its efforts to settle disputes through such
peaceful means as dialogue, consultation, good offices
and mediation, while respecting States’ sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity.
Secondly, we should encourage shared notions in
promoting collective security. The countries of the
world are interdependent, with intertwined security.
Parties should adhere to a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable concept of security and
seek and promote security through cooperation.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union should be based on the concept
of common security. They must strengthen strategic
planning and engage in comprehensive cooperation in
conflict prevention, resolving regional hotspot issues,
safeguarding peace and peacebuilding so as to achieve
win-win cooperation and common security.
Thirdly, we should coordinate and cooperate better,
so as to promote the settlement of regional issues. The
African Union has ample experience with good offices
and mediation and advantages in geography, history
and culture. Therefore, it has a unique role to play in
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

resolving contentious issues in Africa. China supports
the United Nations in listening to the viewpoints of
the AU and African countries so as to ensure that all
parties, in the process of reaching political settlements
on contentious African issues, can make full use of
their respective advantages, complement each other,
strengthen their coordination, take into account the root
causes of regional hotspots, scale up the AU’s input and
thereby develop comprehensive and targeted solutions
to issues.
Fourthly, we should support the AU in building the
capacity of its collective security mechanism. Scaling
up the AU’s capacity-building in peace and security is
conducive to better efforts in managing good offices
and mediation and assuming more responsibilities in
peacekeeping. It promotes the comprehensive settlement
of regional issues. We hope that the United Nations
will provide more support to buildingthe African
Union’s collective security mechanism in personnel
training, setting up institutions, logistical support and
funding, and that it will support building the African
Standby Force and rapid response force in combating
threats posed by terrorism and piracy in the region and
effectively enhance the capacity of collective African
security.
China attaches great importance and is strongly
committed to promoting cooperation with the African
Union in peace and security. So far, it has already
participated in 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa, and there are 2,600 Chinese
peacekeepers in missions such as in Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Darfur, and in the Sudan and Liberia.
At the summit commemorating the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced that within the next five years
China would provide $100 million to the African
Union in military assistance grants to support building
up the African Standby Force and the crisis rapid
response force. Last year at the Johannesburg Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, President
Xi Jinping and the African leaders unanimously
decided that the Chinese-African relationship would
be upgraded to a comprehensive strategic partnership
and highlighted that, in the coming three years, the
emphasis would be placed on implementing cooperation
plans in the following 10 areas: industrialization,
agricultural modernization, infrastructure, financing,
green development, trade, facilitating investment,

S/PV.7816

improving people’s livelihoods, and eradicating
poverty, public health, people-to-people exchanges and
peace and security. China will continue to participate
in United Nations peacekeeping in Africa and will help
African countries to strengthen their capacity-building
in national defence, anti-terrorism, riot prevention,
customs management and immigration control.
The coordinators’ meeting of the implementation
of the outcome of the Summit of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation was successfully concluded in
July in Beijing, which further promoted practical
cooperation between China and Africa in many areas.
China is willing to work jointly with African countries
and actively implement the outcome of the Johannesburg
Summit and safeguard peace and stability on the
African continent. We are committed to developing
a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core and building a community with
a common, secure and bright future for us all.
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I thank the four briefers for their introductory remarks,
and the Senegalese presidency of the Security Council
for convening this debate.
France fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the Ambassador and Head of the Delegation
of the European Union. I have four points to make.
First, the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union on issues of peace and security
is an indisputable and significant fact. African
organizations, acting within the African Peace and
Security Architecture, are increasingly assuming their
responsibilities in crisis management on the African
continent. At the same time, as a natural consequence,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union becomes a necessity in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
development, which will only continue, will strongly
mark the term of the incoming Secretary-General.
Secondly, France acknowledges, encourages and
takes an active part in this development. On a bilateral
basis, France is one of the primary partners in capacitybuilding for peace in Africa. Our partnerships foresee
the training of 20,000 African soldiers by 2020. This is
a major goal that we are committed to achieving.
France welcomes the role played by African Union
and African regional organizations, both at the political
level, such as the role that the Intergovernmental

16-3915319/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Authority on Development plays in South Sudan and
that of the Economic Community of Central African
States in the Central African Republic, as well as at the
military level, in the framework of complementarity
with United Nations peacekeeping operations — for
example, as illustrated in the transition from the Africanled International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and in the transition from the Africanled International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic — as well as, independently with the
Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram.
With regard to the Security Council, France
believes that taking into account the views of regional
organizations should become automatic and can lead
the way to building consensus when there is a strong
and consensus-based position of the African Union or a
subregional organization.
Thirdly, this partnership should be strengthened in
order to address at least four challenges, as called for in
the recent report (S/2016/780) of the Secretary-General
and in Mr. Kaberuka’s report endorsed in July during
the African Union Summit in Kigali.
The first challenge is that we need more
collaboration and coordination. The United Nations
and regional organizations act both simultaneously and
consecutively with different modalities in response to
the same crises. The regional dimension is unavoidable
when the United Nations takes action after an African
Union operation or in support of the implementation of
a peace agreement negotiated in the region. All of those
dimensions are tied together.
The second challenge is the need to identify
which situations would benefit more from the added
value of which organization. The United Nations does
a great deal, but it cannot, and does not know how
to, do everything. In certain situations, a regional
organization is perhaps better equipped to respond to
the specific circumstances on the ground. The African
Union Mission in Somalia, for example, comes to mind,
where the African Union brings genuine added value
as compared with the capacities of the United Nations.
The third challenge is to ensure the necessary
financial predictability and sustainability for African
peace operations. That is the message of the Kaberuka
report, presented to the Council in September by the
20/31

18/11/2016

African Union, which France welcomes. It includes
proposals that should be seriously considered both by
the African Union and its member States — which
should finance 25 per cent of the cost of African
operations — and by the United Nations — which
should make a mandatory 75 per cent contribution to
the cost of the operations.
The fourth challenge is to ensure that the funding
structure is implemented within a robust, comprehensive
partnership. Financing African peace operations
through mandatory United Nations contributions must
go hand in hand with the joint planning and monitoring
capabilities of the Security Council and the African
Union, which entails bolstering and even creating a
mechanism that does not yet exist. We must also attach
the greatest importance to respecting human rights, as
operations mandated, supported and financed by the
Security Council must respect the highest human rights
standards and, more generally, must pay particular
attention to the conduct of the operations. Finally, we
must identify precisely what type of operations lend
themselves to such a mechanism and what type of
concrete support the United Nations could provide.
All of those challenges have been clearly identified
in the three underlying reports for this debate, the
Kaberuka report and the two Secretary-General reports
from September. They are also taken up in the concept
note (S/2016/966, annex) circulated by the delegation of
Senegal for this meeting, as well as in the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/977, which will be put to
the vote at the end of the debate. The draft resolution
fully spells out the framework of the partnership and
duly acknowledges the fact that, although the United
Nations-African Union partnership on peace and
security has a financial component, it is not entirely
financial. Moreover, the draft text recognizes that there
is much work yet to be done and calls on the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union for their guidance in
supplementary and complementary work. France fully
supports that approach, and we thank Senegal and the
United States for having proposed it.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain and the United Kingdom are participating jointly
today under the so-called Toledo formula. As such,
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the United Kingdom. We also
align ourselves by the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union. We are grateful for
the opportunity afforded to us by this debate, as well as
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for the briefings on the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, a key alliance for peace
and security on the African continent.
Although this decade has seen significant progress
in that partnership, the rapid changes and growing
complexity of global threats force us to adapt our
responses and take full advantage of our respective
competitive advantages. The advantage of the Security
Council flows from the primacy conferred upon it
by the Charter of the United Nations on peace and
security issues, while the African Union’s is rooted in
due acknowledgement of the efforts of a dynamic and
growing continent that is determined to forge its own
future. The challenge today is to go from more or less
improvised cooperation, depending upon the urgency
of each emerging conflict, to a more institutionalized
partnership that inspires confidence, is more effective
and enhances synergies. That renewed partnership
cannot be limited to deploying operations, but rather
must encompass every phase of a conflict. I shall focus
on prevention and mediation, and the representataive of
the United Kingdom will cover peacekeeping aspects.
Prevention is key. The report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report itself lays out the crucial primacy of politics.
We know that the vast majority of conflicts in the
African continent are politically based, and that they
all require a political solution. It is worth noting that
it is was trust and team work between the region and
the United Nations that made it possible to settle crises
in places such as Burkina Faso, and that it is a lack of
understanding that hinders progress in other conflicts.
There is a long path ahead of us, especially if we are
to go from early warning signals to joint mobilization.
Improving coordination, reducing response time and
speaking in a unified voice continue to be significant
challenges. The contribution of the United Nations
Office to the African Union is undoubtedly essential
in that regard. That is why welcome the ongoing review
aimed at strengthening it.
Moreover, we should implement some of the
proposals that several delegations made during the
24 May open debate (see S/PV.7694) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
to which the Ambassador of New Zealand referred
in his statement. Those proposals include early, joint
identification of potential crises, sharing information
and increasing communication between the respective
secretariats
and
Councils,
holding
informal

S/PV.7816

brainstorming meetings and deploying joint missions
on the ground. Cooperation on sanctions is another
area to be looked into, as the effectiveness of sanctions
largely depends upon regional implementation, and
their legitimacy would be bolstered by the express
political support of the region.
Finally, regarding mediation and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, a United Nations-African
Union partnership would have obvious benefits. In
that regard, we note and commend the initiative of
the African Union to create a specialized registry of
women mediators for the continent at the disposal of
both the African Union and the United Nations. We also
point to South Sudan as a future test case for the United
Nations-African Union partnership, and to recall that it
was the solidarity of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and the Ssecurity
Council in calling for an end to the clashes that made it
possible to reach the August 2015 peace agreement. We
believe it is time to once again raise our voice together.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself fully with the statement just
delivered by the representative of Spain. We are pleased
to make two further points on the United NationsAfrican Union partnership — a partnership that will
remain critical for peace and security on the African
continent. I will focus my comments on the United
Nations-African Union partnership in respect of United
Nations peacekeeping and African Union (AU) peace
support operations.
At the London 2016 defence ministerial meeting,
the United Kingdom launched its focus on the “three
Ps” of peacekeeping. That framework for improving
peacekeeping is equally important in thinking about
how we continue to approach the United Nations-AU
partnership in terms of peace operations.
We need clear planning based on sharing of
information and common threat assessments. We need
consultative analysis and joint planning that reflects
our respective roles and which extends throughout the
life cycle of missions. In terms of pledges, AU member
States are already significant troop contributors.
The United Kingdom and Spain pay tribute to their
service. AU member States bring unique and diverse
capabilities, and we need to move to the next phase
of better matching the experience of troops and
police to the areas where they are deployed. In terms
of performance, it is vital to have the right sort of

16-3915321/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

mission to face each challenge, which brings me to
the very heart of the issue we discussed last week on
how peacekeeping can evolve to work in high-threat
environments (see S/PV.7802). In that debate, many of
us commented on the unique comparative advantage
of the AU in tackling such threats and taking on more
direct peace-enforcement activity.
The AU and its member States are in many cases
the ones that can respond to kinetic environments in a
different way, as the African Union Mission in Somalia
is designed to do in that country. For that very reason,
we need the United Nations-AU partnership to continue
to grow and be strengthened so that we are more than
the sum of our parts.
That leads me to my second point. AU member
States have made a welcome commitment to offering
a significantly increased financial contribution to
AU peace-support operations. That development has
the potential to open up new opportunities for the
partnership with the United Nations in the coming
years. We need to have more detailed discussions on
how we can collective enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for AU-led
peace-support operations that are authorized by the
Security Council. Mr. Kaberuka’s work is an important
contribution to this debate.
There will be a number of challenges for the United
Nations and the AU to meet. At the top of that list
are the strengthening of joint analysis and planning
and compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We must also ensure accountability
and oversight of missions’ performance and financing.
If we get this right, there are significant opportunities
for the both the United Nations and the AU to improve
oversight mechanisms and ensure high standards of
performance and effective delivery of our mandates.
Put simply, we will be better placed to rise to
the challenge of delivering peace and security on the
African continent. The United Kingdom and Spain look
forward to continuing this important discussion.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over
today’s important meeting. I also thank Mr. Wane,
Mr. Menkerios, Mr. António and Mr. Kaberuka for
their briefings.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) on peace and security has evolved
22/31

18/11/2016

markedly in recent years. Indeed, the international
challenges we face today demand that our organizations
develop an ever-closer strategic partnership.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the annual
joint consultative meeting between the United Nations
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. Our dialogue and partnership will only
continue to grow.
We are encouraged by AU commitments to make
the AU more self-reliant, including via financial
arrangements on peace-support operations through
the African Peace Fund. Not only the United Nations
Secretariat but also States Members of the United
Nations themselves should respond to this progress
by engaging in discussions on financial issues, as
expressed in the draft resolution (S/2016/977) to be
voted on later.
In discussing peacekeeping, we should recall that
the true aim of the United Nations-AU partnership is
sustaining peace. Strengthened peace operations are
an important tool to that end, but not our final goal.
I believe this is the essence of the AU aspiration
to “silence the guns by 2020, through enhanced
dialogue-centred conflict prevention and resolution”.
And as the Council recognized through its presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/12, adopted under the Japanese
presidency in July, we believe that peacebuilding is the
key.
The AU has a comparative advantage in its
contextual knowledge and mediation abilities in
support of political solutions, including through the
Panel of the Wise. Japan strongly believes in political
solutions and has supported AU mediation efforts
and good offices since 1996. Strengthened United
Nations-AU partnerships in conflict management and
peacebuilding will be key success factors in creating
more effective peace operations and more sustainable
peace in the long term.
Ultimately,
it
is
Africa’s
socioeconomic
development that will lead to sustainable peace and
the AU’s self-reliance. The AU Policy on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development reminds us that
security and development are closely linked.
As we consider how to strengthen United Nations-AU
cooperation, we should focus on Agenda 2063’s call for
economic and human development, conflict prevention
and institutions. The Tokyo International Conference
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

on African Development also complements United
Nations-AU cooperation and is based on the principles
of African ownership and international partnership.
More than anything, the United Nations-AU
partnership is about empowering African States,
societies and people to play an active role in creating a
safer and more prosperous future. Japan looks forward
to supporting continued collaboration that employs the
comparative advantages of each organization in pursuit
of our common goal.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very happy to welcome you here
once again, Mr. Minister, to preside over the Security
Council. We took note of, and are grateful for, the
briefings by the representatives of the United Nations
and of the African Union (AU).
We are once again today discussing an important
topic, namely, the partnership between the AU and
the United Nations in ensuring peace and security.
It is clear that there are ongoing serious threats and
challenges in a number of African countries, including
the marginalization of various groups and territories,
the spread of terrorism, the activities of transnational
organized-crime networks and piracy. There are ongoing
conflicts as well as the destabilization of a number
of countries and regions due, inter alia, to arbitrary
interference from external forces. All of this leads to
a hitherto unseen increase in the number of forcibly
displaced persons. The international community should
responde in a timely and effective manner to threats
and challenges to security in Africa.
Obviously, we must prevent attempts to impose on
Africans ready-made solutions without their clearly
expressed consent. The experience of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
other countries demonstrates the harmful nature and
ineffectiveness of such action.
We welcome efforts to find African-owned
solutions. Africans know better than anyone else the
situation and have situation-specific mechanisms at
their disposal. We note progress in the creation of the
African architecture for crisis response. We support the
enhanced cooperation with the Africa Union so as to
ensure peace and security on the continent.
Ignoring African views has adverse implications.
It is enough to recall the result of disregard by external

S/PV.7816

forces of the African Union initiative for political
settlement in Libya in 2011.
Russia has consistently called for developing the
partnership between the United Nations and African
organizations, including between the United Nations
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The importance of such cooperation is
affirmed in the conclusions and recommendations of
last year’s review of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture as well as the September reports of the
Secretary-General.
We support further pooling of efforts between
the United Nations and the African Union to stabilize
the situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali, the Sahel,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well as
the conflict between the Sudan and South Sudan. We
also would like to see closer cooperation on thematic
issues, which would include combating international
terrorism, transnational organized crime, piracy and
illegal trafficking in weapons and narcotics.
We took note of the outcome of the United Nations-AU
review on the matter of support to African peacekeeping
operations entrusted with Security Council mandates.
We stand ready for further constructive dialogue with
our African partners. Of key importance, in our view, is
increasing the predictability, reliability and flexibility
of the financing of such operations. We agree on the
importance of ensuring effective support to them from
the United Nations and other international partners. Of
equal importance is Africa’s compliance with its own
decisions and obligations. As far as we have gathered,
it is expected that we will finish the development of a
unified African approach at the AU Summit in January.
We are all aware that there remains a divergence of
views on this topic, even among African Security
Council members.
For our part, we are of the view that the specific
financial aspects of support to African peacekeeping
operations through assessed contributions from United
Nations States Members falls within the purview
of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Encroachment by the Security Council into the Fifth
Committee’s prerogatives is counterproductive
and undermines the long-standing division of the
“division of labour” within the Organization. We
share the conclusion of the Secretary-General’s report

16-3915323/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

(S/2016/809) issued in September on the outcome of the
joint AU-United Nations review, namely, that United
Nations support to African peacekeeping should not
add up solely to financial and other support. Partnership
between the AU and the United Nations in support of
peace and security also includes joint efforts in conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
Russia is making a notable contribution to
supporting peace and security on the African continent,
which includes designing strategies to settle armed
conflicts, as well defining mandates for the relevant
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations in
Africa. Russian troops and staff from the Ministry
of the Interior participate in many such operations,
and their activities are highly acclaimed by the
Secretariat. My country pays particular attention to the
training of police and military personnel from Africa.
Specifically, in Russia there is yearly training of up to
80 peacekeepers. Staff from law enforcement agencies
in Africa are given the possibility to participate in
higher education programmes and internships at the
short-term continuing education courses in Russia.
We are also making a significant contribution to
eradicating the social and economic root causes of
conflict in Africa. In particular, within the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, more than
$20 billion have been written off of the bulk of African
debt. The remaining debt has been rechannelled to assist
Africans under the Debt for Development Programme.
Furthermore, Russia is an active participant in providing
across-the-board bilateral assistance to the continent in
the framework of existing international mechanisms,
including by making relevant contributions.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Senegalese delegation
convening this morning’s debate.
(spoke in English)
It is also my pleasure and honour to welcome
today’s briefers and thank them for their
comprehensive presentations.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
Nowadays most of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed on the African continent.
Almost 50 per cent of the uniformed personnel in those
missions are also provided by African States. That
clearly demonstrates that United Nations peacekeeping
24/31

18/11/2016

efforts must closely cooperate with African States.
At the same time, the United Nations is often slow in
reacting to situations that can evolve into full-scale
conflicts or situations where the civilian population
is endangered and requires rapid protection action
from the international community. In that regard, my
delegation commends the African Union (AU) for
having often acted as a first responder to crises even
before the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.
Nevertheless, we have to admit that challenges remain
and that more should be done to strengthen further the
relationship between the United Nations and the AU to
effectively address collective security concerns on the
African continent.
In our view, financing is one of the priority areas
in which further action could bring about tangible,
positive results. The predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for AU-led peace operations
has been a long-standing issue. In that regard, the AU’s
decision to raise the continent’s contribution to the costs
of its peace-support operations to 25 per cent by 2020
is a highly commendable step. It will enhance African
ownership and agenda-setting of peace initiatives of the
African Union. In addition, I would like to flag other
areas of particular importance.
First, it is imperative to eliminate a frequently
occurring flaw in many AU peace-support operations,
namely, a capability gap with regard to uniformed
personnel. We believe that ensuring deployment
readiness and improved performance require collective
and coordinated actions by the United Nations and
the AU. As one of the leading European troop- and
police- contributing countries to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, Ukraine knows at
first-hand how difficult and unpredictable situations
in the areas of missions’ responsibility can sometimes
be due to the existing climate or security conditions.
Cooperation on strengthening the capabilities of African
Union units prior to their deployment therefore could
include, but not be limited to, sharing of best practices
and providing special training. For instance, the United
Nations has already introduced the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System, which has proved to be a
useful tool for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In our view, it could be emulated by the African Union.
Secondly, recently the Security Council, along
with other United Nations States Members, discussed
the issue of asymmetrical threats that United Nations
operations face nowadays (see S/PV.7802). It was clear
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7816

from those deliberations, as well as from the relevant
reports on peacekeeping operations, that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are not a proper tool to combat
terrorism. Many hold a view that military measures
to counter terrorism and violent extremism are the
responsibility of national Governments and the relevant
regional organizations. Therefore, we see a great merit
in the United Nations providing advice and expertise in
support of respective African Union endeavours.

for having chosen the topic of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union for the November
programme of work, owing to the importance of the
issue in implementing in practice Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. This is one of the most
important partnerships between the United Nations
and international organizations. I also thank all of the
briefers, in particular Mr. Kaberuka, whose mandate
we support.

Thirdly,
after
recent
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding reviews at the United Nations, we
consider a people-centred approach to such activities
of the Organization to be axiomatic. In that respect,
we believe that the protection of civilians is a decisive
factor not only for the success of United Nations
operations, but also those of the AU endorsed by the
Security Council. It is therefore worth considering
establishing an effective framework for the Human
Rights Due Diligence Policy in African Union peace
operations. From the peacekeeping experience of the
United Nations, it is clear that there is no peace without
human rights.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations has recently increased in
importance as there is a growing awareness that no
party can single-handedly confront the emerging
patterns of transboundary threats to international
peace and security — chief among them are terrorism
and organized crime. That has helped foster new
approaches towards forging partnerships at the
regional, continental and international levels aimed at
confronting such challenges. It has led to the conviction
that cooperation, coordination and joint work are an
indispensable option, facilitated through the division of
labour among the relevant parties and building on their
comparative advantages, towards achieving the desired
goals and outcomes.

Last but not least, in the light of the recent resolutions
of the Council and General Assembly on peacebuilding
architecture, it is important to look back at the 2015
joint communiqué between the African Union and
the Security Council, which envisaged a conduct of
joint United Nations-AU field missions to areas of
conflict in Africa. We should consider implementing
that commitment while organizing field missions of
the Security Council, which we see as an important
conflict-prevention tool. Inviting representatives
of
Peacebuilding
Commision
country-specific
configurations to such missions could also improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Council’s visits.
In conclusion, Ukraine would like to reiterate its
position that, as an elected member of the Council
and an observer State to the AU, we stand ready to
engage constructively on each and every initiative
aimed at enhancing United Nations-AU cooperation
on issues related to peacekeeping, peace support
and peacebuilding on the African continent. People
have suffered for too long in many parts of that great
continent, and the international community has a moral
responsibility to make every effort to achieve lasting
peace and stability wherever that might be needed.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency

In cooperation with regional economic communities
and with the support of its partners, in particular the
United Nations, over the years the African Union
has undertaken an active role in providing security
and stability in Africa. That was made possible by
putting in place and operationalizing its Peace and
Security Architecture and taking early initiatives to
intervene in a timely manner in crises in various areas
of the continent through missions that enjoy flexible,
enhanced and developed mandates tailored to dealing
with the reality on the ground. It also includes adopting
new concepts that go beyond the role of conventional
peacekeeping, combating terrorism, supporting the
establishment of State institutions and confronting
other unconventional challenges.
In that regard, I commend the sacrifices made
by the African Union missions in Somalia, Mali and
the Central African Republic, among other countries,
and pay tribute to their effective contributions to
confronting the peace and security challenges in
Africa and throughout the world. The establishment
of the Peace and Security Architecture in Africa was
linked to an increased awareness of the importance
of African ownership. African Union Summits have
adopted decisions on enhancing phased self-reliance

16-3915325/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in the funding of those activities as well as the
operationalization of the Peace Fund as a main pillar of
the Architecture. Ongoing discussions continue within
the relevant bodies of the African Union to develop
practical and effective mechanisms to implement those
decisions so as to achieve the desired goals.
The significant developments within Africa and
the United Nations have coincided with the report
(see S/2008/813) of the high-level panel chaired by
former Prime Minister Prodi and the report (see
S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, thereby encompassing developments
in conflicts and international crises. It is a matter of
providing an opportunity for an integrated vision in
supporting peace and security as well as launching
new partnerships aimed at finding innovative solutions
to crises and conflicts. The partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is therefore of
particular importance. It enables the United Nations
to actively respond peace and security challenges on
the continent. Items pertaining to Africa account for
70 per cent of the agenda of Security Council, and, in
that regard, I stress the importance of implementing the
recommendations of the relevant reviews and reports.
It is also important to build upon the continuing
efforts to develop the African Peace and Security
Architecture so as to give impetus to and enhance the
institutional partnership between the United Nations and
African Union, thereby creating a strategic partnership
based on shared and jointly shouldered responsibilities,
including adopting workplans to ensure regular
funding of African Union peace operations. That would
allow for the development of African capacity in the
area of preventive diplomacy and mediation, as well
as peacebuilding and reconstruction in post-conflict
situations. It is also crucial to enhance the institutional
cooperation between the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the African Union Commission in order to
enhance the implementation of agreed programmes and
projects within the operations framework agreed by
the two organizations, as well as to support the United
Nations Office to the African Union. That would allow
the Office to carry out its functions as a focal point
between the two organizations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that, as a member of both
the United Nations and of the African Union, Egypt
is determined to actively participate in enhancing the
partnership between the two organizations. It is our
conviction that that is the ideal path towards countering
26/31

18/11/2016

today’s problems facing Africa, and the world in
general. They are complex and multifaceted challenges.
Once again, I reiterate that Egypt will exert every effort
to support the work of Mr. Kaberuka.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay): We appreciate your
presence at this open debate, Sir, and congratulate
the presidency of Senegal for having organized it. We
thank Mr. Wane, Mr. António, Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Kaberuka for their respective briefings.
Uruguay believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is an invaluable tool to improve
collective security in a world that is increasingly in
turmoil and faces complex and multidimensional
threats. Cooperation among States is fundamental to
the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts.
Regional organizations are playing an increasingly
important role in international peacebuilding and
security, insomuch as they contribute to a deepened
understanding of their respective regions and wield
a greater sensitivity and comprehension of realities
on the ground, thereby paving the way to effectively
confront the problems and conflicts that affect their
respectivepositions on the map.
In the case of Africa, cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is crucial and
imperative given the existence of conflict situations
in complex settings, in the context of which we
face asymmetrical threats and the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism, and where in many cases
we also must tackle humanitarian crises and mass
violations of human rights.
Against this backdrop, we very much welcome the
work carried out with determination and energy by the
African Union to achieve peace and development in
Africa. We also welcome the progress made in terms
of cooperation between that organization and the
United Nations, but we believe that this partnership
should be further strengthened through more frequent
interaction and consultations, paving the way for a
common understanding of conflicts and the elaboration
of common strategies. In that respect, we trust that the
draft resolution (S/2016/977) to be adopted today will
contribute to that process.
One of the major shortcomings of the system,
according to the Ramos-Horta report (see S/2015/446),
pertains to the financing of this strategic partnership.
It is for that reason that we deem it desirable that
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7816

the United Nations and the African Union pool their
efforts aimed at establishing predictable, flexible
and sustainable mechanisms aimed at bolstering
peace-support operations in the African region.

peacekeeping operations requires ever more robust
cooperation between both organizations; for example,
in the process of drafting mandates, it is essential that
both organizations pull clearly in the same direction.

Furthermore, given that conflict prevention is a
major priority, I should like to stress also that the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) notes that
peacebuilding efforts must be backed by a predictable
and sustainable allocation of resources.

To conclude, we acknowledge that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union has made further headway in the development
of cooperation mechanisms, including, inter alia,
mechanisms for consultative decision-making, joint
analysis, planning and assessment; an integrated
response to the conflict cycle; and joint efforts to prevent
conflict and promote accountability and transparency.
Such advances, which must continue to be fine-tuned
and adapted to new realities, could serve as a model
and a reference for the establishment and strengthening
of partnerships between the United Nations and other
regional organizations, thus bolstering synergies and
promoting complementarity, taking into account at all
times the unique features of each and respecting the
mandates of each organization.

While acknowledging the leading role played by
the Security Council in matters relating to international
peace and security, we must nonetheless identify the
complementary functions that both organizations could
carry out, harnessing their capacities, influence and
experience to ensure a consistent, coherent response in
various contexts. For example, the efforts in the areas
of mediation, facilitation and good offices carried out
by the African Union in various countries, including
the Sudan, South Sudan, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, must be harmonized with, and
complementary to, the efforts and actions undertaken
by the Security Council.
One area in which we believe the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
must continue to progress is that of human rights and
humanitarian law. In that respect, we express our
support for the United Nations Office to the African
Union and for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights with respect to their
assistance in strengthening the operational capacity of
military, police and civilian peacekeeping staff, with an
emphasis on the central importance of human rights in
peacekeeping operations.
Our country attaches a great deal of importance to
the role played by peacekeeping operations, which we
believe are of particular importance in Africa, where
more than 60 per cent of peacekeeping operations and
more than 80 per cent of all United Nations uniformed
peacekeeping personnel are located, and given that
more than 80 per cent of the annual peacekeeping
budget is earmarked for missions in Africa.
I think it worth highlighting that over the past
decade, the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union has achieved a great deal of progress,
having established various forms of cooperation,
including in the missions in Mali, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and the Sudan. The success of

This would allow us to benefit from and develop the
potential of regional organizations, which, in keeping
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
represent vital pillars of United Nations actions aimed
at the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation joins
other Council members in thanking Senegal for
having convened today’s debate, and we thank you,
Mr. Minister, for presiding over it. We wish also to
express our appreciation to all the briefers for their
respective briefings. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/780), which provides further
context for the subject at hand.
Malaysia
remains
committed
to
further
strengthening and consolidating the comprehensive
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, particularly on issues of peace and
security in Africa. Such comprehensive partnership
would go a long way towards further strengthening
our collective and ongoing efforts in the maintenance
of international peace and security. In this context,
my delegation pays tribute to the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union, which has been
instrumental in strengthening the partnership within
the two organizations.
Nonetheless, although significant progress has
been made to improve cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in recent years, more

16-3915327/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

could be achieved to make the partnership more
meaningful, efficient and effective. It is therefore
imperative that such cooperation continue to be
underpinned by, inter alia, a common strategic objective
and a clear division of responsibilities, and premised on
shared assessments, with a view to mutually reinforcing
and complementing the decisions of both the United
Nations and the African Union.
It is patently clear that the lessons learned and
best practices on the cooperation between the two
organizations should be shared on a regular basis
through a structured mechanism with a view to
producing tangible, results-oriented operational
benefits on the ground and avoid task redundancies
and duplication, including through more frequent
secretariat-to-secretariat exchanges.
The opportunity afforded by the three
comprehensive reviews on the United Nations
peacebuilding architectures, United Nations peace
operations and resolution 1325 (2000), concluded
last year, provided a timely opportunity to reflect on
ways and means of reinforcing cooperation in areas of
common interest to the United Nations and the African
Union on promoting and sustaining peace. We remain
committed to the follow-up and implementation phases
of the review, in coordination and cooperation with all
partners and stakeholders.
While conflict management remains a core function
of the United Nations and regional organizations, there
has been a renewed push, of which my delegation is
fully supportive, towards the strengthening of collective
efforts to prevent conflict from escalating into fullblown threats to international peace and security.
In this regard, Malaysia remains convinced that
conflict prevention must continue to be prioritized
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We should continue to improve
the efficiency of the United Nations-African Union
preventive diplomacy, which should be geared towards
more coordinated actions, including by enabling early
detection and actions to defuse potential crisis situations.
We share the view that regional actors, which assume
greater ownership of development in their respective
regions, have the potential to contribute immensely
to shaping positive outcomes for peace, security and
development. The United Nations should be encouraged
to leverage the comparative advantages of regional
organizations, which possess a better understanding
28/31

18/11/2016

of the dynamics and root causes of conflicts in their
respective regions. Be that as it may, it is important to
bear in mind recent experiences in the Central African
Republic, Mali and Somalia, among other places, which
have revealed some key areas and stresses that stretch
the limits and capacity of regional organizations in
dealing with such challenging situations. Without
sufficient financial and capacity-building support, the
ability to deliver will not match the aspirations and
determinations of regional organizations, particularly
in harsh and challenging situations. It is also equally
important to guard against burden-sharing becoming
burden-shifting, as unrealistic expectations are
placed on regional organizations that have yet to build
full capacity.
In that context, Malaysia appreciates and commends
the African Union for its leadership in taking ownership
of the region’s peace and security agenda. We note,
however, that its ambition is severely constrained by
the lack of necessary resources, particularly in terms
of flexible, sustainable and predictable funding. We
commend and fully support the ongoing efforts and
commitments of the AU to enhance self-reliance in
that regard. It is for those reasons that we welcome
the bold and forward-looking positions adopted by
the AU leaders during the twenty-seventh African
Union Summit, held in Kigali in July, to establish
and operationalize the African Union Peace Fund. As
such, we are pleased to support the draft resolution
(S/2016/977), jointly initiated by Senegal and the United
States, scheduled to be adopted today. We believe that
unanimous adoption of the draft resolution will send
a strong message of support from the Council to the
African Union’s member States. We are convinced that
the draft resolution is a necessary step towards further
cementing the close coordination and cooperation
between the two organizations.
In conclusion, we hope that discussions today
generate more ideas and strategies in order to deepen
and strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union with a view to enhancing the
capacity of the international community and regional
organizations to respond effectively to emerging threats
in the African region and beyond.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its 28 member States. The candidate countries of
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; countries; Bosnia
and Herzegovina, country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, let me first thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to organize this debate on
such an important topic and for the very good concept
note (S/2016/966, annex). I would also like to thank the
representatives of the United Nations and of the African
Union (AU) who are present and who have provided
very helpful briefings.
The European Union encourages and supports
intensified cooperation in the area of security and
peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
African Union, as it has developed over the course
of the past 10 years, since the launch in 2006 of the
United Nations 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union. For its part, the European
Union has always defended effective multilateralism
and has focused on strengthening its cooperation with
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union. We have also invested
in strong triangular cooperation in order to meet the
immediate challenges as well as to develop capacities
in a global and long-term perspective. The added value
of that cooperation is clearly illustrated by the results
of our joint efforts in Somalia, Mali and the Central
African Republic, as in other parts of Africa.
Secondly, we would like to express our deep
gratitude for Africa’s contribution to the difficult task
of maintaining peace, whether under Blue Helmets or
as part of a regional force. As all troop-contributing
countries know, this contribution sometimes goes hand
in hand with a tragic human cost.
We welcome the reviews conducted in 2015
on peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We hope that the follow-up work will include
concrete measures to improve the global security
architecture, with full respect for the role of regional
organizations and the United Nations partnership with
the African Union. The European Union also promotes
the engagement of the United Nations and regional

S/PV.7816

organizations with civil society in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and mediation.
The European Union and the African Union have
a long-standing and solid partnership in the area of
peace and security. Among the five priorities identified
at the fourth European Union-Africa Summit, held in
2014, cooperation on matters of peace and security is
by far the most important of the five identified, notably
from a financial point of view. Our ongoing political
and financial commitment to support African-led
peace operations on the continent will be reaffirmed
at the highest level at the upcoming fifth European
Union-Africa Summit, to be held in Côte d’Ivoire in
November 2017. Our continuing financial commitment
was recently illustrated by the release in August of
€50 million for the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram, and in the €178 million for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Consultations are under way in Brussels on the
next — the sixteenth — package for AMISOM, which
will be used to finance its troops’ salaries through
March 2017.
The European Union has contributed more than
€2 billion to the African Union through the the African
Peace Facility (APF) since it was established, in
2004. Most of those resources support African peace
operations, which have played a fundamental role in
maintaining peace and stability in the continent. The
European Union’s broad, sustainable financial support
for peace and security in Africa goes far beyond
that instrument, to include national and regional
cooperation by our member States. However, financial
resources for the APF are strongly solicited. For the
African Union Mission in Somalia alone, by the end
of 2015 the European Union had contributed more than
€1 billion. At this rate, the APF will soon be unable to
continue to support AMISOM and to respond to any
emerging priorities.
(spoke in English)
Increasingly, there is widespread recognition that
Africa and the European Union need to work together
against the menace of terrorism, which is not constrained
by borders. Terrorism is an existential threat for several
African countries, and it needs to be opposed through
increased international cooperation. This asymmetrical
danger requires improved approaches, necessitating
a long-term security response and long-term troop
deployments, which increasingly need sustainable

16-3915329/31

S/PV.7816

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

financing — something that is difficult to achieve
solely through the African Peace Facility
The European Union welcomed the important
decision taken by the African Union Summit in Kigali,
held in July, to finance the African Union Peace Fund
by introducing a levy of 0.2 per cent on eligible imports
that would automatically flow to the African Union.
The mobilization of additional African resources is a
sign of strong ambition and ownership by the continent.
The African Union Finance Ministers meeting in Addis
Ababa in September took some important steps towards
the implementation of the groundbreaking decision at
the AU Summit in Kigali. We look forward to the official
launch of the fund, expected during the forthcoming
AU Summit in January 2017. In that context, I would
like to salute Mr. Kaberuka’s chairmanship and the
good work we are developing with him.
The EU is also following with interest the
outcome of the the African Union Political and
Security Committee retreat held in Lusaka from 7 to
10 November, which was presented with an ambitious
yet practicable master road map as a milestone towards
achieving the aspirations of Africans for the continent
they want, as elaborated in Agenda 2063, in particular
aspiration 4, for a peaceful and secure Africa.
There is recognition within the European Union
of the need to reorient our financial support towards
more practical, physical capacities such as logistics and
deployment. The bulk of APF funding to date has gone
to stipends for African troops serving in peace support
operations, paid to their Governments via the African
Union. While that funding remains necessary, and
important in some cases, better complementarity and
synergy between APF support and African Peace and
Security Architecture is needed. For that reason, future
APF support will be geared more towards prevention
and mediation, and its support to peace operations will
move partially away from stipend-oriented funding — in
favour of the strengthening of operational capacities
such as logistics, medical support, strategic lift and
communication and information systems — with the
objective of creating sustainable African capabilities to
address present and future peace challenges.
Following a request from the African Union, we
have agreed to mobilize funding for the third phase of
the African Peace and Security Architecture support
programme for the period 1 January 2016 to 31 December
2018, in an amount of nearly €30 million. The third
30/31

18/11/2016

phase of the support programme will follow the road
map structure of the Peace and Security Architecture,
while building on the support provided since 2011, and
will contribute to further strengthening the capacities of
the African Union Commission, the regional economic
communities — the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community — and two
regional mechanisms — the North African Regional
Capacity and the Eastern Africa Standby Force — to
fulfil their respective mandates under the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
The road map also maps out a shared way forward
on the results to be achieved by all stakeholders under
the African Peace and Security Architecture to reduce
existing capacity gaps in the operationalization of
the Architecture. It clearly identifies measurable,
specific objectives and outputs to be achieved to that
end in each of its priority areas. In the same vein, the
strategic headquarters in Addis Ababa need to be fully
operationalized, which is one of the goals of the current
support programme for the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The EU stands ready to provide technical
expertise, technologies and training to achieve that
very important goal.
In conclusion, we remain strongly committed
to an ever-stronger partnership with the AU, as
well as increased triangular EU-United Nations-AU
cooperation, in order to fully achieve the establishment
of lasting African peace and security capacities, in full
respect of African ownership.
The President (spoke in French): Members of the
Council have before them document S/2016/977, which
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Senegal and
the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
16-39153

18/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2320 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation supported and voted in favour of resolution
2320 (2016), for we are aware of how important it is to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU). Such cooperation is one of the
cornerstones of the maintenance of international peace
and security, which is further based on the pre-eminent
role of the African Union to sow the seeds for peace
and security in Africa through the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, as well as by providing financing for
peace and security. My country, which is very proud
to be a founding member of the African Union, fully
subscribes to the need to strengthen cooperation
between our two organizations — the United Nations
and the AU — in all areas and aspects, particularly in
international peace and security. Such a partnership is
necessary if we are to achieve our commonly set goals
in this area, commensurate with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 2320 (2016) addresses issues pertaining
to United Nations financing of African Union peace
support operations, particularly the Peace Fund.
Resolution 2320 (2016) also refers to the AU resolution
to take responsibility for its share of the financing
of peace support operations, part of the concept of
African ownership of these peace operations, which we
support and would like to underscore the importance
of. Discussions between member States of the African
Union are ongoing in the framework of the relevant AU
mechanisms in order to further expand upon how we
will define the means to ensure the shared financing
decided upon by the African Union Assembly of Heads
of State and Government.
Along the same lines, we shall take actions that
are tangible and can be properly implemented to open
the door to such financing. On this particular point,
my delegation calls for a swift conclusion of AU
discussions so that we are in a position to define and

S/PV.7816

establish the measures that need to be adopted by the
United Nations in response, so that support that can be
given to peacekeeping and peace support operations.
We hope that this will lead to predictable, flexible and
sustainable financing and support AU peace operations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are convinced of the importance of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional and subregional organizations to
ensure peace and security on the continent. The Russian
delegation therefore voted in favour of resolution 2320
(2016). However, we are forced to note that, during
work on the resolution, the co-sponsors did not take on
board a number of important amendments from some
delegations, ours included.
We are puzzled by the refusal to include in
the resolution references to the basic principles of
peacekeeping, which have been approved by Member
States many times. We cannot shake the impression that
this is a cover-up for the intention to deploy African
peacekeeping operations against the will of host
parties and in violation of the principle of impartiality.
The universal basic principles of peacekeeping are
obligatory for any operation, especially those approved
by the Security Council. A paradox arises in that
regard when United Nations support is requested, but
United-Nations-approved principles are ignored. The
resolution is also replete with specific language likely
more characteristic of the General Assembly and its
Fifth Committee than of the Security Council.
We call attention to the fact that there was a lack
of unity among African delegations on the Security
Council in agreeing on the resolution. The 29 September
communiqué of the African Union Peace and Security
Council calls for such unity. As we understand it,
the African Union itself has not yet settled on a final
position on the modalities for funding its own peace
operations, and it intends to draft such during the
Summit to be held in Addis Ababa in January.
We are also unhappy with the working methods of
the co-sponsors, who did not fully take into account
the legitimate concerns of several delegations and
stubbornly stuck to their language, which made it more
difficult to achieve consensus on this very important
resolution.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

16-3915331/31
