A /77/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

71st plenary meeting

Thursday, 18 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 p.m.
High-level meeting on the midterm review of the
Sendai Framework
Agenda item 18 (continued)
(c) Disaster risk reduction
Draft resolution (A/77/L.70)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item
18, entitled “Disaster risk reduction”, to hold the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm
review of the Sendai Framework, in accordance with
resolution 76/204 of 17 December 2021. This high-level
meeting will focus on the theme: “Working together to
reduce risk for a resilient future”.
In connection with the item, the General Assembly
has before it a draft resolution issued as document
A/77/L.70.

connected to each other and to us through our actions
and inaction.
To better manage disaster risks, we must understand
why and how disasters are connected and address our
role in perpetuating them. That has become an inevitable
priority for all countries, regardless of geography. But
then, to quote Robert Louis Stevenson, “The mark of a
good action is that it appears inevitable in retrospect.”
The Sendai Framework was the first of the
landmark international agreements adopted in 2015.
In many ways, it was a framework ahead of its time.
Member States called for a critical shift towards
the proactive management of risks before the onset
of disaster. World leaders pledged to pursue riskinformed decision-making, build resilience, tackle
the impacts of climate change and create pathways for
sustainable development.

It is a pleasure to welcome representatives to this
high-level meeting. Let me extend special thanks to
the two representatives who have joined us here. One
of them, Mr. Mustafa Kemal Kilinç, came from the
earthquake zone in Türkiye to be with us today. I am
sure we have much to learn from his first-hand insights
on how to identify risks, assess the gaps and bolster
resilience in the future.

Eight years on, we must admit that our progress has
not kept pace with the urgency of our days. The known
number of people affected by disasters has jumped
eightyfold since 2015. The shocks ignited by unattended
risk — and amplified by the coronavirus disease,
conflict and climate change — have torn through our
systems across the world. They have left millions
homeless and starving. They upended supply chains.
They laid bare the gross inequities of an international
financial order that has often prized profits over people.
How did we get here?

As the earthquake across Türkiye and Syria and
the recent Cyclone Mocha in Myanmar and Bangladesh
made clear, disasters know no borders. They are also

We must acknowledge that our decisions on how
we consume, produce, fuel, finance and plan are still
out of sync with the reality that nature’s resources are

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14073 (E)

*2314073*

A/77/PV.71

finite. We have to rethink and recalibrate our systems,
our structures. We should acknowledge our enormous
responsibility for human-induced climate change. And
we have to stop undervaluing the environmental and
other costs of our actions. As accountants like to say, it
is not a calculated risk, if one has not calculated it.
This midterm review is our last chance before 2030
to collectively change course. Starting today, let us
ensure our choices are planet-smart and people-centred.
Let us measure prosperity with a tool that widens the
lens of the gross domestic product — one that captures
the true cost of human, social, natural and built capital,
meaning the total assets of a nation. By moving
beyond gross domestic product, we can shift away
from extractive and transactional behaviours, moving
towards modes of inclusion and solidarity.
In those efforts, let us ensure that risk governance
and management evolve in ways that are proportionate
to the challenges at hand. The more we improve
scientific capabilities and manage residual risks, the
better our societies will withstand the shocks.
I challenge Member States to account for risk in
every decision that impacts how we live, consume, build
and invest; to shift the temporal frame from short-term
decision-making to one that also includes long-term
perspectives; to make the sustainable transformations in
global and local risk governance; to value resilience in
the global financial systems by redressing how disaster
risk is treated; to increase and incentivize investments
in prevention and rapid response; and, above all, to
place people at the centre of prevention efforts.
By engaging those most affected by disasters, we
can reverse the trends towards inequality, restricted
civic space and rising vulnerability, in short: anticipate
risks, calculate, factor in, prepare, prevent, respond
rapidly and build the lessons learned into the next
action plans. Those issues are at the core of the political
declaration that will be adopted today. And they are
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations we have
pledged to uphold. I urge Member States to renew the
drive for a multilateral system ready for a new risk
landscape. The transformation towards resilience is
ours to craft.
In accordance with rule 70 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, I now give the
floor to the Deputy Secretary-General, Her Excellency
Ms. Amina Mohammed.
2/27

18/05/2023

The Deputy Secretary-General: I am delighted
to join His Excellency Mr. Csaba Kőrösi in welcoming
representatives to the United Nations as we gather to
take stock of our progress towards implementing the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Our world is at a defining point in history. As
we review our journey halfway to 2030, we must
acknowledge that progress has been weak and
insufficient. Sadly, as a result of not meeting our
climate and broader Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) commitments, natural disasters that could have
been prevented have claimed hundreds of thousands
of lives and forced the involuntary displacement of
millions of people — mainly women, children and
other vulnerable groups.
Exacerbating that challenge, we faced the
coronavirus disease pandemic; the triple crisis of
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution; rising
costs of living and skyrocketing inequality. All of that
has been further exacerbated by the effects of the war
in Ukraine.
Meanwhile, structural governance omissions within
the banking and global financial systems demonstrate
the fragility of economic and financial stability in the
face of systemic risks and shocks.
And on climate, scientists warn that we are
headed to cascading and irreversible impacts of
global warming, including extreme weather events
exposing humans and other species to life-threatening
climatic conditions. Record-breaking heatwaves have
hit the Iberian Peninsula and North African countries
with temperatures of 106°F just last week and 113°F
in South-East Asia, with extended droughts wrecking
harvests and aggravating human health in those
regions. Floods and landslides in Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have left more than
9,000 people homeless and 5,500 people missing and
are costing those Governments more than $100 billion
in infrastructure rehabilitation.
Addressing those challenges means changing
our response to risk through systemic thinking,
collaborative action and the smart, agile deployment of
responses to prevent, manage and mitigate global risks.
Disaster risk reduction is critical. Nothing erodes
sustainable development like disasters, which can
often destroy decades of progress in minutes. The
failure to identify, prevent and reduce risks before they
23-14073

18/05/2023

manifest as disasters not only places the Sustainable
Development Goals in jeopardy, but it also affects the
most vulnerable people in the world first and worst.
Addressing that challenge requires integrated,
cross-sectoral action across the entire 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and scaled-up measures at
the local, national and regional levels. We must build
the resilience of communities, countries and natural
ecosystems alike in a holistic way. Understanding and
managing disaster risk and tackling root causes and
drivers of exposure as part of integrated risk-informed
approaches are all indispensable.
In the midterm review of the Sendai Framework,
Member States and stakeholders identify where and
how we must collectively change our relationship to
risk and integrate current and future risks into all of
our decisions, actions and choices.
Together, we need to upgrade our governance and
financial systems to ensure accountability for managing
risks and deploy resources to protect people and natural
capital. We also need to address market “short-termism”
and other failures using fiscal and market-based
measures for greater systemic resilience. Decisions
should always be based on science, strategic foresight
and fully integrating local, traditional and indigenous
knowledge. Science would also need to inform and
anticipate emerging environmental and biological risks
and any emerging technological hazards.

A/77/PV.71

The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her statement.
Before proceeding further, and as indicated in
my letter dated 11 May 2023, I would like to consult
Members on inviting the following speakers to make
statements: Ms. Mami Mizutori, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction;
Ms. Mwanahamisi Singano, Senior Global Policy
Lead at the Women’s Environment and Development
Organization; and Mr. Mustafa Kemal Kilinç, youth
representative from the earthquake zone in Türkiye.
If there is no objection, may I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly, without setting a
precedent, to invite these speakers to make statements
at this meeting?
It was so decided (decision 77/558).
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Mizutori.
Ms. Mizutori: It is a pleasure to be a part of this
global gathering for the midterm review of the Sendai
Framework, a process mandated by the General
Assembly that began in October 2021. It has seen
unprecedented commitment by Member States and
stakeholders. I take this as an indicator of the importance
accorded to understanding and managing risk by States
and non-State actors pursuing the goal of the Sendai
Framework and risk-informed sustainable development.

So, we will need to work together — Member States,
investors, businesses, civil society and the entire United
Nations system — to ensure that the calls contained in
the midterm review are woven across all our agendas,
frameworks, conventions and investments.

The spirit of 2015, which characterized the
adoption of the Sendai Framework and other landmark
agreements, is now buzzing through the parliament
of humankind here in the General Assembly, together
with a renewed sense of urgency. And I am delighted
to see many of the representatives of countries, civil
society and United Nations organizations in this Hall.
We acknowledge the wisdom and boldness of the
leaders who gathered in Sendai in March 2015 to enable
the historic global commitment to reduce disaster risk
and build resilience. I commend all Member States that
have overseen its implementation to date and sincerely
thank them for their tireless efforts towards a resilient
and sustainable future.

Managing risk today is not an option. It is a global
imperative, a commitment, and it belongs to each and
every one of us. Let us endeavour to make that a reality
as we meet in September to take stock of both the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.

I would also like to recognize the critical role
in implementation played by civil society, women’s
and youth organizations, the scientific and academic
communities, not to mention businesses, professional
associations and private sector financial institutions,
among many others. Their efforts truly embody

As we look to the 2023 SDG summit and the
summit of the future, it is time to make a dramatic
shift — from managing disasters to managing risk
and investing in prevention. People are depending on
it. Communities and countries are depending on it.
Sustainable development in itself is depending on us
delivering. And the future of our planet is depending
on it.

23-140733/27

A/77/PV.71

the guiding principle of all-of-society engagement
and partnership.
Despite enormous challenges to implementation,
thanks to the collective efforts of Member States and
stakeholders, the midterm review shows that there has
been progress in realizing the outcomes, goals and
targets of the Sendai Framework.
Governments and stakeholders are better able to
understand risks, as well as their cascading impacts;
and justice, social cohesion and human rights are
more prominently represented. With improved
understanding, they are better placed to bring the
transformations required to prevent, reduce or manage
those risks. That has been aided by a growing number
of countries establishing or upgrading national loss
accounting systems, by improvements in availability
and the application of risk data and information, and by
more widespread use of the Sendai Framework monitor.
There has been a significant increase in the number
of countries with national strategies for disaster risk
reduction, and growth in regional and subregional
cooperation mechanisms. That is however not the case
at the local level.
While inadequate pricing of disaster risks in
public and private investment decisions and a lack
of adequate financing remain major roadblocks,
there have been innovations in risk financing and
risk transfer mechanisms — from adaptive social
protection to insurance to disaster debt moratoriums
and catastrophe bonds.
Further integration of risk reduction in official
development assistance is observed, although it remains
focused on reactive measures.
There has been increased focus and improvement
in multilateral cooperation across regions, leading to
enhanced preparedness and effectiveness of responses.
Equally, understanding risk in protracted crises and
multi-hazard early-warning systems have improved
even if overall access remains inadequate. I have seen
first-hand in Madagascar, Barbados and India, among
other places, how breaking down institutional silos
is helping Governments optimize investments and
build resilience.
However, progress remains unequal across
geographies, skills and income levels. When risks
manifest as disasters, they continue to disproportionately
affect least developed countries, small island
4/27

18/05/2023

developing States, landlocked developing countries,
African countries and middle-income countries. As
risks are left unattended, disasters are materializing
faster, surpassing our ability to cope with increasingly
dire consequences for people, livelihoods, societies and
the ecosystems on which we depend.
The imperative to realize the outcome, goal and
targets of the Sendai Framework is more important
today than ever before. As we look to accelerate riskinformed action to 2030 and a resilient future, I urge
all States and stakeholders to take forward the calls to
action to be adopted in the political declaration today
(A/77/L.70). Key among these are strengthening the
availability of and capacity to apply risk information
and improved mechanisms for sharing among sectors,
ministries, organizations and borders; strengthening
multi-hazard risk governance with responsibility
for risk reduction assumed by all State institutions,
supported by adequate legal and regulatory frameworks
and resources, with all-of-society engagement and
partnership; ensuring that financial authorities integrate
disaster risk reduction into their work to incentivize and
scale up public and private domestic and international
investment, and collaborate with financial and capital
market institutions to better integrate disaster risk in
their decisions; improving the means of implementation
and
strengthening
capacity-building,
financial
resources, data and technology and partnerships; and
integrating provisions for improved preparedness,
building back better, addressing underlying risk drivers
in national and local disaster response, recovery and
rehabilitation plans, and promoting investment in
multi-hazard early-warning mechanisms.
Reducing disaster risk is possible, but it calls for
collective commitments to sociocultural change, a
culture of prevention and the central role of integrated
disaster risk management in building the world we value
and desire. We do know better, and we can and must do
more. We cannot choose a path of timidity, maintaining
business as usual. Doing so presents us with threats that
not only jeopardize sustainable development, but also
our very existence.
The year 2023 is the year for course correction. As
the Secretary-General said,
“We have the information we need. We have the
tools and technology. What we need is the political
will to forge a peace pact with nature and transform
23-14073

18/05/2023

A/77/PV.71

how we grow food, use land, fuel transport, and
power economies.”
Let us not squander this opportunity. The time is
now. Let us rise to the occasion, apply what we have
learned and ensure risk-informed decision-making,
investment and behaviour in all societies so that current
and future generations have a future filled not with
fear, but with hope.
The President:
her statement.

I

thank

Ms.

Mizutori

for

I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for taking the time to be with us this morning; she will
have to leave now due to her other commitments.
I now give the floor to Ms. Singano.
Ms. Singano: The year 2015 was a very historic
year for me, and I am sure it probably was also for most
of the people in this Hall. On my own account, 2015
brought this amazing wave of collective optimism — a
sense of renewed hope — which gave us courage to
dream and envision a new world, a world where disasters
can be prevented, or the impact can be minimized, a
world where no one will be left behind, regardless of
where they live or the circumstances of their birth, a
world where climate injustices will come to an end
and planetary health will be restored. In March 2015,
the Sendai Framework was adopted, in September of
that year, the Sustainable Development Goals were
adopted (resolution 70/1), and, in December 2015, the
Paris Agreement was adopted. While a lot can be said
about the lost opportunities on making these decisions
and frameworks stronger and better, we have these
frameworks and as of now these frameworks are crucial
pillars of our collective vision.
Today we are gathered in this Hall to review the
implementation of the Sendai Framework, seven years
down the line. In 2015, I was an activist, as I am today.
But, in 2015, I, together with other activists, crisscrossed
Africa, where my roots are, and which is the continent
that is closest to my heart. In our crisscrossing of
the continent, we created awareness, mobilized
communities to engage with their Governments and
supported women in engaging in these global processes.
Today I stand in this Hall, on this stage, to speak to the
General Assembly, our leaders. In fact, I am in this Hall
not just to speak to the General Assembly, but to appeal
to it, to get the work done.

The report of the midterm review of the
implementation of Sendai Framework screams to
us that the work has not been done to the scale or at
the pace required to deal with the magnitude of risk
communities and countries face daily. It and the related
report of the main findings and recommendations of
the midterm review (A/77/640) say with clarity that
those who need the support the most continue to be
systematically left behind. Further, importantly, the
report confirms the ongoing cry of non-State actors
that the whole-of-society society approach has yet to
be achieved.
Having a framework is a great milestone, and
we need to celebrate that. But having this framework
implemented in full by all stakeholders is critical for our
shared humanity. My personal concern is that we will
not be able to fully implement the Sendai Framework
and other agreed frameworks if we constantly choose to
do what is easy. Let me take this opportunity to remind
the Assembly of the words of Nelson Mandela:
“There is no passion to be found in playing
small, in settling for a life that is less than the one
[we] are capable of living.”
We need to find pride and joy in doing the hard work.
Recentring global power is not easy. Challenging
engraved traditions that push women and girls into
endless cycles of vulnerability is not easy. Challenging
our own biases and privileges is not easy. Creating just
equal, sustainable and resilient societies is not easy. It
is hard work, but it is necessary work. It is the right
work to do for the sake of our humanity.
In my view, there is no escape from doing the hard
work. The only choice we have is either we do the hard
work now or we do the hard work later. We can reach
and engage women and girls to build their resilience
now, or we can bury them with numbers. We can
support communities’ disaster risk reduction now or
we can mobilize an untenable amount for humanitarian
aid. We can make financing available to least developed
countries and small island developing States now, or we
face the catastrophe of wiping sovereign States off the
face of the universe.
Later comes with a significant cost. The good news
is that women, whom I represent, and communities, are
already providing the leadership needed to get the hard
work done. We only need to do our part to connect and
support them.

23-140735/27

A/77/PV.71

18/05/2023

I cannot overemphasize the need to scale up
implementation of the Sendai Framework for our own
collective resilience. Disasters are not natural, it has
been said over and over again, and disasters know no
borders. Those who are at the periphery of power, of
course, will be affected first and potentially severely.
But make no mistake, at the end of the day, we will all
be affected.
As we leave these halls of power, can we recommit
to getting things done? Can we recommit to scaling
up investment to countries and communities that
need them the most? Can we strengthen collaboration
between countries but also between groups and can
we engage in the development and implementation
of the gender action plan? Last but not least, can we
centre the whole-of-society approach and the whole-ofGovernment approach everywhere?
It has been said courage can be contagious. Can our
leaders be courageous so that we can all be?
The President:
her statement.

I

thank

Ms.

Singano

for

I now give the floor to Mr. Kilinç.
Mr. Kilinç: My name is Mustafa Kemal Kilinç.
I am 23 years old. I am a third-year international
relations student from Hatay, Türkiye. Participants may
know the name of my hometown, Hatay, because it bore
the most damage when earthquakes struck Türkiye on
6 February. I am addressing the General Assembly
today as a survivor of those devastating natural
disasters. I would like to share with the Assembly my
first-hand experience.
I was in Hatay visiting my family. I was supposed
to go back to my university in the city of Adana the next
day. It was 4:17 a.m. Very strong tremors woke me up
from a deep sleep. My bed was shaking hard. When I
tried to get up, the ground was shaking so violently that
I felt it was going to swallow me up. At first, I thought
I was dreaming. As I struggled to gain my balance,
tremors became even stronger. I realized I was in the
middle of a powerful earthquake.
Furniture started to fall, windows broke, walls
cracked, and plaster fell off. There was destruction
all around us. My family and I were all confused and
scared, but we had each other to reach safety. It was
a horrible experience that made me feel very helpless
and vulnerable.
6/27

We left our building safely. The powerful earthquake
finally stopped, but the aftershocks continued. Each
one triggered greater fear. We searched for a safe place
to take shelter. It was a race against time because we
did not know when the next wave would hit us or if it
would be even stronger.
When the sun came up, we saw the extent of
the destruction around us more clearly. Countless
buildings were in ruins, and people were on the streets,
homeless. Not only was my hometown, Hatay, struck,
but ten more provinces in Türkiye were directly hit by
the earthquake. In my city, the physical destruction
was heaviest, with 14,000 buildings destroyed. An
additional 70,000 buildings suffered heavy damage.
Imagine one out of every five buildings in Manhattan
being totally destroyed.
Some of the places from my childhood memories
now no longer exist. I am in this Hall today because our
building did not collapse. It did not collapse because
our contractor had applied high standards that made the
building earthquake resistant. Nevertheless, we could
not go back to our home, as the aftershocks continued
and basic services like water and electricity were not
available. We lived in our car for a week. There were
seven of us. We mostly felt cold inside the car because
we could only start the engine from time to time. If we
ran out of gas, we could not get more.
We were grateful for the blankets they gave us.
We were lucky to be able to stay in a train wagon for
another week. There, we finally felt warm. Eventually
we moved across the country to stay with some relatives.
We returned to Hatay after a few weeks to try to build
our lives back again.
In the days following the earthquakes, we were
always torn between the joy of good news and the
sadness of bad news. For several days we could not reach
many friends and relatives by phone. We were not sure
who lived and who died. We would be happy when we
found out that someone was alive. We even experienced
miracles: five of our relatives were rescued after 1,020
hours under the rubble. They stayed alive thanks to the
two-litre bottles of water that were next to their beds.
But then we were crushed when we heard the news of
deaths. I lost many close and distant relatives, as well as
dear friends and teachers who are never coming back.
In total, more than 50,000 people lost their lives in
our country as a result of these earthquakes. Almost
half of these dead were in my city. Getting their dead
23-14073

18/05/2023

bodies out of the rubble was also a challenge. We waited
for hours and even days to give them a proper burial.
When we received their remains, we felt relief. We
went through a range of extreme emotions in a period
of days.
We also saw disasters on top of disasters. Fires that
broke out at the seaports because of collapsed containers
took days to extinguish. There were also fires on the
streets. Many survivors lived on the streets in the middle
of the dust and rubble, suffering from the cold weather
and heavy rain. Then that rain turned into floods, killing
more people and causing more destruction. Within just
a few days, we endured earthquakes, fires and floods.
It made us wonder whether this was the apocalypse.
The earthquakes struck an area as large as many of
the countries represented in this Assembly. Right after
the earthquakes, roads and railways collapsed, making
transportation difficult.
It was therefore impossible for the authorities to
provide significant assistance right away. At first, all
the victims relied on each other to remove the rubble,
save others and provide aid. When our authorities,
non-governmental organizations and volunteers from
many countries around the world mobilized to help, it
lifted our spirits.
We saw many foreign search-and-rescue teams on
the streets. They were assisting Turkish officials. We
also saw United Nations vehicles and staff. On behalf of
all the earthquake victims, I would like to express our
deepest gratitude to all the nations that supported us in
these difficult days.
We cannot predict natural disasters. But we can
certainly be prepared whenever and wherever they
happen. This is why I wanted to tell my story. I want
people to understand what a disaster victim feels and
experiences. I hope that as a result of the work at the
United Nations there will be fewer disaster victims like
me around the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Kilinç for his heartening
and humbling statement.
The General Assembly will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.70. As stated in my
letter dated 12 May 2023, considering the long list of
inscribed speakers for the plenary segment, I strongly
encourage delegations to include any explanation
of position concerning the political declaration in

A/77/PV.71

their statements in the plenary, rather than making a
statement in explanation of position at this stage.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.70, entitled “Political declaration
of the mid-term review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030)”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.70?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/289).

A/77/L.70

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor in
explanation of position after adoption, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Ms. Marin Sevilla (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has the honour of taking the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of
the Charter of the United Nations. At the outset, we
appreciate the efforts of Australia and Indonesia in
facilitating the negotiations of the recently adopted
consensus document (resolution 77/289). However, we
wish to place the following on record.
First, the debate on disaster risk reduction is taking
place amid a multifaceted global crisis that is having a
devastating impact especially on developing countries
and which obligates us to effectively address, inter alia,
the increasing frequency and intensity of disasters,
given their severe and negative economic, social and
environmental consequences.
Secondly, if we recognize that the Sendai
Framework is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, it is necessary to understand
that its full implementation is part of our common
efforts to, inter alia, adopt a risk-based approach to
sustainable development. The Sendai Framework is
therefore part of the same 2030 Agenda that calls
on States to refrain from unilaterally enacting and
implementing economic, financial and trade measures
that are inconsistent with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and which impede the
full achievement of economic and social development,
particularly in developing countries.

23-140737/27

A/77/PV.71

18/05/2023

However, how can we really talk about the full
and effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda and
the Sendai Framework when more than 30 countries
around the world, including many in our Group of
Friends, are prevented from effectively moving forward
in implementing disaster risk reduction programmes
or accessing the necessary funds to address the
consequences of disasters of various kinds? It must be
recognized that unilateral coercive measures also pose
obstacles to, inter alia, capacity-building, technical
and financial assistance and much-needed technology
transfer. It is therefore rather worrisome that, despite
the fact that this is a widely known reality, we have
chosen in the outcome document of this high-level
meeting to remain silent on this vital issue for more
than a third of humanity.

As Members are aware, pursuant to resolution
76/204, this high-level meeting also consists of a
plenary segment, four interactive multi-stakeholder
panels and a closing segment. The plenary segment will
take place immediately following this opening segment
and will continue until 1 p.m. The plenary segment will
resume this afternoon from 3 to 9 p.m. in this Hall. The
four multi-stakeholder panels and closing segment will
be held in the Trusteeship Council Chamber tomorrow,
as announced in the programme.

In that context, we underline the urgent need for
all means and enabling conditions for disaster risk
reduction and implementation of the Sendai Framework
at the local and national levels, as well as addressing
situations of risk and vulnerability, while promoting the
resilience of people and communities. To this end, it is
imperative to put a complete and unconditional end to
the application of unilateral coercive measures that not
only cause severe pain to our peoples, but also hinder
the very implementation of the Sendai Framework.

I now call on Her Excellency Ms. Katalin Novák,
President of Hungary.

Accordingly, our Group of Friends considers the
recently adopted document to be incomplete and that it
will remain so until it truly reflects an issue that has a
direct impact on the development of billions of people.
Unilateral coercive measures are an unfortunate reality
that can no longer be ignored, especially given the
disturbing and growing severity of climate catastrophes
in recent years and the obstacles that such measures
pose in providing assistance and facilitating care and
relief efforts.

I am Katalin Novák, the first woman President
of Hungary, and I have three reasons to be here with
everyone today. First, we Hungarians are affected by
the war in our direct neighbour, Ukraine. We are also
affected by the demographic decline and challenges we
have not faced before. Secondly, we feel compassion
for the countries that are more exposed to natural
disasters than we are. Thirdly, I am proud to be present
at a meeting presided by the Hungarian President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi.

The President: I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Mitchell
Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Arrmanatha
Nasir, Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations in the
informal consultations on the political declaration
adopted as resolution 77/289. I am sure members of
the Assembly will join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.

Hungary is a middle-sized country in the heart of
Europe, with a population of 10 million. We have no
seas or significant natural resources. However, given
our resources and local conditions, we have made
outstanding efforts to help those in need. Through
the framework of the Hungary Helps programme
alone, since 2017 Hungary has sponsored about 300
humanitarian and rehabilitation projects in 54 countries,
the equivalent of more than $100 million.

8/27

Before we begin with the list of speakers for the
plenary segment, I would like to remind delegations that,
as mentioned in my letter dated 11 May, statements will
be limited to three minutes for individual delegations
and five minutes for statements made on behalf of
Groups of States.

President Novák: Europe seemed to be a calm,
peaceful continent in the past 70 years. What do we
see now? Pandemics, catastrophes, floods, fires and
a brutal war in Ukraine. Our European world is not
the same as we thought it would be by now. On top of
that, we suffer from the sad picture of empty cradles,
and we are facing a serious demographic crisis in our
Western world.

On the cold night of 6 February, a 7.8 magnitude
earthquake struck Türkiye and Syria and claimed
23-14073

18/05/2023

the lives of about 50,000 people, causing damages
in excess of $100 billion. Hungary was there to help
from the first moment. I personally visited President
Erdoğan and the Turkish people and flew over Hatay
Province, the region most seriously damaged by the
catastrophe. I am proud that a total of 167 Hungarian
specialists and 29 rescue dogs saved the lives of 35
people. In addition, we provided Türkiye with more
than 100 tons of medicine and medical equipment, and
we are also providing help to rebuild a cultural centre
and a church. We also provided 47 tons of rapid aid,
providing care and housing for the Syrian people who
were directly affected by the earthquake. And three
medical clinical units were deployed in Syria in the
most affected regions.
That is just one recent example that shows how
important it is to not only protect ourselves, but also
to assist each other. That is why we launched the
Hungary Helps programme, with a view to providing
quick and effective assistance when most needed. We
were there to help at the floods in Pakistan last year,
and the year before that at the Croatian earthquake,
the lethal typhoons and at the eruption of the Mount
Nyiragongo volcano.
A final question — for whom do we want to save
our planet, if not for the next generation? We need
strong families, where we can teach our children to
care for their own environment and to help those in
need. Together, we can do even more to build a secure
and sustainable future. Hungary is ready to help. His
Holiness Pope Francis visited Hungary just a few weeks
ago and said: “Let us give a future of hope, not war, to
the next generations. A future of cradles, not of graves.”
May his words become a reality.
The President: I now call on the Vice-President of
the Republic of Zambia.
Ms. Nalumango (Zambia): Before I deliver my
national statement, allow me to express our solidarity
upon the adoption of resolution 77/289, on the political
declaration. On behalf of the Government of the
Republic of Zambia, we commend the work of the
co-Facilitators on the Declaration on the mid-term
review of the Sendai Framework and thank all Member
States for reaching consensus. The Zambian declaration
is in support of the adopted text, which we hope will
enable States to accelerate the implementation of the
Sendai Framework.
Allow me now to deliver our national statement.

A/77/PV.71

At the outset, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Disaster Risk Reduction for convening this
important meeting.
The midterm review of the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction is taking place at a
critical moment in our global development history.
We are approaching the midpoint of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), the SDG summit and the
global taking stock of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. And yet, progress recorded so far is very
worrisome. We are witnessing the increasing scale,
frequency and intensity of climate-induced disasters,
with their devastating impacts, undermining the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable
Development Goals, more generally. We therefore
cannot overemphasize the urgency of accelerating the
implementation of the Sendai Framework as an integral
part of the 2030 Agenda.
We acknowledge and applaud the SecretaryGeneral’s call to protect everyone on earth through the
universal coverage of early-warning systems. However,
most developing countries lack sufficient investments
in forecasting and early-warning systems for effective
and comprehensive early action, including disaster
preparedness and response.
We call for enhanced international support from
development partners in integration of disaster risk
reduction in the implementation of relevant sustainable
development policies.
Zambia has undertaken the following key measures,
among others, to strengthen disaster risk management
in the context of the climate change discourse:
First, we established a robust multidimensional
disaster-management structure at all levels of society
and Government, which allows for the participation
of both State and non-State actors in disaster
risk management.
Secondly, we incorporated disaster risk reduction
into development planning in order to ensure that the
national development framework is risk-informed.
In conclusion, as Chair of the African Group of
Negotiators on Climate Change, we also look forward
to a constructive engagement on funding arrangements
for addressing loss and damage at the twenty-

23-140739/27

A/77/PV.71

eighth conference of the parties to the united nations
framework convention on climate change.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana.
Mr. Phillips (Guyana): My delegation aligns itself
with the statements to be delivered on behalf of the
Caribbean Community, the Alliance of Small Island
States and the Group of 77 and China.
Under the theme “Working together to reduce risk
for a resilient future”, the high-level midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015—2030 is being held at a critical time for us in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Our region is the secondmost disaster-prone region of the world. Between 1997
and 2017, one out of four disasters and just over 50 per
cent of the economic losses due to climate-related
disasters occurred in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Climate change is exacerbating the impacts of natural
hazards, with rising sea levels and more frequent and
intense weather events.
More needs to be done to address the underlying
risk drivers that contribute to disasters. International
cooperation and support are critical for reducing
vulnerability to disaster, including for providing
financial and technical assistance, sharing best
practices, promoting knowledge exchange and capacitybuilding. Since the adoption of the Sendai Framework,
we have made modest progress in implementing disaster
risk reduction measures. Nationally, Guyana’s Low
Carbon Development Strategy 2030 includes building
resilience to the impacts of climate change, improving
disaster risk management and promoting adaptation
measures in vulnerable communities. Regionally, the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency
established the Regional Comprehensive Disaster
Management Strategy and Programming Framework
2014–2024, which aims to strengthen disaster risk
governance and reduce the vulnerability of the region
to disasters. The Strategy is highly recognized and
valued, by participating States and partners alike, as
the overarching framework and basis for coordination
and collaboration to advance disaster risk management
and resilience across the region.
Despite our efforts, we in Latin America and the
Caribbean continue to face significant challenges in
reducing disaster risk. Again, the main challenge is
the limited financial and technical resources available
to our countries to implement disaster risk reduction
10/27

18/05/2023

measures, which limits our ability to invest in the
infrastructure and systems needed to reduce our
vulnerability to disasters.
The classification of many small island developing
States as middle-income countries has impeded their
access to concessional financing, which is critical for
their overall development, including building resilience.
We therefore look forward to the early completion of
the United Nations multidimensional vulnerability
index, which will objectively determine our countries’
vulnerability and resilience and go beyond the narrow
criterion of gross domestic product for the allocation
of financial support to developing countries. We
also look forward to the speedy establishment of the
loss and damage fund, which will be critical for the
countries that are most vulnerable and most affected
by the effects of climate change. We also call for the
$100 billion per year commitment to the developing
world to be urgently implemented.
It is those countries that contribute the least
to climate change that are most affected by it. It is
therefore not a matter of charity but of climate justice
when we ask for commitments to be fulfilled. Climate
justice is a comprehensive approach that addresses the
underlying drivers of climate change and promotes
equity and fairness in the distribution of the benefits
and costs of climate action. Climate justice and
international solidarity are important for addressing
the challenges of climate change and the promotion of
sustainable development.
I end my remarks with a call for everyone in every
nation to work towards meeting their commitments
to the Sendai Framework. Guyana will continue to do
its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister and Minister for Education and Training,
Minister for Police, Fire Services and Emergency
Services, and Minister for His Majesty’s Armed Forces
of the Kingdom of Tonga.
Mr. Sovaleni (Tonga): I am pleased to attend
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the midterm review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015—2030, which gives
us an opportunity to take stock of national progress,
challenges and innovative solutions in achieving
anticipated goals under the Sendai Framework.
23-14073

18/05/2023

I acknowledge the successful conclusion of the
negotiation process on the political declaration of
the high-level meeting on the midterm review of
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
(resolution 77/289), which was ably co-facilitated by
the Ambassadors and Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Indonesia. Tonga supports the declaration
and its adoption.
We reaffirm our commitment to the full
implementation of the Sendai Framework, and I am
confident that the outcome of today’s high-level meeting
will allow us to identify innovative solutions and gaps
in policy and practice, particularly in recognition of
the changing risk landscapes due to the growing rate of
intense climate-related hazards.
Tonga has made progress in the implementation of
projects in areas pertaining to understanding disaster
risk, strengthening governance to better manage
disaster risk, investing in disaster risk reduction for
resilience and enhancing disaster preparedness for
effective response. That is also in alignment with our
region’s 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent.
Despite that progress, Tonga continues to be
severely affected by climate-related hazards. We have
been fighting to survive the brunt of climate-related
disasters, despite being negligible contributors to the
climate crisis. As reported, no country is on track to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030
due to obstacles that include intensifying catastrophic
natural disasters, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
geopolitical tensions, and technical and human
capacity constraints.

A/77/PV.71

and Governments to anticipate and manage disasters
is worrisome. The damage to the economy from that
eruption and tsunami was estimated by the World Bank
to be approximately equivalent to 30 per cent of Tonga’s
gross domestic product.
Accordingly, we need effective integrated climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction efforts
that will enhance resilience. We need more investments
in understanding the underlying drivers of the social
construction of risk. We need disaster risk reduction
interventions that are targeted towards strengthening
governance and institutional capacities. The outcome
of the midterm review process should therefore focus
on contextualizing the processes of risk-informing
development initiatives through targeted investments.
However, that cannot be achieved if investments and
resources are allocated on a piecemeal basis. We need
an inclusive and holistic approach to financing disaster
risk reduction interventions, including the loss and
damage facility.
To conclude, Tonga calls for a review of the financing
disaster regime and the implementation system that will
localize solutions for effective disaster risk reduction
as we look forward to engaging constructively with all
delegations over the next two days. The review of the
Sendai Framework and the political declaration thereon
should guide us on the right pathway to meet the noble
objectives of the Sendai Framework.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister of Eswatini.

Evidently, there are significant gaps in accessing
financial resources for initiatives targeted towards
strengthening governance and institutional capacities.
That is also a major challenge for most Pacific small
island developing States. The current disaster-related
financing regime is largely driven by reactive and
compensatory investments for post-disaster response,
all of which hinders progress.

Mr. Masuku (Eswatini): The Kingdom of Eswatini
is appreciative of today’s high-level meeting on the
midterm review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015—2030, at which we will reflect
on the progress of countries in implementing that
important Framework. There is no doubt that the
Sendai Framework has brought together a large number
of stakeholders to work at the local and international
levels. It is a collaborative effort that will accelerate
risk reduction and build a resilient future.

In January last year, thousands of families were
displaced because of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai
volcanic eruption and the ensuing tsunami. That
once-in-a-1000-year event was reported to be a magma
hammer, which generated the largest atmospheric
explosion recorded by modern instruments. Our hardwon development gains were swept away by a single
event. The outpaced capacities of our communities

Financing disaster risk management is undoubtedly
one of the biggest challenges for a country with a small
economy, such as ours. Inadequate financing slows
down the implementation of disaster risk management
plans and leaves everyone vulnerable, even when the
risk is known and can be prevented. While our country
is on course to develop a disaster risk management fund,
there are already concerns that it may not be adequately

23-1407311/27

A/77/PV.71

capitalized to meet the cost of loss and damage caused
by the impact of climate change. That calls for climate
change and disaster risk reduction practitioners and
institutions to work together to prevent duplication and
maximize the use of limited resources.
Eswatini will further institutionalize systemic-risk
monitoring through the development of a disaster risk
management monitoring framework, as well as through
the implementation of the Global Risk Assessment
Framework, in collaboration with the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR).
Eswatini will continue to work with UNDRR and the
Southern African Development Community to improve
the understanding of risk, which is one of the priorities
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
It will also launch a national platform for disaster risk
reduction, which will ensure the active and meaningful
participation of communities and all sectors of our
community or economy in disaster risk reduction.
The Kingdom of Eswatini has accomplished
numerous achievements emanating from the
implementation of the Sendai Framework, including
the formulation of the national resilience strategy,
the tropical cyclone readiness plan, the mobilization
of stakeholders to improve disaster preparedness and
the inclusion of disaster risk reduction in nationally
determined contributions. The impact of climate
change, manifested through prolonged dry spells,
flooding and heatwaves, accompanied by a high rate
of unemployment, has led to at least 20 per cent of the
population living in chronic food insecurity.
The Government has for a long time provided
safety nets to the population through cash-based
transfers. Although that is necessary and helpful in the
short term, it is not sustainable and therefore poses one
of the biggest challenges for the country in sustainably
tackling the cause of chronic food insecurity, which
we understand to be the impact of climate change.
To build resilience, several other programmes that
target chronically vulnerable populations have been
initiated. One of them, the Child Headed Households
Farming programme, which is a Government initiative
supported by various stakeholders, is already yielding
impressive results. The most vulnerable child-headed
households are supplied with farm inputs and assisted
with the planting of fruit trees to produce their own
food. However, they still need irrigation equipment to
be resilient to drought.
12/27

18/05/2023

The Kingdom of Eswatini recognizes that disaster
risk management should be part of government policy
and programmes, as sustainable development will be
elusive without it. In that regard, disaster risk reduction
has been included in the Water Management Policy of
2017, the 2019 National Drought Management Plan,
the 2022 National Development Plan and many other
government plans.
In an effort to achieve the Sendai Framework’s
targets and priorities, the Kingdom of Eswatini is
currently reviewing the Disaster Management Act of
2006, which will strengthen disaster governance to
manage disaster risk. That review is informed by the
prevailing knowledge and best practices globally, as
well as our own experience gathered over the past seven
years. The 2015–2016 drought, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and the recurring cyclones, the intensity
and return periods of which have been amplified as a
result of climate change, left us with rich knowledge to
use towards a better and risk-resilient future.
Thousands of housing structures for the elderly
and child-headed families were destroyed by torrential
rainfall and tropical cyclones. The country has raised
awareness on the importance of adhering to building
codes and has also constructed at least 800 improved
housing structures in the building-back-to-better
effort. The country witnessed strong collaboration
among its security forces, health sector, private sector
and religious groups, which proved to be effective
during the joint emergency operations to respond to
the coronavirus disease pandemic. We consider that
collaboration to be a best practice in curtailing rapid
onset disasters.
On behalf of the people of the Kingdom of Eswatini
and His Majesty’s Government, I would like to thank the
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and
our international partners for their support in advancing
disaster risk reduction in our country. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to learn in
such a forum, as it will strengthen our knowledge and
resolve on disaster risk reduction.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Education, Sustainable Development, Innovation,
Science, Technology and Vocational Training of Saint
Lucia.
Mr. Edward (Saint Lucia): The member States
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) have long
experienced disproportionate challenges in terms of
23-14073

18/05/2023

A/77/PV.71

sustainable development, owing to our geography,
small size and open economies, which leave us exposed
and highly vulnerable to external shocks. We also
face elevated risks in terms of disaster incidence and
consequences, particularly in the realms of climate
change, sea level rise and natural disasters, including
hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes.

towards the Sendai targets in our member States, the
following critical priorities must be advanced.

As entirely or predominantly coastal nations,
the concentration of population, agricultural land,
civil infrastructure and economic development in the
coastal zones exacerbates our inherent vulnerability
to natural disasters. The Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency utilizes the Regional
Comprehensive Disaster Management Strategy as
the Caribbean’s vehicle for the implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030. Its overarching framework forms the basis for
coordination and collaboration to advance disaster risk
management and resilience across our region.

Secondly, we must promote the transfer of
technology, including enhanced early-warning systems
that can quickly and effectively alert people to potential
hazards by providing accurate and timely information.
That includes building up emergency broadcasting
and alert systems and ensuring that people know what
to do in the event of a natural disaster. In that vein,
CARICOM welcomes the Secretary-General’s Early
Warnings For All initiative and is pleased that the first
regional launch of that initiative in the world took place
in the Caribbean in February.

We are at the midpoint of the implementation of
the 2015 agreements, and progress has stalled and in
some cases reversed. Let us be clear — that has resulted
not only from the impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic but also from a weakened multilateral system
and the lack of progress in addressing climate change.
Our economies have been hard hit, and we are at the
tipping point of unsustainable debt. A marked increase
in inequalities and barriers between risk science,
perception and risk-informed decision-making further
compounds our vulnerability. Against that backdrop,
the representatives of CARICOM member States arrive
at this high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the midterm review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 with one clear
message — there is considerable work yet to be done.
Urgent course correction is an imperative.
Risks are being created and are accumulating faster
than our ability to anticipate, manage and reduce them.
They bring increasingly dire consequences for people,
livelihoods, society and the ecosystems on which we
depend. The shared structural disadvantages and
characteristics of our member States not only place us
at an economic disadvantage by preventing economies
of scale but also hinder sustainable development by
limiting our ability to recover after a disaster, more
so than for larger and more diversified economies.
It is therefore the view of CARICOM that in order
to generate targeted actions that accelerate progress

First, we must build resilience to complex multiple
hazards and strengthen critical infrastructure, including
by improving building codes, retrofitting existing
structures and creating more robust communication
and emergency systems.

Thirdly, we need improved disaster preparedness
and response plans, in particular by providing training
and capacity-building in emergency responses, building
up emergency supplies and infrastructure, and putting
in place systems to coordinate disaster-response efforts
that include interventions to scale up national and
regional human capacity.
Fourthly, climate change adaptation is critical,
as CARICOM countries must adapt to cope with the
impacts of climate change, including by implementing
measures to promote renewable energy sources and
planning for rising sea levels.
Fifthly, we must build community resilience by
empowering people and local actors to prepare for
and respond to natural disasters, promote communityled disaster risk reduction initiatives and ensure that
vulnerable populations are supported.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Sixthly, the scaling-up of disaster risk financing
across the region is essential and is inextricably
linked to the broader conversation on the needed
reform of international development financing and
the international financial system. Those reforms
must take into account, in the context of disaster risk
reduction, how vulnerability is assessed when accessing
development financing. The ongoing discussions on
the creation of a multidimensional vulnerability index
and the Bridgetown Initiative can lend support to the
scaling-up of disaster risk financing.

23-1407313/27

A/77/PV.71

If we are to realize meaningful progress, those
six priority actions should be solidified in the relevant
instruments that would enable implementation,
including the new sustainable development blueprint
for small island developing States, which will be
adopted at the fourth International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, to be hosted by Antigua and
Barbuda in 2024.
We have adopted a political declaration (resolution
77/289) that reaffirms our collective commitment
to the full implementation of the Sendai Framework,
including its guiding principles. Let us ensure they
do not remain mere words on paper but are translated
to real-world, tangible actions towards our shared
goals. CARICOM remains a committed partner and
is prepared to work with all to ensure the full and
meaningful implementation of the Sendai Framework.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the Commissioner for Crisis Management of the
European Union.
Mr. Lenarčič (European Union): The candidate
countries, Türkiye, North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia, as well as Andorra, align themselves with
this statement.
We meet at a time of more dangers than ever before.
The risk landscape has changed profoundly since the
launch of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030 in 2015. The list is long and is
growing despite our best efforts. The fragilities exposed
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the disastrous
impacts of the climate crisis — including the more
intense and frequent extreme weather events — and
the man-made disasters and conflicts in tandem with
natural disasters such as earthquakes — those are huge
challenges, and we must rise to meet them. That is
why it is so important to be here today for the midterm
review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030.
On behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Disaster Risk Reduction and Head of the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction for providing this
opportunity for reflection and recommitment.
14/27

18/05/2023

What have we accomplished by placing resilience
at the centre of our policymaking? First, we have faced
the climate crisis head on. Within the framework of
the European Green Deal, we have adopted initiatives
to scale up climate change mitigation and adaptation,
strengthen biodiversity protections and tackle pollution.
Secondly, we have planned ahead. By developing our
strategic foresight capacities, we can better anticipate
trends, potential risks and opportunities. Thirdly, we
have become more prepared. By strengthening our
Union Civil Protection Mechanism, we have improved
our disaster risk management and have demonstrated
EU solidarity at its best.
Those actions are not limited to Europe. We have
stepped up our cooperation with partner countries in the
area of disaster risk reduction, saving lives across the
world. But that is not enough. As we reflect here today
on the road ahead, we know that we must do more. The
world is not on track to achieve the objectives of the
Sendai Framework. As we look today towards 2030,
we must use this moment to recommit our energies
and spare no effort in reaching our goals. The EU is
working hard to make that happen. Let me share with
members of the General Assembly just four of the ways
in which we are doing that.
The first way is disaster resilience. We are
strengthening our resilience in Europe thanks to
the adoption — with our member States — of a new
European disaster resilience agenda and five disaster
resilience goals, which will also guide our policy
dialogue with our partner countries, improving
resilience worldwide.
The second way is disaster preparedness. We will
strengthen preparedness for all countries, including
the most vulnerable. We will contribute to the Early
Warnings for All Initiative of the Secretary-General,
with several EU member States announcing new
commitments to initiatives, such as the Climate Risk
and Early Warning System Initiative and the Systematic
Observations Financing Facility. Robust early warnings
will enable us to scale up anticipatory and early action.
The third way involves funding. We will continue
to increase funding for adaptation and climate
resilience, with a focus on the most vulnerable
countries and building back better. We look forward
to engaging constructively in the implementation of
the new funding arrangements responding to loss and
damage, including through climate and disaster risk
23-14073

18/05/2023

financing and insurance mechanisms. In that way, we
will strengthen our response to the risks of loss and
damage driven by the climate crisis in those countries.
The fourth way concerns cooperation. By
strengthening the synergies linking development,
climate and humanitarian assistance, as well as the
better management of natural resources, we can address
the root causes of disasters. That is key to building
community-level resilience and ensuring that no one
is left behind. We must ensure that the Framework is
implemented coherently with other respective agendas.
We must also work together to tackle displacement
and migration related to disasters, with a focus on
prevention, resilience and adaptation.
We have come very far, but there is still a very
long way to go. We cannot prevent all disasters. That
is why we must prepare for the worst, while striving
for the best. The Framework is much more than a set
of targets — it means a better, safer and more resilient
future for people across the world. Together, we can
achieve that. Together, we must achieve that.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Rural and Maritime Development and
Disaster Management of Fiji.
Mr. Ditoka (Fiji): I have the honour to deliver
the following remarks on behalf of the members of
the Pacific Islands Forum with presence at the United
Nations. We acknowledge the guidance and support of
the Cook Islands as Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Since the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030 was introduced, there has been a
growing recognition that disaster risk reduction requires
an inclusive and multi-stakeholder approach. In the Blue
Pacific continent, key enablers include a strong political
commitment, the recognition of disaster risk reduction
as a key priority and the need to collaborate among
ourselves and with the wider global community in order
to advance our disaster reduction efforts. Through our
Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific and
its inclusive Pacific Resilience Partnership, we have
sought to translate the global principles and objectives
of the Sendai Framework into actionable measures
that are tailored to the Pacific island context. Pacific
countries have invested in technology and systems in
order to detect and monitor natural hazards, enabling
timely alerts and responses. Improved capabilities for
forecasting cyclones, tsunamis and other hazards have
enabled early and anticipatory action that has saved

A/77/PV.71

countless lives and facilitated efficient evacuation
procedures, underscoring the effectiveness of such
initiatives. Anticipatory action is helping us to
understand when to act and where to focus action and
preparatory interventions.
Forum leaders have declared that the Pacific faces
a climate emergency that threatens the livelihoods,
security and well-being of its people and ecosystems.
More than ever, the integration of climate change
adaptation measures into disaster risk reduction
strategies is crucial to ensure that our region is prepared
for the climate-related challenges that lie ahead. Yet,
financing for disaster risk reduction and climate action
in the Pacific is still not at the level at which it needs
to be. The Pacific faces resource constraints, including
limited financial resources, technical expertise and
infrastructure. Going forward, we need to connect the
lessons of the Sendai midterm review process with
the preparatory process for the fourth International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in
order to ensure that the future Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States is underpinned by resilience. In that
regard, we note the work of the High-Level Panel on
the Development of a Multidimensional Vulnerability
Index for Small Island Developing States.
Our Blue Pacific continent needs reliable and
timely climate and disaster risk information that can
easily be accessed and understood. Such information
should take into account future demographic,
economic and climate scenarios, and should localize
risk information. In addition to the voluntary national
reviews undertaken by a few Pacific island countries to
inform the midterm review of the Sendai Framework,
several thematic reports were commissioned at the
regional level to highlight the regional aspects of
key issues, including on gender on the pathway for
community resilience, disability inclusion, climateand disaster-resilient infrastructure, and traditional and
indigenous knowledge. We have shared the findings
of those reviews and reports in order to inform the
midterm review and ensure that the lessons learned,
challenges faced and opportunities identified from our
Blue Pacific region are incorporated and reflected in the
actions to amplify and accelerate risk-informed action.
I would now like to make some remarks in my
national capacity as the minister responsible for
disaster management.

23-1407315/27

A/77/PV.71

Fiji has made modest progress towards the
achievement of the priorities and targets of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. We have
reduced our disaster-related mortality by more than
11 per cent since 2016 and have strengthened the
collaboration among stakeholders for the mainstreaming
of disaster risk reduction into socioeconomic and
development processes. We attribute that to our
commitment to ensuring a whole-of-Government
and whole-of-society approach towards disaster risk
management, so that the voices of the most vulnerable
and exposed to disaster risk are taken into consideration
in the design and implementation of disaster risk
reduction strategies and policies. We firmly believe
that disaster risk governance mechanisms that transfer
responsibility and accountability to local authorities
and communities is key to ensuring that people are at
the heart of decision-making and ensuring that people
take ownership of managing and reducing their risks
related to natural and man-made hazards.
Disaster risk financing remains one of the key
challenges for small island developing States such
as ours. We have noted the ongoing emphasis on the
financing of post-disaster response and recovery, instead
of the recommended ideal of funding support being
channelled towards pre-disaster preventative measures.
Furthermore, enhancing data collection and analysis is a
critical area that requires continued support. Improving
data-collection systems and investing in advanced
technology for monitoring and early-warning systems
can significantly enhance risk-assessment capabilities.
By collecting comprehensive and accurate data on
hazards, vulnerabilities and exposure, decision-makers
can gain a better understanding of the risks faced by
small island developing States.
We note with appreciation the improvements
in the general understanding of disaster risk and the
methodologies and tools now available for disaster risk
assessments. However, we maintain that we need to
unlock the resources and expertise that lie within the
private sector and bring to the fore the knowledge and
insights available within communities, in particular
when it comes to understanding and addressing the
underlying contributory factors of disaster risk. In order
to promote risk-informed investments, it is crucial to
enhance partnerships between the private and public
sectors, which involves incentivizing collaboration
and transforming economic and financial systems
and processes. One essential step is to make risk16/27

18/05/2023

informed decision-making and reporting mandatory
for both Government- and private-sector investments.
In recognizing the significance of such an approach,
Fiji has taken a proactive stance by establishing the Fiji
Business Disaster Resilience Council, which serves as
a platform for fostering private-public partnerships,
enabling joint efforts to address disaster risks and
building resilience.
If anything, the coronavirus disease has taught
us that the traditional linear way of thinking about
disaster risk management is now a thing of the past.
We must come to terms with the interconnectedness of
the global community and the potential transboundary
impacts and non-linear nature of systemic risk. In the
ever-changing risk landscape that is compounded daily
by the impacts of climate change, we are confronted
more than ever with challenges that will affect us
all, whether the origin of the problem be domestic or
international in nature. It is my considered opinion that,
moving forward, we must renew our focus on national
priorities by building resilience into our economic,
financial, infrastructural, social and environmental
systems, and that a thorough understanding of the
interplay and relationships among the systems will help
us to make decisions that will strengthen the overall
resilience of our respective countries.
The Fiji Government would like to assure the
United Nations and the global community that we will
continue to do our part in the global effort to reduce the
impacts of disasters. We acknowledge the invaluable
role of traditional knowledge in disaster response.
Indigenous and local communities possess unique
knowledge and practices that have enabled them to
adapt to and cope with natural hazards for centuries.
In our disaster risk reduction efforts, we commit to
respecting, preserving and integrating traditional
knowledge into our strategies and plans. We express
our support for the implementation of the gender
action plan, acknowledging the disproportionate
impact of disasters on women, which can be attributed
to social and cultural norms, economic disparities
and unequal access to resources. By recognizing and
supporting women’s roles in disaster risk reduction, we
take a significant step towards a more equitable and
resilient society.
I would like to conclude by taking this opportunity
to inform the General Assembly that Fiji recently
published its Sendai Framework midterm review report,
which provides an in-depth analysis and valuable
23-14073

18/05/2023

insight into the effective strategies and initiatives
implemented by Fiji to mitigate risks and enhance
resilience in diverse sectors. By showcasing success
stories, identifying challenges and highlighting areas
for improvement, the report strives to foster inspiration
and facilitate the exchange of knowledge among
countries and organizations committed to disaster
risk reduction. I thank members for the opportunity to
update the Assembly and wish us all well as we continue
to build towards the successful realization of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction by 2030.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Land and Environment of Mozambique.
Ms. Maibaze (Mozambique): We are honoured
to convey the greetings of Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi,
President of Mozambique and African Union
Champion for Disaster Risk Reduction, a title which
the African Union conferred upon him in recognition
of the disaster risk management capacity demonstrated
in Mozambique.
Due to its geographic location, Mozambique has
been affected from 2015 to the current year by a total
of 11 tropical cyclones that had a severe impact on the
national economy, leading to loss of human lives and
damage to critical infrastructure. As we are aware of
the country’s level of vulnerability, the Government has
adopted specific legal frameworks and strategies for
disaster risk management and has implemented global
and regional management instruments, including the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030. During the past seven years, in implementing the
Sendai Framework, the country has made important
achievements, above all, in strengthening legal
frameworks and policies. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the following achievements.
We adopted and expanded early-warning systems
and developed preventive actions. We strengthened
multisectoral coordination units at all levels. We
established the Disaster Management Fund, which
receives an annual disbursement from the Government
from tax revenues, aimed at disaster prevention,
response and post-disaster reconstruction. During
the rainy and cyclone season that just ended, for the
first time ever the Government purchased cyclone
insurance, which covers damage caused by associated
precipitation, the first disbursement of which will
respond to the damage caused by category 3 Cyclone
Freddy of March, which affected 1.3 million people.

A/77/PV.71

Mozambique is committed to its regional strategic
alliances. In that regard, the country hosts the Emergency
and Humanitarian Operations Centre of the Southern
African Development Community — a mechanism
intended to respond to emergency situations in the
region. In addition, among other priorities, the country
is also committed to improving its capacity in the
institutional, technical and financial areas of disaster
risk governance, the improvement of local disaster
prevention, response and reconstruction capacities,
encouraging the building and rebuilding of resilient
public infrastructure and strengthening regional and
international collaboration.
As I am aware of the role of the countries
represented here in finding solutions to reduce the
risk of disasters and building a resilient planet, I
would like to end my intervention by calling on
nations to strengthen cooperation platforms in order to
consolidate and operationalize financing mechanisms,
such as those that address loss and damage, with a
view to reducing the vulnerability of populations and
creating the conditions for resilience and adaptation to
climate change. In addition, I would like to reiterate
our commitment to further strengthening the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. The political
declaration adopted today (resolution 77/289) adds value
in that regard, as we recommit ourselves to achieving
our common goal by 2030, leaving no one behind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Local Government and Rural Development
of Jamaica.
Mr. McKenzie (Jamaica): On behalf of the
Jamaican delegation, let me express our appreciation
to the United Nations for convening this high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm
review of the implementation of the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. We thank the
President of the General Assembly for his leadership,
and we recognize the members of the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) for their
excellent engagement and extensive work leading up to
this successful high-level meeting.
Jamaica recognizes that this high-level meeting
provides an immense opportunity for countries, civil
society, the private sector and all members of the global
disaster risk community to reflect on the findings and
recommendations of the midterm review of the Sendai
Framework in order to assess progress and address the

23-1407317/27

A/77/PV.71

challenges in its implementation. It is also an opportunity
to identify innovative ways to advance actions in the
quest to achieve the seven global targets. As Jamaica is
a small island developing State, its vulnerabilities have
been further compounded by climate risks and other
hazards that have significantly affected our people,
economy, infrastructure, environment and culture.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)pandemic is one
such event. The COVID-19 experience also attested to
the fact that disasters are systemic and cascading and
require an integrated approach that is multisectoral,
multidimensional and people-centred, as we adhere to
the principle of leaving no one behind.
Jamaica reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of the Sendai Framework to reduce
disaster risk through the alignment of its polices,
programmes, plans and — by extension — our national
plan, Vision 2030. Jamaica has continued to strengthen
disaster risk governance and its legislative agenda by
adopting a comprehensive disaster risk management
policy and plan, which was introduced in Parliament
as a green paper and is intended to guide the national
disaster management process and structure by using a
whole-of-society approach.
In keeping with the Making Cities Resilient 2030
initiative to strengthen our local capacity, the city of
Kingston recently adopted the UNDRR Public Health
System and Cultural Heritage Addenda to the Disaster
Resilience Scorecard for Cities through a workshop
supported by the UNDRR. The municipality is well
advanced in achieving its disaster-management priorities
through an enhanced partnership. The Government of
Jamaica is serious about building resilience to counter
the financial impact caused by natural hazards. We
have therefore improved the country’s disaster risk
financing programme, which is critical to the overall
risk-reduction process.
Jamaica continues to be a major player in the global
and regional disaster risk management community.
Jamaica called for the name of the Regional Platform
for Disaster Reduction in the Americas to be changed
to the Regional Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction
in the Americas and the Caribbean, which gave greater
prominence to the region. In 2021, we were the first
country in the Caribbean to host the organization’s
conference — the seventh Regional Platform for
Disaster Risk Reduction in the Americas and the
Caribbean. In addition, in 2021, the Regional Platform
saw for the first time the inclusion of a youth forum,
18/27

18/05/2023

with a youth representative at the ministerial and highlevel authorities’ meeting.
Jamaica continues to build on its disaster-response
capabilities by the continuous enhancement of its earlywarning systems, which is fundamental to disaster
risk reduction, therefore fulfilling the requirements of
target (g) of the Sendai Framework — increasing the
availability of multi-hazard, early-warning systems
and disaster risk information by 2030. The country
has received the support of the Government of Japan
through the Japan International Cooperation Agency to
strengthen its early-warning communication systems
and capabilities in order to respond to emergencies
and disasters.
In conclusion, the disaster risk reduction measures
that the Government of Jamaica is initiating are critical
to ensuring the economic viability and survival of our
country and its people. We are committed to reducing
disaster risk and increasing resilience. As leaders, we
must all make a concerted effort to create a pathway
to reduce the impact of disasters on our countries
by building stronger economies and forging greater
partnership with the international community, as
we move towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Justice and Public Security of Norway.
Ms. Mehl (Norway): We are here today to accelerate
disaster risk reduction efforts and build resilient
societies, which calls for united efforts and strengthened
partnerships. The political declaration we adopted
today (resolution 77/289) is important for reaching that
goal. I want to thank Australia and Indonesia for their
outstanding leadership and facilitation of a consensusbased outcome.
At the national level, Norway has always been
exposed to a variety of natural hazards. Extreme
weather, floods and landslides have caused
great damage. And our concern is the increase in both
occurrence and impact.
Norwegian municipalities have improved their way
of working on disaster risk reduction. Indeed, 99 per
cent of all municipalities conduct regular comprehensive
risk and vulnerability assessments. Useful lessons
from the midterm review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 will be included in
23-14073

18/05/2023

the Government’s new white paper on public security
and action plan on adaptation to a changing climate.
Going forward, the private sector will play a key
role. In Norway, 90 per cent of critical infrastructure is
privately owned. I am convinced that we must continue
to encourage and seek new areas and ways to cooperate
with the private sector.
At the international level, climate is a priority for
Norway. We will double our climate financing towards
2026 and within that triple the support for adaptation
and building resilience. We see climate adaptation
and disaster risk reduction as key to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Work under
the SDGs, the Paris Agreement and the Sendai
Framework must be coordinated and integrated to
improve resilience.
Disaster displacement is an increasing challenge.
We need to invest in disaster risk reduction, assess
potential disaster displacement and prepare for human
mobility in a way that minimizes associated risks.
I would like to emphasize the importance of
ensuring a gender perspective and a rights-based
approach in all our efforts. Stakeholders’ participation
and a whole-of-society approach are crucial to achieving
the Sendai targets.
As one of the co-Chairs, Norway aligns itself
with the statement to be presented by my Peruvian
colleague on behalf of the Group of Friends for Disaster
Risk Reduction.
To conclude, I would like to express my gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and to the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction for the great work they are doing to advance
the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection
under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan.
Mr. Sheralizoda (Tajikistan): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Tajikistan at this high-level meeting
on the midterm review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, which provides
an opportunity to identify and implement changes,
innovations and course corrections in policy, practice,
investment and cooperation so as to prevent, mitigate
and reduce existing and emerging risks by 2030.

A/77/PV.71

Tajikistan is one of the countries most vulnerable to
climate change in the Europe and Central Asia region.
Over the past decade, the number of disasters in the
country has increased significantly — disasters that have
caused enormous socioeconomic and environmental
damage, which in turn hinders the achievement by
the country of the Sustainable Development Goals.
To that end, Tajikistan reaffirms the need for the
implementation of the Sendai Framework in the context
of achieving the goals and objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We need concrete actions to address the factors that
increase the risk of disasters such as climate change and
climate variability, rapid and unplanned urbanization,
limitations in technology availability, the unsustainable
use of natural resources and pandemics.
The Government of Tajikistan is actively involved
in the implementation of the Sendai Framework. In
that regard, Tajikistan, in collaboration with the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and with
the participation of various stakeholders, prepared a
report on the midterm review of the implementation
of the Sendai Framework. The report showcased the
country’s achievements in disaster risk reduction and
identified priority areas for improvement. Tajikistan,
based on the Sendai Framework, has adopted a national
disaster risk reduction strategy for the period until
2030 and a midterm programme for the period until
2027 to enhance the strength and resilience capacity
legal and institutional framework, conduct surveys in
areas exposed to hazardous exogenous processes and to
reinforce response activities aimed at providing support
to people in emergency situations.
In addition, a national platform for disaster
risk reduction was established that brings together
various stakeholders.
Despite the significant progress made, a number
of areas require concrete action. In order to involve all
parties and mobilize additional human and financial
resources, it is important to intensify the dialogue
among Government agencies, the private sector, civil
society and local communities. To protect and ensure
the inclusion of all parts of society, it is necessary to
strengthen the inclusive approach to raising awareness
and understanding of disaster risk and to focus on
public engagement in early-warning systems, response
and recovery, and development.

23-1407319/27

A/77/PV.71

One of the important priorities is the issue of the
coordination of actions in the field of disaster risk
reduction, sustainable development, climate change and
water issues. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the fact that Tajikistan has been playing an effective
role in the context of the global agenda for the past two
decades as an advocate for water and climate issues.
During that period, at the initiative of Tajikistan, the
General Assembly adopted nine resolutions aimed at
uniting the international community to address existing
water-related issues and intensify actions in that regard.
Remarkably, this year we have the midterm review
of the Water Action Decade and the midterm review
of the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
Utilizing the synergy between both processes will
provide an opportunity to identify adjustments that
could contribute to the sustainable management of
water resources and integrate the lessons learned in
disaster risk management, integrated water-resource
management and climate adaptation.
We believe that the international community
and financial institutions will play a crucial role in
achieving tangible results.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the Minister of the Interior, Institutional Reform and
Democratic Renewal of Belgium.
Ms. Verlinden (Belgium): Belgium is honoured
to participate in this high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the midterm review of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. Let
me start by stating that Belgium aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union, as expressed earlier
by Commissioner Lenarčič. Please allow me to add a
few considerations from the perspective of Belgium.
The past few years have highlighted the increasing
intersectoral and transnational nature of crises. During
the major emergencies we have seen, we witnessed more
than ever the need for international collaboration and
common responses. In the field of disaster risk reduction
as well, Belgium firmly believes in the multilateral
principles embodied in the United Nations. Of course,
the coronavirus disease pandemic immediately comes
to mind, but I am also referring to the terrible floods
that hit Belgium and its neighbouring countries in the
summer of 2021.
Most countries represented here today have faced
similar or worse catastrophes over the past few years. In
20/27

18/05/2023

that challenging context, we are absolutely convinced
of the added value of the Sendai Framework and are
therefore grateful for the opportunity to contribute to
its midterm review, aimed at assessing the progress
achieved by the various parties as well as making
recommendations to reach our common objectives.
Belgium would like to reaffirm its commitment to the
guiding principles and priorities for action formulated
in the Sendai Framework. In that perspective, our
country is intensifying its collaboration with various
partners around the world in order to develop a wider
vision of risks and deepen its expertise in the field of
crisis management.
Belgium also strongly supports the establishment
of international frameworks enhancing preparedness,
response capability and resilience to future crises. We
attach great importance to the complementarity of those
international frameworks from the United Nations,
NATO, the European Union and others.
We in Belgium are currently establishing a single
national security strategy covering all the requirements
and objectives of those various international
frameworks. Besides the classical requirements, three
additional areas of focus have been added, namely,
financial resilience, the protection of economic and
scientific potential, and psychological resilience.
Moreover, the Belgian authorities have also adapted
their strategic vision of crisis management to make
the concept of resilience an integral part of their
policy guidelines.
During the many crises and disasters that we have
faced in recent years, a clear chain of command was
essential in order to manage those crises efficiently.
During those difficult times, Belgium, fortunately,
was able to rely on well-defined crisis-management
structures where all stakeholders were well aware of
their role and responsibilities. Nevertheless, after the
terrible floods that we faced in the summer of 2021, a
commission of experts in crisis management was set
up to draw lessons from that experience and to make
recommendations to the Government. The Commission
recommended further development of the culture of
risk and the integration of citizens in that risk cycle. It
also looked at best practices to build back better after
a crisis.
In that challenging context, the need to adapt the
legal framework became evident in order to enable more
effective risk management. Currently, new legislation
23-14073

18/05/2023

bringing together all emergency plans, at both the
national and local levels, is being drafted.
In addition, Belgium has not underestimated
and will not underestimate the growing impact of
climate-change risks. We recently set up a centre for
complex risk assessments to develop complex and
multidisciplinary risk assessments in the context
of climate change. As we are still developing the
parameters of such assessments, we are keen to engage
with and learn from other countries that are working
with such risk assessments.
Despite all those improvements, I am very
concerned by the increasing frequency and intensity
of crises. If we want to accelerate progress towards
reducing risk and building resilience in a crosssectoral context — and thus achieve our common
goals — we will need greater investment. That is why
Belgium supports the strengthening of the resilience of
vulnerable communities around the world, especially in
Africa and in the least developed countries.
I would like to highlight our strong support
for the Least Developed Countries Fund, which is
intended to support least developed countries in their
climate-change adaptation efforts. Belgium pledged
€75 million in 2021-2024. We have heard the call of
the Secretary-General to roll out a global early-warning
system, and we are prepared to do our part in that
multilateral effort.
Belgium welcomes this midterm review and is
looking forward to the policy recommendations and
practical solutions that will emerge from our exchanges.
There is no time to waste; we need to act, because
if not now, when? We must act in a thoughtful and
joint manner in order to safeguard and guarantee fair
development and the well-being of our global citizens.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for the Interior of Ghana.

A/77/PV.71

impact. In furtherance of that commitment, the African
Union came up with a programme of action with
additional, African-focused targets.
The Sendai Framework was designed to be
coterminous with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It was to enhance the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Needless to
say, the Sustainable Development Goals were pursued
within the macro environment of risks and disasters,
and the Sendai Framework ensures risk-informed
sustainable development.
We are witnesses to the increasing losses across
the world caused by disasters — earthquakes, floods,
mudslides, heatwaves and conflicts, among others. The
frequency of disasters and their increasing intensity
have exacerbated the disaster menace. In addition, the
systemic nature of risk and its resultant residuality have
changed the risk narrative.
Permit me to touch on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which revealed the hidden
vulnerabilities of our countries. Our weaknesses were
exposed, and the need for the implementation of the
Sendai Framework was emphasized.
COVID-19 taught us bitter lessons in the area of
preparedness. Our Government has therefore carried
out a number of post-COVID initiatives. One such
initiative is the establishment of a national vaccine
institute to build local capacity and to develop direction
and implementation for vaccine production and
manufacturing to meet future pandemics.
The residual socioeconomic effects of the pandemic
are affecting all of us tremendously. Financing
disaster risk reduction continues to be a challenge.
Permit me to mention the fact that the importance of
investment in resilient infrastructure, early-warning
systems and disaster risk insurance schemes cannot
be overemphasized.

I align myself with the statements to be delivered
later by the representatives of Cuba and South Africa,
speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the Group of African States, respectively.

We welcome the partnership with the private
sector and innovative financing mechanisms such
as disaster risk insurance to finance disaster risk
reduction measures. Those nonetheless would require
a prioritization of needs and the maximization of the
use of resources, as well as a recognition of the need for
weak economies to attain economic resilience.

In May 2015, the world endorsed the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030.
The commitment was strong, and we waited to see its

I appeal to the relevant stakeholders to make good
on their obligation pursuant to the groundbreaking
agreement reached at the twenty-seventh session of

Mr. Dery (Ghana): Ghana supports the political
declaration (resolution 77/289).

23-1407321/27

A/77/PV.71

18/05/2023

the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to provide
loss and damage assistance to vulnerable nations
severely affected by floods, droughts and other
climate-related disasters. Funding is key.

In his opening remarks, the President made a
profound statement, in which he said that profit is
prized over people. To support that statement, which I
agree with, I wish to quote from The Deserted Village,
by Oliver Goldsmith:

Ghana has taken steps to implement the Sendai
Framework over the years. We have revised our
national building code to take into consideration the
current hazard profile. Ghana is faced with the threat
of earthquakes, with the country experiencing frequent
tremors. To solve that problem holistically, the country
has developed a comprehensive plan to redirect our
focus to deal with earthquake preparedness and
response. We have realized that the local government
system would be effective for the implementation of the
Sendai Framework.

“Ill fares the land, to hastening ill a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay”.

In Ghana, the local government system, called
District Assemblies, has decentralized operations. The
Government has a system in place to ensure that disaster
risk reduction is mainstreamed in their medium-term
plans before they are approved for implementation.
Since the local government level is the hub of
national development, disaster risk reduction at that
level has afforded enhanced sustainability for the
Sendai Framework and, ultimately, the SDGs. To
address environmental problems, we have embarked on
a number of measures and interventions. The greening
programme, which consists of planting trees, is owned
by the citizenry. Each year the programme is rolled out
to ensure a reduction in the greenhouse effect.
The implementation of the Sendai Framework
in Ghana faces challenges. Illegal surface mining,
termed galamsey, has polluted our water bodies and
poses a threat to the survival of future generations.
The problem is complex and has economic, social and
cultural dimensions. The Government is committed to
fighting the galamsey menace in Ghana.
The world faces increasing risks from
climate-change-related disasters. We call on all
stakeholders to come together in building more resilient
communities and reducing the impact of disasters.
We need to consider ways of addressing the linkages
between climate change and disaster risk reduction.
We owe future generations the right to life. We
must bequeath to them an environment with a balanced
ecosystem. We must gird our loins to save our planet.
22/27

Let us not go down that road.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Interior of Luxembourg.
Ms. Bofferding (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to thank
the President of the General Assembly and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster
Risk Reduction for having convened this midterm
review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030. Indeed, this meeting offers us
an opportunity to assess the activities undertaken and,
above all, to discuss the efforts currently under way as
well as those that are planned in the area of disaster
risk reduction to ensure coordination in our efforts to
strengthen them to yield a resilience that goes beyond
our own borders.
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
The complex crises and disasters facing us in
recent years reflect the urgency, importance and
relevance of the goals and priorities set out in the Sendai
Framework. We have seen that risks are increasingly
systemic and interconnected. To respond to those
risks, we need to adapt our governance mechanisms
with an eye to improving our understanding of risks,
bolstering prevention and preparation, and, above all,
accelerating change in order to move from a reactive
approach to disaster management towards one that is
more anticipatory and proactive.
Concrete action is therefore needed at all levels,
above all to strengthen the resilience of our societies.
Therefore, Luxembourg moved in 2020 to establish a
national platform for disaster risk reduction tasked with
the implementation of the Sendai Framework. Since
then, major progress has been achieved. For example,
we have integrated organizations of persons with
disabilities into the platform.
It is important to take account, in the process of risk
assessment, of the various vulnerabilities that exist in
23-14073

18/05/2023

our society and to give that issue due attention in order
to determine the appropriate actions that must be taken.
I am also pleased at the cooperation under way
with community sector representatives, who have
contributed, as members of our national platform, to
the bolstering of national resilience by strengthening it
at the local level.
The efforts of representatives of various sectors
have helped us better understand risks in order to
ultimately raise the awareness of all stakeholders
and to achieve, or even strengthen, resilience at all
levels. Additional efforts are needed in order to craft
a society that is resilient to risk, and I believe that that
goal cannot be achieved except by providing clear,
accessible information.
I assure the Assembly that Luxembourg will
endeavour to strengthen its activities aimed at raising
awareness about the risks facing the population. That is
why my Government is currently working to establish
an information and warning system for the people that
is even more accessible. Well-informed citizens will be
resilient, prepared and less vulnerable to disasters.
Luxembourg will therefore continue its activities.
In 2022, we supported risk-reduction activities to
the tune of roughly €1.5 million. Luxembourg will
maintain its support for the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction and will continue to support
our various humanitarian partners in their efforts to
reduce risks and prepare for natural disasters.
Together, we can achieve a world that is more
resilient — a world that is able to address the challenges
that we will face going forward.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Home Affairs of Barbados.
Mr. Abrahams (Barbados): Two decades ago,
the Barbados Government adopted as a national
policy the tenets of the Caribbean Strategy on
Comprehensive Disaster Management. The Strategy,
which is coordinated and supported by the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA),
regionally emphasizes a whole-of-society partnership
and collaboration in tackling and reducing the risks
and losses associated with the multiple hazards that
may impact the lives and livelihoods of the Barbadian
people and the country’s landscape.

A/77/PV.71

The CDEMA is recognized and endorsed at the
highest political level as the vehicle by which Barbados
and the wider Caribbean implement the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030.
The management and reduction of risk are
inextricably linked to national resilience and sustainable
development. It is therefore within such a context that
building resilience to the multiple hazards that may
affect us remains a national priority. My Government’s
thrust nationally has included a focus on strengthening
the governance mechanisms for comprehensive disaster
management. Thus we recently approved a rearticulated
national comprehensive disaster management policy
and developed a multi-hazard early-warning system
and a policy and road map for news programmes,
among others.
Likewise, we continue to raise awareness and
promote disaster risk advocacy at all levels and build
resilience at the community and grass-roots levels, as
we have acknowledged that communities are on the
front line of that resilience undertaking.
We continue to strengthen our national and response
mechanism, ensuring that our operational readiness
and posture is adequate, scalable and possesses the
flexibility to manage any emergency or disaster. We
agitate for and mobilize predictable financing to support
disaster risk management efforts, and we encourage
and provide a pathway for the mainstreaming and
investment of disaster risk management solutions into
the various sectors, such as those within the blue and
green economies.
Cognizant of the importance of and the need
to accelerate disaster risk reduction and resilience
initiatives and to show solidarity regionally and globally,
Barbados recently hosted and endorsed at the highest
political level the United Nations global initiative on
an emergency warning system for all. We express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for having been
included as one of the countries selected in the initial
phase of that global public-good initiative. We view
that initiative as an investment in the preservation of
humankind, as early warning will save lives.
In every system, accountability is a critical
component.
Periodic
assessment,
monitoring,
evaluation and reporting are essential as we take stock
of challenges and progress in the Sendai Framework
implementation process. Barbados is therefore pleased
to contribute our official national voluntary report

23-1407323/27

A/77/PV.71

18/05/2023

for the midterm review of the Sendai Framework
implementation. We are in solidarity with the Americas
and, as such, have contributed to the regional position
of the Americas.

for Disaster Risk Reduction, Mami Mizutori, for
her initiative of organizing this midterm review on
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030.

We also take this opportunity to graciously express
our gratitude to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay for
its initiative. Additionally, we compliment the United
Nations and all countries present here for actively
participating in this critical midterm review process.
This midterm review must acknowledge the impact of
the coronavirus disease on the pace of implementation
thus far. We also must accept that we are behind the eight
ball. We must recommend measures for acceleration
and provide additional support for small States that
have limited resources and capacity.

Before I continue, allow me to express my deep
condolences to my Italian colleagues in connection with
the tragic loss of life during the severe floods of the
last few days. Our thoughts are with the families of the
victims and all those who are affected by the disaster.

We urge Governments, the private sector,
international donors and financial institutions to
consider the Bridgetown initiative as a practical and
innovative approach to supporting the sustainability
and viability of small island developing States (SIDS).
The creation of a balanced or level playing field must
be a global goal if SIDS are to have a fighting chance.
Barbados will continue to utilize its voice as a
proponent of and advocate for resilience and for climate
justice and climate action that fully addresses our
critical concerns as SIDS; for the collective leveraging
and mobilization of adequate national, regional
and international resources to support disaster risk
resilience programming; and for the simplification, I
repeat, for the simplification of access to predictable
development financing by small island developing
States to aid in tackling disaster risk and losses as well
as climate change.
It is imperative that words now be translated
into action: deliberate, swift, science-informed,
evidence-based targeted action — action that is
timely, pragmatic and builds on past knowledge and
experiences. Such action must be underpinned by
bold, decisive and transformational leadership, and it
must realize and demonstrate an earnest investment in
humankind at all levels. We must be people-centred in
our approach and our solutions
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the Minister for Climate Crisis and Civil Protection
of Greece.
Mr. Stylianides (Greece): First, let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
24/27

As one who had the honour and the pleasure to be
part of the negotiations that led to the original Sendai
Framework, as a former European Commissioner, I am
particularly pleased to join this gathering here today.
The Sendai Framework was a bold and ambitious text
that followed the Hyogo Framework for Action. It has
been the global blueprint for the disaster risk reduction
effort. It is a call for action and concrete measures.
Eight years later, this midterm review is a milestone.
It is an opportunity to take stock of the progress made so
far, to identify gaps, to revisit national strategies and to
reflect on the next steps, of course, taking into account
the hard reality of climate change and the climate crisis.
In our country, in Greece, Prime Minister Kyriakos
Mitsotakis took an innovative decision to establish
a ministry for climate crisis and civil protection,
bringing the causal relationship between the climate
crisis and natural disasters to the forefront. Within that
framework, we are putting scientific knowledge and
expertise at the core of our decision-making policies
and processes. We are therefore establishing a national
database for all natural and man-made disasters,
which will be supported by various teams of scientists
and experts, monitoring and modelling all relevant
data to inform in advance the operational arm of our
response mechanism.
That instrument will be the scientific arm of the
upgraded Greek national crisis coordination centre
and, of course, our operational arm, the Hellenic
Fire Brigade. In addition, greater synergy and better
collaboration as well as the exchange of good practices
among countries are key, not only in Europe but globally
in Asia, in Africa and in Latin America.
To that end, we are working closely with our
European partners. More specifically, we are actively
engaged with the European Union Civil Protection
Mechanism and rescEU, the most important and
23-14073

18/05/2023

A/77/PV.71

successful instrument for cooperation in the field of
disaster management in Europe.

with the vulnerability of populations in the atolls much
higher than those in urban centres.

Greece has already become the rescEU hub for
the eastern Mediterranean, and we have taken the
initiative to establish robust regional cooperation
under the umbrella of the European Union Civil
Protection Mechanism.

While those challenges pose an existential threat
to the Maldives, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is an effective avenue for us to work
towards resilience at all levels. The Sendai Framework
provides a holistic approach to reducing disaster risks
and building resilience, and it recognizes the unique
challenges facing countries like the Maldives.

Looking forward to 2030, we need to strengthen
our collective action capabilities and to invest more
in education and training to cultivate a culture of
prevention and preparedness among our citizens.
Last October, the European Forum for Disaster Risk
Reduction Roadmap Action-Oriented Dialogue took
place in Athens. One of the most important conclusions
thereof was that there is a need for a shift in the focus
of disaster risk strategies from response to prevention.
That must become our common priority, bringing the
traditional approach to disaster risk management,
which focuses on response with three key pillars, the
very well-known triangle: prevention, preparedness
and resilience. I strongly believe that this must become
our new commitment
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister of Defence of Maldives.
Ms. Didi (Maldives): On behalf of His Excellency
President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih, I thank President
Kőrösi for having convened this high-level meeting
of the General Assembly to review and discuss the
implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030. This is a matter of great
concern for the Maldives, given that small island States
such as the Maldives are among the most vulnerable
to the impacts of climate change and natural disasters.
Climate change and its associated impacts are
already visible in the country. The increasing frequency
and intensity of extreme weather events is causing
immense damage to livelihoods. Monsoon rains started
in early May and are imposing excessive hardships
on our communities even as I speak. That has already
caused huge losses to our homes and agriculture.
Immediately before that, in April, temperatures soared,
resulting in bush fires in the south and water shortages
across the Maldives, and the cycle keeps repeating.
The degradation of our marine ecosystems due
to ocean acidification is impacting our economy and
our people’s way of life. There is also a vast disparity
between the effect of disasters on various communities,

The implementation of the framework will be
a huge leap in the right direction in protecting our
communities and ecosystems, and is essential to secure
a sustainable and prosperous future for our peoples.
It would be a missed opportunity if we did not
capitalize on the progress made so far. The midterm
review has identified areas of regression and stagnation,
highlighting the need to accelerate our efforts to achieve
the goals of the Framework.
The causal relationship between climate change
and the rise in disaster risk emphasizes the need for
a systematic and integrated approach to solutions.
As aptly noted in the review, innovative solutions are
required. Collaboration among policymakers, scientists,
engineers and practitioners is required to achieve that.
The integration and harmonization of policies and
strategies at the national and local levels is also needed.
We in the Maldives have incorporated disaster risk
reduction into a national strategic action plan. With
that we are accelerating the adoption of disaster risk
reduction programmes across sectors. That has also
enabled key stakeholders to prioritize their efforts
and work towards disaster risk reduction in a more
coordinated manner. We are also examining how
we can best incorporate disaster risk reduction into
adaptation plans.
For resource-constrained small island nations
such as the Maldives, response as a key component of
resilience must go hand in hand with the risk reduction
discussion. The magnitude of the challenges facing us
is enormous; only through collective effort can we hope
to overcome them. In working together to achieve the
goals of the Sendai Framework, let us commit to a more
sustainable and prosperous future for all.
This morning we heard Mustafa’s touching story.
We must come together as leaders and lead by example.
We need action now. I assure the Assembly that

23-1407325/27

A/77/PV.71

Maldives is 100 per cent committed to the achievement
of our common goals.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for the Environment of Angola.
Ms. De Carvalho Pereira (Angola) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
I congratulate the President of the General Assembly
for having organized this important meeting, at
which we are addressing the midterm review of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030. It is an honour for my delegation to be able to
share what the Republic of Angola has done towards
its implementation.
The systemic nature of risk and the shocks that
cascade through sectors and geographical areas require
a reassessment of approaches in order to understand,
manage and reduce risks, whether they be caused by
human, natural, environmental, climate, biological,
technological or other factors.
Though progress has been made in the implementation
of the Sendai Framework since its adoption, in 2015,
it still is not enough, and failure to apply the Sendai
Framework undermines the achievement of the
objectives and goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and other intergovernmental agreements
and conventions, including the Paris Agreement and the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.
Our understanding of economic, social, political and
ecological risk factors is improving, but further and
significant changes in governance are still required.
Angola is one of the sub-Saharan African countries
that has suffered most from the impact of climate
change and extreme climate events, with floods and
drought being the most significant natural events in
our country. The scale and impact of disasters on lives,
livelihoods and ecosystems are on the rise and have
hampered the entire development process undertaken
by the executive branch of the Angolan Government,
and economic losses due to disasters undermine the
efforts made to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, as those costs deprive the Government of funds
that could be used for health care, education, social
protection and other important public needs.
Angola ratified the Sendai Framework in 2015; it
became a priority for the Government, which approved
the national development plan, which included a disaster
risk reduction component in all sectors and actions to
26/27

18/05/2023

consolidate the prevention, mitigation, response and
recovery strategy for any disaster situations that may
occur, using the civil protection law.
The Angolan national commission on civil
protection, through various ministerial departments,
has been implementing strategic disaster risk prevention
and reduction as well as the national preparedness,
contingency, response and recovery plan against
disasters and calamities, which is undergoing review.
The provincial plans for development cover eight
of our country’s 18 provinces, or 45 per cent of our
national territory.
In the context of the African Union’s plan of action
on disaster risk reduction in Africa, the implementation
of a disaster prevention project in schools and
communities is under way. That project, in partnership
with UNICEF, has developed teaching materials that
address subjects related to droughts, floods, malaria,
natural calamities and other cross-cutting themes
that will be integrated into the educational system’s
curriculum in Angola.
The executive branch of Angola’s Government
has endeavoured to create and implement projects for
early-warning systems to ensure that communities are
informed of any threats to which they are subject, as
well as response mechanisms to safeguard human lives
and people’s livelihoods.
In the southern region of our country, specifically
in the province of Benguela, the early-warning-system
stations in Caiave, along the Catumbela River, and
along the Coporolo River are operational. The data
gathered at those stations allows us to remotely monitor
measurements such as water levels in the rivers so that
the appropriate entities may make decisions promptly.
It is important to note that major investments have
been made to upgrade national weather services in
order to better support key economic sectors and more
efficiently monitor the weather.
Angola is proud of having been chosen as
focal point for the implementation of the Southern
African Development Community’s weather-service
programme — the Climate Services and Related
Application programme — whose sole purpose is
to strengthen the value chain of weather services in
order to incentivize the use of weather monitoring and
forecasting products in climate risk management and
environmental management.
23-14073

18/05/2023

Angola has adopted a national climate-change
strategy and plans to implement the monitoring,
verification and reporting mechanism and to install
a national weather observatory. We intend to create
a local response capacity with the establishment of
disaster risk management committees in order to
develop wider participation by the population and civil
society in general, thus allowing citizens to identify
and understand their vulnerabilities and the threats and
level of risk to which they are exposed.
In conclusion, we reiterate our national commitment
to achieving the seven global targets as well as the five

A/77/PV.71

African targets under the Sendai Framework. We must
carry out increasingly coordinated actions, particularly
with respect to environmental issues and climate
change, to incorporate the One Health approach into
the human, animal and environmental components as
well as the urban and rural resilience approach, and to
strengthen governance by developing a national risk
management policy.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. We shall hear the remaining
speakers today in this Hall at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

23-1407327/27
