S/PV.8355

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8355

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeffrey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/845)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28868 (E)
*1828868*

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/845)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/845, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401
(2018) .
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I welcome you to the Security
Council, Mr. President. I am delighted to see you
here, in view of your new important role, which in my
opinion has already shown the further engagement of
your country in this complex environment. I thank you
for being here and for presiding over this meeting.
Let me start with yesterday’s developments on
Idlib. They are important. As Council members know,
Idlid has been a major source of concern for all of
us in thic Chamber and beyond. Yesterday, Russian
President Putin and Turkish President Erdoğan
reached an agreement to establish a demilitarized zone
within the Idlib de-escalation zone. The Government
of Syria has welcomed the agreement — as we saw
2/26

18/09/2018

recently — and confirmed its full coordination with the
Russian Federation in that regard.
We in the Secretariat — and I believe the SecretaryGeneral has also been very clear on this — welcome the
fact that diplomacy has produced progress in the effort
to address the challenges posed by Security Councillisted terrorist groups while protecting civilians — up
to 3 million of them, including 1 million children. This
represents the squaring of a very difficult circle. I
therefore thank President Putin and President Erdoğan
for their personal engagement. We had hoped that they
would hold that meeting, and that meeting took place
and produced a very important outcome.
I also believe that the strong international
engagement on the dangers of a full-scale offensive
in Idlib has been important. I thank everyone here
because I know they have strongly raised that issue,
together with my colleagues and friend Mark Lowcock.
I commend members of Syrian civil society for raising
their voice. There are 3 million of them. They have been
raising their voices. In fact, just yesterday, for instance,
I received a letter signed by more than 13,000 women
from Idlib, calling for protection and security for their
families and reminding us that they are civilians. We
therefore hope that this agreement will be expeditiously
implemented in full respect for international
humanitarian law; with sustained humanitarian access;
with respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria; and with continued
preference for dialogue — such as yesterday’s — over
escalation in addressing a complex situation.
In that context, let met also note that, just as we
are seeing crisis in Idlib averted, which is very good
news, we are seeing worrying military activities
elsewhere. Overnight, a Russian military aircraft was
downed, killing 15 servicemen. The Russian Ministry
of Defence has stated that the plane was accidentally
downed by Syrian Government anti-aircraft fire,
which was responding to Israeli fighter jets carrying
out attacks just off the coast. The Government of Syria
has stated that Israelli jets struck a Government facility
near Latakia. Russia has blamed Israel for this. Israel
has stated that Israeli jets were targeting weapons
shipments headed for Lebanon that threatened Israeli
security, and has blamed the Syrian Government for
the incident. We call upon all parties to refrain from
military actions that would only exacerbate an already
complex situation, especially now that we are receiving
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

such positive news regarding what could have been a
dramatic military escalation.
But for now, we are pleased that there is
de-escalation in one major area: Idlib. And now that we
have this deal, there is no reason not to move forward
expeditiously with the political process. Let me turn to
that process and take stock of where we stand.
Syrians look to the United Nations to facilitate a
political process that can help them exit this war and
enter into a better future — a future that they determine,
independently and democratically. That will require a
real dialogue and genuine negotiation — a process that
is credible and inclusive. My guide is and will always
be resolution 2254 (2015), which mandates the United
Nations to facilitate the political process. Together
with my team, I have always looked for creative ways
to advance resolution 2254 (2015) in light of the many
political and military developments taking place all
the time — a rollercoaster — but always with a view
to ensuring that the political process is credible and
addresses the real issues that divide Syrians. That
brings me to the constitutional committee.
The Secretary-General dispatched me to the Syrian
Congress of National Dialogue in Sochi seven and a half
months ago. It was a carefully considered decision, made
after special consultations in Vienna with the Syrian
parties and with the Russian Federation — and not just
by me, but involving the Secretary-General himself,
too. Based on those consultations, the United Nations
had reason to believe that Sochi would contribute to
accelerating the Geneva process. Its outcome was to
be brought back to Geneva as a core component of
the wider political process, and the final terms of a
constitutional committee were to be facilitated by the
United Nations in Geneva.
True to this spirit, since the Sochi Congress I have
worked carefully to facilitate the establishment of a
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee. I have consulted particularly
closely with Iran, Russia and Turkey, given what is
logically their particular interest — given that they
were in Sochi — and responsibility to help make the
Sochi outcomes meaningful. Of course, I have also
consulted widely, including with the members of the
so-called small group and others, too. And I have been
continuously available and listening to Syrians — the
Government, all parts of the opposition and many
others too, inside and outside Syria.

S/PV. 8355

In these consultations, a formula on participation
gained acceptance. One-third of delegates would be the
Government delegation; one-third would be a broadly
represented opposition delegation; and a middle third
would be, as the Sochi final statement clearly says:
“Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women”. It became clear that each third
could comprise 50 members, and from each 50, 15
could be identified to play a particular role as regards
drafting a constitutional reform. This, when combined
with clear rules of procedure, would be a package to
launch a credible and inclusive process for drafting a
constitutional reform.
Based on this formula, three lists have emerged:
the list of the Government delegation, with Russia
and Iran’s support; the list of a broadly represented
opposition delegation, with Turkey’s support and that
of other States as well; and, crucially, a middle third
list that, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) and
Sochi, is clearly my duty and responsibility to facilitate
and then to finalize. In our modest opinion, the middle
third list currently on the table meets the criteria
outlined in the Sochi statement. I also ensured that it
was something that the United Nations could support in
terms of credibility and international legitimacy.
This meant selecting experts with critical technical
expertise — we are talking about constitutions — and
experience in constitution-drafting. It meant including
Syrians from different ethnic, religious and geographical
backgrounds; those from both inside and outside of
Syria; and those who are known to be bridge-builders.
It also meant ensuring that a minimum of 30 per
cent across the entire 150 experts were women. One
overarching consideration is the need for a balance
in the middle third. No particular leaning should
totally dominate; this will be a core component of the
credibility of the committee.
In addition, after having consulted the Astana
guarantors, I offered suggestions and options on the
mandate, chairing, steering and decision-making — we
have a lot of training and experience in that at the United
Nations. These were designed to offer a minimum set
of procedural points that would allow the Syrians to
meet productively and progress in a Syrian-led, Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated process.
At the start of this month, I said we were getting
closer to a moment of truth. All opportunities had been
offered to canvass all issues thoroughly, including via

18-288683/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

teams from my Office who visited Moscow, Ankara,
Tehran and other capitals. I convened the Astana trio
on 10 and 11 September in Geneva in an effort to move
ahead. At that meeting, some issues became clear.
For instance, the Government list is not contested;
nor is the opposition list. This is important, but I
have to admit that my team and I were disappointed
that the middle third list — the list for which I have
a particular responsibility — was significantly
questioned. Approaches were suggested that I found
to be inconsistent with the credibility and legitimacy
needed for a United Nations-facilitated process.
Meanwhile, while issues such as chairing and voting
were canvassed, a lot was left unresolved regarding
rules of procedure.
The Astana guarantors proposed that we continue
technical talks on the middle third list before another
meeting in Geneva in October. While I really have no
problem with such technical meetings, let me be clear.
The middle third list needs be balanced and credible
to Syrians from all sides and to the international
community. As per resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Sochi final statement, it is the United Nations and the
Geneva process that facilitate and finalize the way
forward. Moreover, there is an urgency to move forward
and move ahead. We cannot afford to keep constantly
consulting each other.
This was — and is — my message to the Astana trio.
I gave the exact same message when I met the members
of the so-called small group, namely, Egypt, France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America. On 14 September
in Geneva, I told them where we were in the process
and welcomed their support. I made it clear to them,
just I had to the Astana trio, that they should not seek
to intervene in issues that are basically for the United
Nations to facilitate — neither the lists, the rules of
procedure nor the substance of the process — beyond
what is in resolution 2254 (2015) and the 12 principles
developed in the Geneva process and endorsed in Sochi.
It is too easy to say, “we will keep consulting”. If
we are not careful, this will become an end in itself.
What Syrians want to know is when a credible process
will start. As far as I am concerned, all the pieces
are in place for that to happen; we could start in one
week. If everyone supports the United Nations-led
process and recognizes the need for it to be balanced
and credible with sensible rules of procedure, we can
move ahead very fast. Indeed, I believe that the time is
4/26

18/09/2018

approaching for me to indicate a fixed date by which
the Sochi final statement is given effect by launching
the constitutional committee.
This next month will therefore be critical. I
am ready to engage everyone. In addition to the
international players, I of course look forward to
engaging the Syrian parties, starting with the Syrian
Government. Their active involvement is obviously
crucial if a constitutional committee is to proceed.
I will also need to engage with the opposition and a
wide range of Syrian voices. Above all, I want to move
beyond the current preparations and see a genuinely
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned constitutional committee
up and running for the good of Syria and Syrians as a
core component of a credible political process. This is
what we have. The political process has been reduced
to one very important thing, which is the constitutional
committee, along with a safe and neutral environment
and elections. These are very important and sufficient
to make a difference.
Let us not underestimate the importance of this.
There is a need to see Syrians start to talk to each
other, which can take place within the constitutional
committee. There is a need to find steps that can build
confidence and that can, in time, create a safe, calm
and neutral environment. At a time when there is an
effort to focus on refugees and rehabilitation, let us
not forget that without a meaningful and irreversible
political process and without real steps on the ground,
the confidence required may not develop.
I cannot fail to remind the Council here of the
need for urgent, concrete actions on the release of
detainees and abductees, the hand-over of bodies and
the identification of missing persons, all of which are
crucial issues that affect thousands of Syrians. Let
us also remember that we must ultimately prepare
for United Nations-supervised presidential and
parliamentary elections, with all Syrians inside and
outside Syria participating, as called for in resolution
2254 (2015).
Last week, I was honoured — like many of my
colleagues — to attend Kofi Annan’s funeral. As
the first United Nations Special Envoy on the Syrian
conflict, he emphasized some fundamental points: a
political, not military solution — this is what we see in
Idlib, as it moves in this direction — with one United
Nations-led process of mediation, based on inclusion
and consent and backed by a united Security Council.
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

He offered the first way out — the six-point plan and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) — but could
not carry the effort forward when the Council was not
united. This was a bitter price that had to be paid; we
all know what happened. Sadly, it was a greatly missed
opportunity, as Kofi Annan reminded me.
Much has changed since then, but we all agree that
there is no military solution in Idlib or anywhere else.
We need an inclusive political process and the United
Nations is here to facilitate that process, starting with
a constitutional committee getting to work. However,
it must be credible, because only thus can the United
Nations invest it with the legitimacy it needs. I ask all
concerned to give the United Nations facilitation in the
coming weeks — by that I mean in October — their
full support.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: As the Council is aware, I was
in Damascus three weeks ago for talks with the
Government. We had constructive discussions on
a range of issues. Across much of the country, the
situation is now calmer than it was when I last visited
in January.
However, humanitarian needs remain substantial
and the Government expressed concern to me about
the underfunding of the United Nations humanitarian
response plan this year. I said that, in my judgment,
addressing that would require improvement in needs
assessment and access for humanitarian agencies,
including my own Office, to assure both current and
potential donors that help is genuinely targeted, in a
neutral and impartial way, at the people in greatest need
and, indeed, that such help reaches those same people.
Since the visit, of course, we have been totally
focused on the danger that the looming Idlib catastrophe
may totally upend our humanitarian agenda. As Mr. De
Mistura has said, we welcome yesterday’s news from
Sochi. I want to be clear with the Council about what
was at stake.
From the Secretary-General down, we have
consistently expressed alarm over the risks of a fullscale military offensive in north-west Syria. It was
no exaggeration, merely a statement of fact, that such
an onslaught would likely have presaged the worst
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century.

S/PV. 8355

Surveys of affected people undertaken last month
showed that well over 2 million people could have
been displaced in the event of a full-scale military
operation. It would have meant further untold suffering
of vulnerable and terrified people from overcrowded
sites in which basic services have been stretched to
breaking point for months. There simply is no way for
humanitarian agencies to protect and meet the needs
of millions of extremely vulnerable people, including,
as Mr. De Mistura reminded us, 1 million children, in
the midst of a massive military onslaught. We therefore
welcome yesterday’s agreement because, if sustained
and implemented in full respect of international
humanitarian law, it may avert the catastrophe we have
been warning against.
To succeed, demilitarization requires the
agreement of all parties. Short of such agreement, it is
foreseeable that force would be used to demilitarize,
and thus civilians would be exposed to the very harm
we are trying to avoid. Whether from within or outside
the proposed demilitarized area, should civilians deem
it necessary to leave, they must be allowed to seek
refuge elsewhere. In case of displacement, all possible
measures must be taken so that affected civilians
are received under satisfactory conditions of shelter,
hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, and that members
of the same family are not separated.
It is also important that any screening to
distinguish civilians from fighters be undertaken in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
clear standard operating procedures, while ensuring
humane treatment and accounting for those who have
been screened. Special protection and assistance
measures should be in place for civilians, in particular
women and children, who have been associated with,
or are family members of, fighters. Regardless of
location — whether within or outside the demilitarized
zone — international humanitarian law obligations
continue to apply. Warring parties cannot deliberately
or carelessly disregard the distinction between civilians
and combatants, or between civilian infrastructure and
military objectives.
The United Nations, along with other humanitarian
organizations, continues to implement a major
humanitarian assistance programme from across the
border in Turkey, as mandated by Council resolutions.
On average, we are reaching 2 million people each
month in north-west Syria. This week alone, food for
more than 260,000 people is being sent across the border,

18-288685/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

as are non-food items and tents for more than 60,000
people — most of it through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
into Idlib. Aid is also being prepositioned to ensure that
those in need can continue to receive support in the
face of further military escalation. Food rations for one
week for more than 350,000 people and non-food items
for 400,000 people have already been prepositioned in
Idlib. Supplies have also been prepositioned in Homs,
Aleppo and Latakia governorates, including food
assistance for up to 1 million people and shelter kits and
non-food items for up to 300,000 people. Hardly any
of that would have been possible had the Council not
renewed the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) when
it adopted resolution 2393 (2017), in December 2017.
The resolution made a real difference, and millions of
people depend on the activities it mandates.
The humanitarian situation in other parts of the
country remains difficult. At Rukban, on the SyriaJordan border, the United Nations, in cooperation with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, remains ready to provide
humanitarian assistance through an inter-agency
convoy. What we need is official approval from the
Government of Syria for the convoy to proceed and
for the teams to accompany the convoy to deliver
life-saving supplies and carry out needs assessment and
distribution monitoring. We also need deconfliction
and guarantees of safe passage from the Government
of Syria, the Russian Federation, international coalition
forces and the Government of Jordan. And we need
written guarantees of safe passage by all non-State
armed groups controlling the camp and present along
the route.
Further to the north, some 153,000 people are
now estimated to have returned to Raqqa city since
October 2017, although conditions remain unconducive
for returns because of high levels of destruction and
explosive hazard contamination. Efforts have been
made to scale up the mine action response since earlier
this year, including mine risk education activities and
training. Humanitarian mine action organizations have
also been carrying out mine removal operations in
Raqqa city since June, focusing on key infrastructure,
with a coordination mechanism available to include
sites prioritized by the humanitarian community.
However, much more needs to be done before the city is
safe and conducive for returns.
In Deir ez-Zor, attention appears to have turned
now to the last remaining enclave of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria, along the east bank of the
6/26

18/09/2018

Euphrates river in the southern parts of the governorate.
That includes the towns of Hajin, Al-Soussa, Al-Sha’afa
and Al-Baghouz. There are significant concerns for the
safety and security of civilians living in those areas,
with more than 20,000 people estimated to be displaced
and reports of leaflets being dropped to warn civilians
to leave before the start of the offensive. I call on
parties once again to avoid civilian loss by respecting
their international humanitarian law obligations of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and to
allow civilians who wish to leave to move safely to
other areas.
In the south-west of the country, most of the up
to 325,000 people estimated to have been displaced
in the area since late June are now reported to have
returned to their areas of origin. But thousands still
remained displaced and high levels of humanitarian
need persist, including among returnees. The United
Nations has continued to provide humanitarian aid in
the area, with the agreement of the Government and
in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
other humanitarian organizations, with efforts ongoing
to ensure more sustained access across the area. That
is urgently needed to address gaps issuing from the
suspension of cross-border activities from Jordan in
late June.
Let me finish with a final word on Idlib. What
do we think the 3 million civilians, including those
1 million children, confined to Idlib make of yesterday’s
agreement? Well, they have a simple question: Is this
merely a stay of execution or is it the beginning of a
reprieve, the first tiny glint of light at the very end of
the darkest tunnel?
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity
as the Secretary of State’s Special Representative for
Syria Engagement, and at the invitation of Ambassador
Haley. I thank her for her leadership to support
the people of Syria and her invitation to be present
here today.
I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
Before I continue, I would like to express sorrow to
our Security Council partner Russia for the tragic loss
of life when the Russian plane was downed yesterday.
The unfortunate incident reminds us of the need to find
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

a permanent, peaceful and political resolution to the
conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
For 3 million Syrians, Idlib is their last hope for
refugee from the Al-Assad regime’s reign of terror, as
we just heard from the Under-Secretary-General. Those
people know Al-Assad’s brutality all too well. That is
because many of them, 1.4 million of them to be exact,
already fled their homes before.
One of those people is a 24-year-old woman
named Hiba.
Hiba and her family left the town of eastern Ghouta
in March. At that time, the Secretary-General described
the assault on eastern Ghouta as “hell on Earth”. Hiba
and her family were forced to flee to Idlib, hoping to
find a place where they would not have to fear for their
lives. But now Hiba is on the front line once again. As
she told a reporter,
“We saw enough bombing in eastern Ghouta. I
cried so much when I heard the warplanes again.
There is nowhere to take shelter.”
It is for Hiba, for the 3 million civilians struggling
alongside her in Idlib and for all her fellow citizens
across Syria and in the diaspora that we need to see
not just another stop-gap arrangement but a lasting
ceasefire that paves the way for a credible political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process.
As President Trump has stated, Bashar Al-Assad
of Syria must not recklessly attack Idlib. There is no
military solution to this conflict. Russia wants the world
to believe that after a military campaign everything will
go back to the way it used to be. That is why they ask for
the three Rs: recognition of the regime, reconstruction
money and pushing Syria’s neighbours to send refugees
home before it is safe to do so, trying to sweep the
past seven years of violence under the rug. Let us be
serious. Al-Assad and the henchmen who unleashed
these atrocities will never be welcome in the world
of civilized nations. They will get no help to rebuild,
certainly not from us. I cannot imagine that any other
Government would want to explain to its people why it
would send aid to the barbaric Al-Assad regime.
There will not be stability in Syria as long as
Iran and its proxy forces remain. Those groups are
responsible for some of the most egregious violence in
this war. They have directed the regime’s starve-andsurrender campaign. They are now on Israel’s doorstep.

S/PV. 8355

That is unacceptable. Iran cannot dictate the future for
the Syrian people. If Russia is interested in bringing
peace to Syria, it should make sure that Iran and its
militias leave Syria once and for all. The risk of a
broader conflict will leave with them.
Iran is responsible for creating the Syria we see
today: a broken and violent country. The Syrian people
know full well who did this to them. No one will
forget. We must prevent the people of Syria from facing
yet another catastrophe at the hands of the Al-Assad
regime, and the only way forward is a lasting ceasefire,
as called for in resolution 2254 (2015).
Yesterday, as we just heard, Russia and Turkey
agreed to stabilize the situation in Idlib. We call on
all parties to commit to a lasting ceasefire and to take
immediate steps to advance the Geneva peace process
further. Again, the only way forward is a genuine and
inclusive political solution.
Last week, I and others met with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to determine how we advance the
Geneva political process. That has to be our focus.
We need talks that stick to the road map for a new
constitution and elections in line with resolution
2254 (2015). The United States is fully committed to
that effort, which is why I am here today to support
Ambassador Haley and her team here in New York.
In our view, Special Envoy De Mistura should
therefore immediately move forward as he has laid
out, with the convening of a constitutional committee
in keeping with his mandate. We have been discussing
such a committee since January. We understand that
Russia, back at the beginning, told us that it was fully
on board and promised that the committee would
fully support the United Nations Geneva process. As
Mr. De Mistura said, it is urgent to move forward now.
The United Nations should therefore set a date for the
first meeting of the committee and move forward with
creating such a new constitution. We should hear back
from the United Nations on its progress by 31 October.
I urge other Security Council partners to support such
an approach.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I also want to express my
condolences to Russia for the recent loss of life, which

18-288687/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

adds to the list of immeasurable losses of life in Syria
and highlights the need for an urgent political solution.
I speak on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait.
I would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation and the humanitarian assistance provided by
the United Nations in very difficult circumstances. We
reiterate our call for safe, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all in need across Syria,
including to areas that have recently changed control.
The reports of the Secretary-General continue to be
clear that all methods of delivery, including crossborder aid, are essential to the effective provision of
humanitarian assistance and to ensuring a needs-based
response. We also reiterate our calls on all donors to
contribute generously to the underfunded Syria appeals.
We would like to focus our remarks yet again on
Idlib, and thank Staffan De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock
for keeping us up to date on the different aspects of the
extremely serious situation there, and of the intensive
work of the United Nations to prevent what we have been
warned could be the biggest humanitarian catastrophe
of this century.
We received reports that there were days without
airstrikes last week, which shows that, when there is
political will, a cessation of hostilities can be achieved.
We are encouraged by the statements from the meeting
in Sochi yesterday, and we hope that a cessation of
hostilities in Idlib will now ensue and be respected by
all and that dialogue rather than military escalation
will prevail. That is also required in order to succeed
with efforts to separate terrorist groups as designated
by the Security Council from armed opposition groups.
We would appreciate receiving more information
on the agreement made in Sochi today, including on
the implementation of a demilitarized zone to be
established by 15 October and reassurances of an
immediate cessation of hostilities. We also welcome
Special Envoy De Mistura’s work in that regard, and
we encourage coordination between ongoing efforts
where relevant.
Counter-terrorism measures in no way relieve the
parties of their very clear obligations under international
law, which are applicable throughout Idlib and Syria.
The Secretary-General last week called on the Astana
guarantors
8/26

18/09/2018

“to find a way to isolate terrorist groups and create
a situation in which civilians will not be the price
paid to solve the problem of Idlib”.
That is as true for Idlib as it is true across Syria.
Over the past few weeks, in meeting after meeting,
Sweden and Kuwait, together with the vast majority of
Security Council members, have consistently called
on the Astana guarantors to implement their own
de-escalation agreement in Idlib. We will continue that
preventative diplomacy, and we repeat our calls today
that Syria and its allies must refrain from escalating
violence in Idlib, ensure humanitarian access and full
freedom of movement for all persons and abide by all
their obligations under international law. Civilians
and civilian objects must be protected, and all parties
are obliged to apply the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. All those obligations
apply across Idlib and in all of Syria, inside and outside
any demilitarized zone. The very clear demands on the
parties to the conflict in resolution 2401 (2018) likewise
remain in place.
We also express our grave concern over new reports
of attacks on medical facilities despite deconfliction,
for example, the case of the 6 September bombing of the
medical facility in Kafar Zita. Such attacks may amount
to war crimes. There can be no impunity for violations
and abuses of international law, and we reaffirm our
strong support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism and the Commission of
Inquiry in that regard. We also support the call by
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock to all parties to
abide by deconfliction protocols.
We also appreciate the update by Special Envoy De
Mistura on the United Nations-led political process and
his tireless efforts in that regard. We agree with him
on how resolution 2254 (2015) is intrinsically linked
to how to solve the situation in Idlib. Incentives are
needed for the day after separation, both for armed
groups and for the civilian population. Such incentives
can come only from a genuine diplomatic effort on the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
It is therefore urgent to make progress on the
political process in parallel. We lend our full support
to the United Nations mandate to establish the
constitutional committee and prerogative to ensure its
credibility and international legitimacy. Women’s full
and effective participation in the work of the committee
must be ensured. We call on all involved to respect the
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

independent middle list created by the United Nations,
and we encourage the Special Envoy to convene the
committee as soon as possible, as he indicated.
Let us all be clear: a full-scale military operation in
Idlib would risk any remaining hope for a sustainable
and peaceful settlement in Syria. Only once a credible
political transition is firmly under way, and when
conditions for safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees and internally displaced persons are in place,
will the international donor community be ready to
assist in the reconstruction of Syria.
The responsibility — and ability — to avoid a
catastrophe and allow time for dialogue still lies with
Syria and the Astana guarantors. As co-penholders
for the Syria humanitarian file, Kuwait and Sweden
will continue to ensure that the Council follows
developments in Idlib very closely. We continue to be
actively exploring all options for the Security Council.
We stand ready to work with all Council members and
the relevant actors on the best way forward. Enough
blood has been shed. All efforts should now be political
and diplomatic.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to join the other speakers in expressing
my deepest condolences to the Russian Federation with
respect to the event just mentioned.
I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Mark
Lowcock for their exemplary commitment and their
briefings, which not only make clear the gravity of the
current situation but also illustrate the potential that
exists today for a way out of this crisis.
Syria is today at a crossroads: it can either spiral
further into military escalation in Idlib, which would
begin one of the darkest chapters of the Syrian tragedy,
or it could instead take the path of genuine political
engagement towards resolving the conflict. Both
scenarios, the darkest and the most encouraging, are
possible at this point. The decision largely depends
upon the Security Council’s ability to unite around
peace — on option that is today, despite the immense
the immense challenges, within our reach.
Syria is once again on a precipice, with an
offensive threatening the Idlib area for the past several
weeks, where more than 3 million people are now
located. Locations there have already been subjected
to shelling, tens of thousands of civilians have fled
the indiscriminate strikes and yet worse still could

S/PV. 8355

be to come. Several hospitals have been the targets
of attack. We cannot reiterate it too much: attacks
against health personnel and hospitals constitute war
crimes and their perpetrators will have to answer
for their actions. The fight against terrorism is in no
circumstance an adequate argument to justify such a
disaster. Indiscriminate attacks represent not only a
humanitarian outrage but also acts of strategic folly,
serving only to fuel the terrorism they purport to fight.
Syria has therefore become the pre-eminent incubator
of terrorism. An offensive in Idlib would have the same
effect and, furthermore, contribute to dispersing the
jihadist fighters there across the region, potentially to
Europe and beyond.
France has deployed tireless efforts in all forums,
on all fronts, in seeking with its partners ways to avert
disaster. A four-party meeting was held last Friday
among the diplomatic Councillors of Turkey, Russia,
Germany and France, with a view to finding common
ground between the small group and the Astana group.
In our view, that is an unavoidable path. Turkey has
made significant efforts to contribute to concrete
solutions. While we note the agreement announced
yesterday by Presidents Erdoğan and Putin regarding
the establishment of a demilitarized zone in the Idlib
area, we call on Turkey and Russia to specify the
parameters, such as the fate and movements of terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council.
In that context, when we want to believe that
diplomacy is finally regaining ground, we must
persevere in our joint efforts to persuade all parties to
the conflict that there are alternatives to escalation and
that the path of dialogue is the only way to deliver on a
lasting solution to the situation in Idlib.
The protection of civilians must be an absolute
priority for all stakeholders. It is incumbent upon all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular pursuant to the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We must
also do everything possible to protect humanitarian
and medical facilities and personnel and to ensure safe,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations
in need. I should like to recall the unique and crucial
nature of cross-border humanitarian assistance, which
in August alone provided vital daily assistance to nearly
750,000 individuals in the north-west.
We continue to support Turkey’s efforts to find
a negotiated solution in Idlib. We commend its

18-288689/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

commitment, like that of the United Nations, which is
making a real difference. It is the very future of Syria
that is at stake. How is it possible to simultaneously hope
for the return of refugees and prepare for an offensive
that could displace hundreds of thousands of people?
How is it possible to generate the necessary trust for a
credible political process at a time when the population
of Idlib continues to be threatened by a brutal military
campaign? How can we call for the rebuilding of Syria
at the same time as preparing to destroy Idlib and there
exists no credible and irreversible political process?
The reality is that there can be no military solution
in Syria. An offensive in Idlib would further destroy
hope for peace in Syria. I repeat it once again: we will
tolerate no further use of chemical weapons in Syria,
and we stand ready to respond.
Avoiding an escalation in Idlib is all the more
necessary given that a credible negotiated political
solution acceptable to all is within our grasp. That is
my firm belief. This option was generated by United
Nations mediation. The discussions held last week
in Geneva should lead to the prompt establishment
of the constitutional committee, the first component
of a political process endorsed by the international
community, including the Security Council, through
resolution 2254 (2015). The small group, which met with
the Special Envoy on Friday, expressed its full support
for those efforts. However, the Asana guarantors have
expressed reservations regarding the composition of the
constitutional committee established by Special Envoy,
despite the mandate entrusted to him by the Sochi final
statement of 31 January.
France firmly believes that the time has come to
move forward with the setting up of the constitutional
committee by Mr. De Mistura as soon as possible. That
is the call I wish to issue today on behalf of France,
echoing, and supporting, the message Mr. Mistura
has just delivered to us. An imminent date is needed
for that work to begin. I recall that participants in the
Sochi congress agreed that the Special Envoy would be
responsible for the committee’s composition under the
Geneva process. Those commitments must be upheld.
The Special Envoy must be in a position to update us on
his progress at the next Council meeting on this matter,
and the constitutional committee should finally be able
to meet as soon as possible. In our view, that is key
to building real political momentum. We all are aware
that the road ahead is long and difficult; that is the very
reason for our call: not one minute do we have to waste.
10/26

18/09/2018

A political solution does not begin and end with
the drafting of a new constitution; detailed discussions
must now begin on its many other elements, such as
modalities for the adoption of a new constitutional
text; the holding of free and transparent elections in
which all Syrians, including refugees and displaced
persons, can vote; and, more broadly, the creation
of a safe and neutral environment, underpinned by
confidence-building measures, which is integral for
granting the necessary credibility to the entire process.
Our road map has been clearly laid out: a strong
commitment to a cessation of hostilities in IdIib; the
continuation of the political process, with collective
support for the launch of the constitutional committee’s
work as the first step; and the unity of the Council
around a constructive political agenda with a view to
a peaceful and agreed upon resolution to the conflict.
It is France’s unambiguous position that the rebuilding
of Syria can be envisioned only on that basis, once an
irreversible, credible and inclusive political transition
has begun. Let us be clear: without a guarantee that
such a transition is under way, no Syrians will believe
that their country has changed and the vast majority of
them will refuse to return home, dooming any hope of
lasting peace in Syria.
In conclusion, I would like to stress our belief
that the Security Council has a special responsibility
to break the cycle of tragedy in Syria and to generate
genuine political momentum. On behalf of France, I
call on the Council to rally around that shared political
goal by supporting the Geneva process, the Special
Envoy and an inclusive political settlement.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We express our heartfelt condolences to
Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia for the loss of life of
Russian servicemen yesterday. We also extend those
condolences to his Government and the families of
the victims.
We must be aware that the situation in Idlib, and in
Syria in general, requires strong diplomatic capacity at
the highest level to stop the massacre and objectively
manage the flow of displaced persons. That is why,
despite the very confrontational positions expressed
at the Tehran summit, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the signing of the memorandum
on the stabilization of the Idlib de-escalation zone,
which was agreed yesterday in Sochi by President
Putin and President Erdoğan. That memorandum is
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

aimed at rejecting a large-scale military offensive,
which we have been anticipating since the beginning
of September owing to the intensification of air and
land attacks, which have led to dozens of deaths,
injuries and displacements, as well as the destruction
of civilian infrastructure. As the signatories pointed
out, that Russian-Turkish agreement seeks to create a
demilitarized zone in Idlib patrolled by soldiers of both
countries by 15 October and should make it possible
to separate the Government forces from the opposition
forces, to withdraw heavy weapons starting on
10 October and to re-establish road transport between
Aleppo and the towns of Latakia and Hama before the
end of 2018. All that means that the Russian-Turkish
talks must prevent the Syrian army from carrying out a
major military offensive, which would lead to the loss
of many civilian lives in Idlib.
We congratulate the Governments of the Russian
Federation and Turkey for that noble diplomatic effort,
and the Syrian Government for having supported that
agreement and stated that it is prepared to implement
its provisions.
That decision, which should be aimed at strengthening
the ceasefire, improving the humanitarian situation
and seeking a long-term political solution to the
conflict, is perfectly in line with the mandate and
work of the international mediator for Syria, Special
Envoy De Mistura. We would like to thank him for
his tireless work, which hled to the Sochi agreement.
My Government hopes that the meetings held by
Mr. De Mistura with representatives of 10 countries
of the International Syria Contact Group on 10, 11 and
14 September in Geneva will finally lead to the creation
of an intra-Syrian constitutional committee and that the
guarantors of Astana will not present any impediment
to the constitutional proposal put forward by Mr. De
Mistura. That proposal is essential for the holding
of elections in the post-war period with a view to
legitimizing a political process in which all the political
actors of the country must participate.
The fact that the Syrian conflict will not end with
this battle justifies the need to prioritize a political
solution in Idlib. The Islamic State continues to
maintain a small redoubt on the border with Iraq, and
a large part of the country’s territory remains beyond
the Government’s reach, especially in the north and
east, areas which are in the hands of Kurdish militia.
Moreover, armed groups that manage to escape Idlib
could still find refuge north of Aleppo. Therefore, as

S/PV. 8355

we have said before, civilians must not be made to
suffer from a scorched earth policy.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, as has
been stressed, 2 million people in Idlib are in a vulnerable
situation and require humanitarian assistance. In
that context, a major attack could be more lethal and
destructive than any other that has been launched
during this conflict, which has already claimed the
lives of more than 500,000 people since 2011.
Despite that difficult operational environment, my
delegation is pleased that the United Nations and its
partners are continuing to deliver regular humanitarian
assistance to Idlib from across the border in Turkey.
Furthermore, under such challenging circumstances,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners must
not lose sight of the need for cross-border assistance to
be prioritized so that humanitarian assistance can be
delivered efficiently and effectively.
I would like to conclude by reiterating once again
the need for all parties to the conflict to exercise
restraint and respect their obligations under human
rights law and humanitarian law to safeguard civilian
lives and protect civilian infrastructure, as well as
United Nations personnel and humanitarian actors, in
accordance with resolution 2139 (2014).
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, I wish to extend our sincerest condolences
to our colleagues and friends of the Russian delegation
with regard to the tragedy of the downing of the aircraft
that had military personnel on board. We are deeply
troubled by that tragedy, and we extend our deepest
condolences to the families and loved ones of the dead,
as well as the colleagues of those who died.
(spoke in English)
We thank Special Envoy De Mistura and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their comprehensive
and very informative briefings. It is gratifying to learn
that, despite the problems with regard to Idlib, we
have made substantial progress in the political process
towards resolving the conflict.
Kazakhstan is pleased to note that the work carried
out by the guarantors is undoubtedly aimed at preventing
escalation in Idlib, because no one wants war. In that
regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the memorandum signed
on 17 September in Sochi by the Defence Ministries
of Russia and Turkey on the stabilization of the
situation in the de-escalation zone of Idlib in Syria. We

18-2886811/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

support the creation of a demilitarized buffer zone in
Syria’s Idlib province to separate Government forces
from rebel fighters based there. We commend Turkey
and Russia on the breakthrough decision to enforce
the demilitarized zone by 15 October. Now we look
forward to the implementation of the agreement by all
parties engaged in the deal. We commend the Special
Envoy’s attempts to involve various States of the Middle
East, the Gulf region and Europe in the process. We
welcome his consultations on 14 September in Geneva
with the delegations of the so-called small group to
facilitate the broader dimension of our collective effort.
Although that meeting did not end in tangible results,
such consultations should be continued, as they are a
clear confirmation that the world community intends to
find a peaceful way out of the Syrian crisis. Likewise,
an innovative regional paradigm is needed to support
both the Geneva and Astana processes in order to
uphold the ceasefire and promote the peace process.
We note with satisfaction the fact that the negotiations
in Geneva agreed on the number of candidates for the
constitutional committee. We support Mr. De Mistura’s
efforts to proceed with the launch of the work of that
important body.
The situation in Syria is very difficult. Like the
guarantors of the Astana process, we all need to make
every effort to ensure that the civilian population does
not suffer because of the struggle that must be continued
against terrorist organizations. We also urge all sides to
act with prudence with regard to the so-called threat
of the use of chemical weapons, by either side so as to
avert any further political or humanitarian crises.
We highly commend the visit of Emergency Relief
Coordinator Mark Lowcock to Damascus on 28 August
to engage with the Government of Syria on how best to
further scale up the collective humanitarian response.
We call on the international community to provide
additional financial support and the resources that
are urgently needed to respond to a potential military
escalation in the north-west of the country.
Kazakhstan is concerned about the safety and
protection of civilians in Syria’s rural Deir ez-Zor
governorate, where fighting has displaced more than
20,000 people since July. As we know, recently 53
people were killed and 100 injured in air strikes on
residential areas in the Abu Kamal district. Internally
displaced people have settled in makeshift camps in
the governorate and are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. Nearly 200,000 displaced people have
12/26

18/09/2018

returned to Deir ez-Zor since November 2017. We
commend the United Nations on its efforts to ensure
safe access for humanitarian aid workers so as to
reach people in need. We call on all sides not to block
aid and to make every effort to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Lastly, analysing events in recent days, Astana
assesses that developments in the situation in Syria
have created the basis for a qualitative change for
the better — the final elimination of terrorists on the
territory of the country, the beginning of a real political
process, the revival of economic activity and the return
of refugees to their homeland.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would also like to extend its sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation following the
incident that occurred yesterday in Syria.
My delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the
political process and the humanitarian situation in Syria
under your presidency, Sir, and thanks Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their informative briefings on
the latest developments in Syria.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation welcomes the multifaceted assistance that
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
continue to provide to people in distress in the areas
affected by armed clashes, despite ongoing hostilities.
The plight of those people is all the more worrying as
they are also exposed to risks caused by the presence of
explosive remnants of war and landmines. In addition,
several staff members of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations specialized in
the provision of humanitarian aid also pay with their
lives for their commitment to assisting people affected
by the conflict. Reports to date reveal that 22 United
Nations agency staff members have been killed,
including 18 from the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. As
for non-governmental organizations, 74 Syrian and
Palestinian Red Crescent staff and volunteers have
made the ultimate sacrifice.
My delegation remains convinced that a possible
offensive by the Syrian armed forces in Idlib will have
unprecedented humanitarian consequences, which
will cause another mass exodus, thereby adding to
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the suffering of a population martyred by seven years
of particularly deadly conflict. We are extremely
concerned about the increasing risk of a humanitarian
disaster in Idlib governorate, which hosts nearly
3 million people, including 1.4 million internally
displaced persons. Those people have no choice but
to take refuge in overcrowded camps, where basic
services are struggling to meet their immense needs.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the parties to the conflict
to show restraint and take the necessary measures to
ensure safe, sustainable and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance in order to avoid another
tragedy, such as that experienced in eastern Ghouta,
Aleppo and Homs.
My country recalls that the warring parties cannot
evade their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
objects, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
international law. We therefore call upon them to take
all the measures necessary to spare schools, hospitals
and medical personnel during military operations.
My country also takes this opportunity to reiterate
its commitment to the principle of accountability. To
that end, my delegation urges all parties, including
States, civil society and United Nations agencies, to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
On the political front, my country welcomes the
sustained efforts of Mr. De Mistura to reach a political
solution, which is the only way out of the current
impasse. In that regard, we welcome the meetings
organized by the Special Envoy last week in Geneva
among the guarantors of the Astana process to discuss
the establishment of the constitutional committee
and among the representatives of the United States
of America, the United Kingdom, France, Germany,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan to discuss issues
related to the political process and the establishment of
the electoral committee. Côte d’Ivoire urges all parties
to support the Special Envoy in his quest for a lasting
political solution to the Syrian conflict. Lastly, we call
on the warring parties to opt for the path of dialogue, as
stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by expressing our deepest condolences
following the tragic death yesterday of Russian aircraft

S/PV. 8355

servicemen, as well as to extend our sympathy to their
loved ones.
I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. China appreciates their efforts to promote the
Syrian political process and alleviate the humanitarian
situation in the country.
The international community has closely followed
the situation in Idlib for quite some time. China
welcomes the joint statement issued by the leaders of the
Russian Federation, Turkey and Iran on 7 September.
We applaud the meeting held between Russian and
Turkish leaders in Sochi on 17 September and the
signing of the memorandum on the supervision of the
de-escalation zone in Idlib. China supports all efforts
to ease the situation and advance the Syrian political
settlement process. Going forward, all parties with
influence should seek to work together to activate it and
ensure that the joint statement and memorandum are
fully implemented in order to facilitate the ceasefire
and the cessation of hostilities. That would in turn
foster favourable external conditions for dialogue,
peace talks and a political settlement to the situation
in Syria. The international community should forge
synergies in order to continue fighting terrorism, while
building on the counter-terrorism gains made in Syria
and preventing terrorist organizations from abducting
and coercing civilians.
A political solution is the only way to lasting
peace and stability in Syria. Last week Special
Envoy De Mistura conducted in-depth consultations
with the Syrian parties on the establishment of the
constitutional committee. The international community
should continue to support the United Nations as the
main mediation channel, as well as the role played by
the Geneva peace talks and the Astana process. It should
also push the Syrian parties to effectively implement
resolution 2254 (2015), in line with the principle of a
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led process in search of a political
solution that responds to the realities on the ground in
Syria and accommodates the concerns of all parties
through inclusive political dialogue. All parties are
duty-bound to adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
basic norms governing international relations and to
fully respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity.

18-2886813/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

China is deeply concerned about the developments
in Syria and its humanitarian situation. Despite the
myriad challenges, the Syrian people are repairing
roads, restoring power and rebuilding hospitals, schools
and other infrastructure. The number of refugees and
displaced persons returning to their homes is steadily
on the rise. Only through steady progress in rebuilding
can we bring hope to the Syrian people and help secure
long-term stability and peace in Syria.
The international community should actively
support the reconstruction of Syria, including through
intensified efforts to clear explosive remnants of war,
so as to create conditions for the return of refugees and
displaced persons. The Syrian parties should proceed
by taking into account the future of the country and
the well-being of the people, abide by relevant Council
resolutions, resolve their differences through dialogue
and consultations and alleviate the humanitarian
situation without delay.
The United Nations and the international community
should strengthen communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government in providing assistance
to all areas in need in Syria. The humanitarian relief
efforts in Syria should adhere to the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and apoliticality.
In recent years, China has provided substantial
assistance to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Syria and neighbouring countries affected by the crisis.
In August, the Red Cross Society of China provided
Syria with mobile medical units, including two medical
buses and two ambulances. It also handed over to to
the host a prosthetic rehabilitation centre for Syrian
children, built with the assistance of China. China
will continue to provide assistance to Syria and its
neighbours to the best of our ability.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank both
briefers for their comprehens, yet again very worrying,
updates. Like many others around the table, we share
a sense of urgency while talking about the current
developments in Syria, where the conflict is far from
its end. Allow me also to join others in expressing our
sincere condolences to the Russian Mission.
Let me today focus on two aspects of the
conflict — the internal and the external.
First, while talking about the internal dimension
of the conflict, we cannot acknowledge that things
are normalizing. Even though last Sunday — for the
14/26

18/09/2018

first time since 2011 — local elections were held, we
have to underline that not everyone could participate in
them. We have to keep in mind the lack of participation
by internally displaced persons (IDPs) and Syrian
refugees. Therefore, in our opinion, those elections
might not fully reflect the reality of Syria today.
As there is no military solution to the conflict, we
have always underlined that we should aim at reaching
an intra-Syrian framework for a political agreement on
a transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015). It is for
the Syrians themselves to negotiate, and that is why we
desperately need to revive the United Nations political
process in Geneva. Only a real, tangible political
process, which would ensure true representation of the
Syrian people, would provide the setting of a timetable
and procedures for the drafting of a constitution
and conducting United Nations-supervised free and
fair elections.
In that context, let me express our strong support
for the Syrian-led inclusive constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva.
It should be implemented as a priority now. It requires
the full and constructive engagement of all parties
to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities,
to participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.
It is also important to note that a cessation
of hostilities may also give the peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva the
opportunity to gain momentum, so that a political
solution might be finally reached. For that reason, we
call upon all parties to fulfil their commitments to the
existing ceasefire agreements.
Secondly, with regard to the external dimension
of the crisis, we need to discuss the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria today, although
the military offensive in Syria continues. As a
consequence, human suffering is growing. Any action,
taken by anyone — but especially by the Astana
guarantors — even against terrorists, cannot justify the
attacks on innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including health facilities. All parties to the conflict
are obliged under international humanitarian law not to
attack civilians and civilian infrastructure and to take
all possible measures to protect civilians. There is a
special role for Russia, Turkey and Iran in that regard.
We are extremely worried about the escalation
of hostilities in the Idlib governorate. That region is
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

one of the de-escalation zones in Syria, which was
established and is overseen by the guarantors of the
Astana process with an aim to ensure the ceasefire and
humanitarian access.
We welcome the agreement reached between Russia
and Turkey in Sochi yesterday, which is thought to have
averted an all-out offensive by the Government forces to
retake the last remaining opposition stronghold in Idlib.
Considering it as a move in the right direction towards
avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe, we urge all
parties to the conflict to ensure the full implementation
of the agreement.
We are deeply concerned about the severe
situation of the most vulnerable victims of the
conflict — especially children, women and members
of religious minorities, as well as IDPs. Those groups
currently constitute half of the population of Idlib. If not
protected, we are risking a humanitarian catastrophe
that might also include a serious risk of sexual violence.
We call upon all to alleviate the suffering of civilians
by granting them free and safe access to humanitarian
assistance, including voluntary medical evacuation,
which should strictly be overseen by the United Nations
and the implementing partners, based only on medical
needs, in order to ensure the voluntary character of
the process.
In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining unity as well as the responsibility in
the Security Council on the question of the full
implementation of the humanitarian resolution
(resolution 2401 (2018)) across Syria. All parties to
the conflict should exercise restraint and prioritize the
protection of civilians. We call on all stakeholders with
influence on the ground, especially Russia, Turkey
and Iran, to take the necessary steps to ensure that the
fighting stops and the Syrian people are protected.

S/PV. 8355

of vulnerability of millions of people, as well as the
evident disdain of the parties to the conflict for
international law and international humanitarian law.
As previously pointed out, it is essential to prevent Idlib
from becoming a new site of humanitarian tragedy or a
major factor of instability.
Peru strongly condemns terrorism and considers it
necessary that the remaining terrorist groups in Idlib
and in other areas of Syria be held accountable. We
also recognize the need to safeguard the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. However, in
no way should that be interpreted as justification
for putting the lives of millions of people at risk. On
the contrary, the situation leads us to emphasize that
there is no military solution to the conflict. In that
regard, we would like to welcome the announcement
of the Presidents of the Russian Federation and Turkey
concerning the establishment of a demilitarized zone,
which indeed includes the distinguishing and the
separation of terrorists from other rebel groups and the
civilian population. We also wish to acknowledge the
intense efforts that the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral has been carrying out in that vein, in particular
the recent meeting he convened in Geneva with the socalled small group.
We encourage all parties to maintain a constructive
and committed spirit, with a view to protecting the
civilian population throughout the Syrian territory, and
to advance the political process based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/512,
annex). With regard to the latter, we underscore the
need to accelerate the implementation of an inclusive
and representative constitutional committee, especially
with respect to Syrian women. And we welcome the
progress in that regard that the Special Envoy has made
known to us.

We appreciate the convening of this meeting, and
we are grateful to Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings and work. We acknowledge and support
their efforts to achieve a political solution to the conflict
in Syria and to protect the civilian population.

We also highlight the need to accelerate the
process of releasing prisoners, of identifying missing
persons and of handing over human remains to
relatives. Furthermore, we underscore the need to
guarantee immediate, safe and unrestricted access to
humanitarian assistance from the United Nations and
other specialized agencies. That includes cross-border
assistance, which in the current context is essential for
the survival of millions of people.

Peru notes with regret and deep concern the
continuation of the conflict and the grave humanitarian
situation. We regret the suffering and the high level

Finally, we must not forget the need to address the
situation of the millions of displaced persons and to
consider that the achievement of sustainable peace in

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we express our condolences to Russia for
those who lost their lives yesterday in Syria.

18-2886815/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

18/09/2018

Syria necessitates their ability to return to their homes,
properties and businesses voluntarily, under safe
conditions and in a dignified manner.

to the situation. We also believe their efforts should be
supported by all States that have influence over local
actors in Syria.

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all,
to join other colleagues in expressing our sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation.

As we continue to advocate for a durable solution
to the Idlib situation, it is also absolutely imperative
to support the humanitarian programmes of the United
Nations and its partners. The humanitarian tragedy in
Idlib and other parts of Syria continue to require safe,
rapid and sustained humanitarian access. As the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/845) mentions, all
methods of aid delivery are essential to the efficient
and effective provision of humanitarian assistance and
to ensuring a needs-based response. In that connection,
we welcome the visit of the Humanitarian Coordinator
for Syria on 28 August. We hope his meetings with the
Syrian Government and other stakeholders will bring
about tangible results that improve humanitarian access
to enable the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to provide aid to all Syrians based on needs.

We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on the Syrian political and humanitarian track.
We reiterate our support for the continued diplomatic
endeavours of the Special Envoy to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis. We also appreciate the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide aid to millions of Syrians under
difficult circumstances.
We have been expressing our concern about the
humanitarian consequences of a further military
escalation in Idlib and its surrounding areas. As it has
been mentioned repeatedly, there are close to 3 million
people residing in that area; and 2.1 million are already
in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition,
1.4 million are internally displaced. Therefore, a
further military escalation would endanger millions of
civilians and severely affect the ability of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to deliver aid,
leading to further loss of lives as well as displacement.
That is why the Secretary- General made an appeal last
week to avoid a full-scale battle in Idlib, as it would
unleash a humanitarian nightmare.
While we worry about the fate of civilians,
we also understand that there are United Nationslisted terrorists who must be defeated with enhanced
international cooperation and coordination. Therefore,
as the Secretary-General underlined, it is vital to spare
no effort to find solutions that protect civilians in Idlib.
At such critical times, we believe it is imperative to
do everything possible to demonstrate the primacy
of diplomacy.
In that regard, we welcome that the meeting between
the Presidents of Russia and Turkey held in Sochi
resulted in an agreement to establish a demilitarized
zone. While expressing our appreciation to both
countries, we hope that their agreement will protect
civilians and avoid the worst scenario, which both
the Special Envoy and the Humanitarian Coordinator
have been warning of repeatedly. We encourage the
Astana guarantors, particularly Russia and Turkey, to
continue to work together to find a sustainable solution
16/26

While we all have been rightly focusing on the
urgent situation in Idlib, we all also agree that both the
crisis in Idlib and the whole of Syria cannot be addressed
without a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led comprehensive
political process facilitated by the United Nations.
Hence we support the continued efforts of the Special
Envoy. We acknowledge the consultations he mentioned
having last week on the constitutional committee
with the Astana guarantors and the members of the
small group. In that regard, we underscore that all
Syrians parties and those States with influence should
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to finalize the
establishment of the constitutional committee, which is
critical to relaunching the intra-Syrian political talks.
In conclusion, there is no military solution to the
Syrian crisis. Only political solution, facilitated by the
United Nations, can meet the legitimate aspirations
of the people of Syria. As the Secretary-General
reminded us in his latest report, the only goal of the
United Nations efforts — which is to end the suffering
of Syrians — should be shared by all of us. At this very
critical time, the Council should extend its backing to
the Special Envoy as he continues his tireless efforts
to end the Syrian crisis through an inclusive political
process based on resolution 2254 (2015).
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to thank both Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Special Envoy De Mistura for their
respective briefings. Let me also express our thanks
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

to all those United Nations and other humanitarian
aid workers who are providing life-saving aid to those
most in need. We salute their selfless and brave work in
dire circumstances.
I would also like to join others in offering our
condolences to Russia and the families of those who
lost their lives in the downing of a military plane. It
adds to the long list of casualties that this conflict has
caused and underscores the need for a political solution.
Despite the relative calm of the past few days, the
situation in and around Idlib remains extremely tense.
Everything needs to be done to prevent an all-out
offensive. The agreement between Russia and Turkey
on a demilitarized zone around Idlib seems a step in
that direction.
I would like to focus on the following points: the
need for further de-escalation in Idlib; the need to revive
the political process and to form the constitutional
committee; the need to deliver impartial humanitarian
aid and the reasons why it is not the right time for
reconstruction aid at this moment.
On the need for de-escalation in Idlib, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands once again underlines
that further escalation of violence in Idlib could lead
to an international confrontation and a humanitarian
catastrophe. Some of the 2.9 million civilians inside
Idlib have already been on the move in the past few days.
Yesterday in Sochi, an agreement was reached on a
15- to 25-kilometre-wide demilitarized zone. Chances
of a military confrontation between the regime and
opposition groups have been reduced significantly.
Still, some questions remain. What happens until the
moment the deal comes into force, supposedly on
15 October? Can Russia and Turkey guarantee that
civilians will not be forced to move from their homes?
Will there be access for humanitarian aid delivery to
people living in the demilitarized zone? We would
appreciate clarification from Russia on those questions.
There is consensus in the Security Council on
the need to counter terrorism of Council-designated
terrorist groups. The protection of civilians should be
at the core of every possible plan. We reiterate that
combating terrorism is no excuse to attack without
distinction, proportionality or precaution. We support
efforts to separate terrorists from civilians, to prevent
terrorists from using civilians as human shields. We
call on all parties to ensure full respect for international

S/PV. 8355

humanitarian law, and to refrain from any attacks on
basic services and hospitals. The Syrian army and the
Russian air force have the coordinates of the hospitals.
All attacks that have already taken place, as well as
those that might still take place in the future, fall
under their responsibility, and accountability needs to
take place.
On the need to revive the political process and form
the constitutional committee, we welcome the progress
with regard to the establishment of the constitutional
committee. It is not a goal in itself but is part of the
broader political process based on resolution 2254
(2015). One can speak only of a credible political
process when the constitutional committee itself is
credible. That means there is a need for inclusiveness
and representation of all Syrians. We reiterate that the
Special Envoy must have the freedom to compile the socalled third list. It should not require negotiation with
States. We repeat our support for the Special Envoy’s
commitment to have 30 per cent female representation
in all parts of the constitutional com mittee.The United
Nations should set a date for the first meeting of the
constitutional committee and move ahead with creating
a new constitution. We look forward to hearing back
from the United Nations on its progress by 31 October.
On the need to deliver impartial humanitarian aid,
unimpeded and unconditional access for principled
humanitarian assistance — both cross-border and
cross-line — remains an absolute necessity. The
2.9 million citizens in Idlib must be protected and their
needs need to be met. We welcome the United Nations
action plan. It is of the utmost importance that it now be
quickly financed and operationalized. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands is willing to do its part. It is essential
that the United Nations remains operative and has free
access to enable efficient humanitarian aid throughout
Syria. We repeat our call to the Syrian authorities,
Russia and Iran to immediately improve independent
and free access for all humanitarian organizations.
The regime makes independent needs assessments,
coordination and reporting by the United Nations
impossible; however, those are conditions for needsbased financing. We repeat our scepticism about the
concept of humanitarian corridors or other evacuations
of civilians and moderate fighters from Idlib, as
proposed by the regime and Russia. First, there must
be clarity on the evacuation process, destinations,
monitoring by the United Nations and guaranteed
access to satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene,

18-2886817/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

health, safety and nutrition. Evacuations should always
be voluntary and should never be used for political or
demographic purposes.
Let me conclude by condemning the current call
for reconstruction aid and the call for the return of
refugees. There will be no reconstruction aid for Syria
until there is a lasting political transition in Syria. It
is also inconceivable that we start rebuilding when a
massive attack still looms around Idlib. Syria currently
is not ready for the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees. Contrary to what some want to make us
believe, it is not the lack of reconstruction that keeps
people from returning. Many Syrians cannot go back for
fear of violence, persecution and imprisonment. Those
Syrians fear security screenings and forced conscription
and, last but not least, they have no homes to return
to, due to the potential consequences of laws such as
Law Number 10. It is clear that fundamental structural
changes are needed in Syria’s Administration. An
inclusive political transition must be the starting point.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Welcome you back
to New York, Mr. President. I thank our two briefers, the
Special Envoy and the Under-Secretary-General. Let
me also repeat the thanks of colleagues for everything
their teams do on the ground to help the people of Syria,
who need them more than ever. We are very conscious
this is a very difficult job for them to do.
The conflict is seven and a half years old — it is
longer than the Second World War. Over half a million
people have died in Syria, millions have been displaced
and chemical weapons have been used, including
by the Syrian regime. I think we are running out of
superlatives to describe the horrors of this conflict.
We meet every month on Syria in this Chamber, but
this time does feel particularly important. The Turkish
plan for Idlib, which its officials have discussed with
the Russians, is the crux. It needs to be developed and
implemented and, as other speakers have said, Russia in
particular needs to uphold it. We look to Russia to do that
because Russia is one of the five permanent members
of the Security Council, with particular responsibilities
for international peace and security. Russian needs to
exert its influence on the Syrian authorities, otherwise
the crimes that are committed against the Syrian people
are committed in Russia’s name. We heard earlier about
the voices of Idlib. There are 3 million voices in Idlib
who will want to know why the Idlib plan cannot be
18/26

18/09/2018

implemented. There are 18 million voices in Syria who
want the Council to act to protect them.
A lot has been said today, some of it very familiar or
common to those Council members who have spoken.
I will not repeat some of the assessments, but I would
like to go on record as saying that the United Kingdom
agrees with our American, Dutch, Swedish, Polish and
other partners in their assessments. We wholly agree
with them.
I want to highlight in particular four points: first
of all, I want to agree with what the representative of
France said about the situation on the ground, but also
what he said about the French, Americans and British
taking our responsibilities if chemical weapons are ever
used again. I want to talk about the political process:
we want to see the constitutional committee convened.
We look to the Special Envoy to do that. We believe he
has all the authority he needs to pick the names and we
trust him to do the best he can in the interests of the
people of Syria and in the interest of peace. We look
for a date at to be set and we ask him to report back to
the Council by 31 October. We look to the small group
and the Astana group to make progress on coming
together in support of the United Nations. I agree with
what my Dutch and Swedish colleagues said about
reconstruction money. There are 3 million voices in
Idlib, and 18 million voices in Syria as a whole, who
will want to know why progress cannot be made on the
political track.
Turning to the humanitarian front, we would like to
hear from the Syrian representative why there are still
problems with access and why there are still problems
with safe passage, as mentioned by the Under-SecretaryGeneral. I note what the representative of Equatorial
Guinea said about scorched earth. It is a truly terrible
situation, but he is right to draw attention to it. We
would like to know what the Syrian regime is doing
to put that right. A large number of speakers talked
about international humanitarian law and the principles
of precaution, discrimination and proportionality. The
United Kingdom absolutely upholds those principles. It
is unbelievable that hospitals are being attacked, and
even more unbelievable given that they are part of a
deconflicted area. Last week, the United Kingdom
announced approximately $40 million for Idlib. We
hope that will help, but I want to go back to what the
Under-Secretary-General asked — is it a reprieve or a
stay of execution? It is a dreadful choice, but it has to
be a reprieve. There are 3 million voices in Idlib and
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

18 million voices in Syria who will want to know why
this cannot happen.
Turning to the wider issues, as awful and horrific
as the Syrian conflict is, the prospect of a wider,
inter-State war is waiting in the wings. The Syrian
people are not only being attacked by their own
Government, they risk being drawn in and becoming
the victims of a wider conflict. It is not legitimate to
use the territory of Syria to fire missiles at Israel. The
risk of miscalculation and misunderstanding that led to
the downing of a Russian aircraft encapsulates, on a
small scale, the much bigger and even more frightening
risk of a wider miscalculation.
In that regard, I would like to echo other colleagues
who have voiced their condolences to our Russian
colleagues for the loss of their air crew. I repeat,
however, that the risk of miscalculation is incredibly
high. It was the Syrian Arab air force that shot down the
Russian plane, and the proximate cause was the actions
of Iran and Hizbullah on the ground. That ought to
serve as a very powerful warning, not just to the Syrian
authorities but also to the Russians and the Iranians of
the prospect of something much wider and even more
horrible than we have seen thus far in Syria.
Lastly, the Special Envoy referred to Kofi Annan,
and we will have a tribute to Mr. Annan in the United
Nations later this week. This morning, a wreath was
laid to Dag Hammarskjöld, who is also one of the iconic
Secretaries-General whom the United Nations has been
fortunate enough to have lead it. We do them no credit
if we allow this conflict to continue. In 2012, I was
present for the historic Geneva II Conference on Syria.
The best legacy we can offer Mr. Annan in response to
all his work is to bring the Syrian conflict to an end and
help the Syrian people.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their informative briefings. My delegation reiterate its
appreciation and support for their sensitive work.
We also express our condolences to the Government
and the people of Russia for the loss of lives during
yesterday’s incident.
We are meeting once again to discuss the sensitive
issue of the current and future situation of the Syrian
people. However, we stress that, according to the report

S/PV. 8355

of the Secretary-General (S/2018/845), military activity
in the south-west has decreased as a result of the
Government recovering territory held by armed groups
and its consolidation of control in that region. However,
we insist that the parties must respect their obligations
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law, in order to ensure the protection of
civilians, hospitals and educational institutions, as well
as to protect the workers of the various humanitarian
agencies on the ground.
Part of that protection must go hand in hand with
the prompt and active clearance of explosive remnants
of war throughout Syrian territory, beginning with
densely populated areas. We consider that to be an
urgent and fundamental action, since those remnants
pose a risk to medical and humanitarian personnel and,
most critically, to the civilians who are returning to
their places of origin.
We underscore that in eastern Ghouta during the
latest reporting period, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report, many displaced persons
were able to return to their homes and resume their
normal lives and even commercial activities. We also
note that, according to the report, the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations have been able to reach
more than 2.37 million people with food assistance, as
well as with medicines to some hard-to-reach areas. We
stress the need to include in the agenda the release of
people detained and kidnapped by terrorist groups, as
well as the identification of the bodies of victims of
violence in the conflict.
We insist on the need to ensure the protection of the
2.1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
in the province of Idlib, including the 1.4 million
internally displaced persons. We also reiterate our
deep concern about the possible escalation of violence
in Idlib governorate, where there are approximately
3 million people, including the regrettable presence
of almost 80,000 members of non-State armed groups
and terrorist groups, designated as such by the Council.
Bolivia takes this opportunity to reiterate its categorical
rejection of all acts of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever, whenever and by whomever it
is committed.
We believe that any effort or measure taken within
the framework of resolution 2401 (2018) that provides
for the fight against terrorist groups designated by the
Council, or other armed groups, in order to separate

18-2886819/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

them from the civilian population must also consider
the protection of civilian lives under international
law. In that connection, we welcome the agreement
reached hours ago at the highest levels between Russia
and Turkey in Sochi. That agreement will enable the
removal of all radical combatants from Idlib, including
the Al-Nusra Front, which has links to Al-Qaida, and
heavy weaponry belonging to all armed groups.
We highlight the initiatives of the Astana guarantors
to reduce violence throughout the Syrian territory. That
is why we must strengthen the Astana agreements, one
of the international initiatives that helped to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.
In that regard, we call upon the parties to continue
working for the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), while highlighting once again that those
local agreements helped not only to reduce violence
and allow the evacuation of people in need, but also
to facilitate the arrival of humanitarian assistance.
We hope that those agreements will continue with the
aim of allowing access for convoys, including crossborder convoys, emergency medical evacuations and
humanitarian corridors that will enable the voluntary,
unhindered, dignified and safe movement of civilians
to their places of origin.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of
Special Envoy De Mistura and for his talks with the
various stakeholders in the framework of the highlevel diplomacy. We repeat that the Syrian conflict
has no military solution, and we therefore reject any
attempt at break-up or sectarianism in the country.
On the contrary, we wish to state that the solution is
to sustain and implement the Sochi final declaration,
whose main aim is the establishment of a constitutional
committee. We hope that Mr. De Mistura’s efforts in
that regard will bear fruit.
Within the framework of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
respect for the principle of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria, we call for the resolution of this
conflict through an inclusive political process, based
on dialogue and consultations, led by and for the Syrian
people and allowing for a peaceful and sustainable
solution to the situation within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I should like to extend our
gratitude to all of those delegations that have voiced
20/26

18/09/2018

their condolences in connection with the tragedy that
occurred yesterday in the skies over Syria.
We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.
Yesterday, in Sochi, yet another historic milestone
was achieved with respect to developments in the
situation in Syria, namely, the Russian-Turkish summit,
which resulted in the signing of a memorandum on
stabilizing the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone.
Together with our Turkish partners, we will submit that
document for distribution as an official document of
the Security Council.
Key components of the memorandum include
maintenance of the de-escalation zone and the
establishment within it a demilitarized zone that will
help carry out focused work to ensure a sustained
cessation of hostilities. At the same time, it confirms the
determination to continue fighting terrorism in Syria in
all its forms and manifestations. Uncompromising and
consistent struggle against terrorism remains among
the chief obligations of all States Members of the
United Nations.
The document is a confirmation that Russia,
together with other Astana guarantors, continues to
undertake tremendous efforts to ensure that the situation
around Idlib will be resolved through negotiations
and that the civilian population will not suffer, as we
described to our partners and have been describing
all of this time. Efforts aimed at seeking an optimal
solution will continue. Regardless of what some may
state due to envy or from mere impotence, the Astana
format remains a functional and effective mechanism.
We thank our Kazakh colleagues for their contribution
to its establishment.
On the whole, our view is that the situation on
the ground has set the stage for a meaningful political
process. That, too, is largely to the credit of the
Astana trio. We will persevere in our efforts aimed
at facilitating the establishment of a constitutional
committee made up of representatives of the Syrian
leadership, opposition forces and civil society. The
challenge and objective is to ensure the beginning of
the committee’s work as soon as possible.
We call for attempts at destructive intervention in
this sensitive process to be abandoned and for attempts
to impose contrived, ill-conceived configurations to
be set aside. They only slow down the formulation of
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

balanced solutions and undermine the achievement of a
sustained, lasting settlement.
I wish to tell Mr. De Mistura that it is perhaps not
worth using the Security Council to exert pressure on
the guarantors. They are doing more for the political
process than anybody present in the Chamber. It is
important for him to facilitate — and not to lead — the
process. Syrian decisions need to be owned by the Syrian
people themselves, as is stipulated under resolution
2254 (2015), to which we all, including Mr. De Mistura,
frequently refer.
We call upon all those who do not intend to make
progress on scenarios in a way that runs counter to the
genuine desires of the Syrian people, who do not intend
to embroil themselves in political engineering, to help,
or at least not obstruct, the activities of the guarantor
countries of the Astana process designed to launch
what is necessary for Syria, the Middle East region
and the entire international community, namely, a
comprehensive political process based on the decisions
of the Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue in
Sochi and Security Council resolutions on Syria.
Our approaches to tackling humanitarian issues in
Syria remain unchanged. We believe that it is unseemly,
to put it mildly, to selectively approach the delivery of
assistance to the Syrian population. It is unacceptable
to blatantly politicize issues pertaining to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the rebuilding of what
was destroyed by terrorists, upholding the inalienable
right of refugees and internally displaced persons to
return to their homes.
Unfortunately, unbalanced policies in Syrian
affairs emerge more often than not. In particular,
having read the report of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, we have been unable
to find anything about issues pertaining to access by
humanitarian workers to a number of areas beyond the
control of Damascus, including those occupied by the
coalition in breach of Syria’s sovereignty. There has
been no mention of what took place, and what continues
to take place, in Raqqa. Yet it is known that the bodies
of the dead are still being retrieved from under the
rubble after the so-called coalition razed the city to
the ground, having liberated it from terrorists and,
while they were at it, from civilians. I do not recall a
call for the protection of refugees being issued at that
time. Apparently, some have a selective approach to
humanitarian affairs.

S/PV. 8355

There has been no progress in delivering vital
supplies to the residents of the Rukban camp, which is
located in an enclosed zone around the United States
At Tanf military base. Indeed, Mr. Lowcock mentioned
both Raqqa and Rukban in his briefing. Once again,
we would draw attention to the fact that the value of
the conduct of cross-border operations in the light of
developments on the ground has been exaggerated.
This is a mechanism that has been introduced as an
extraordinary measure. It is not transparent and blatantly
undermines Syria’s sovereignty. It is important to move
towards its eventual drawdown. It is also important to
promptly rebuild the Syrian economy, and especially
areas most severely affected by the hostilities there. It
is necessary to eschew double standards and politically
tinged conditions. Many reject such approaches. That
was confirmed during last week’s sixtieth annual
Damascus International Fair with the participation of
official representatives and companies from 48 States.
It is high time to acknowledge the fact that
unilateral sanctions imposed by a number of States
undermine, not the regime, as they have called it, but
are detrimental above all to ordinary Syrian citizens.
This is a vicious and counterproductive practice, not
only in the Syrian context but in other contexts as well.
The Russian Federation will continue to provide
assistance to Syria on the political and humanitarian
fronts. With the assistance of the Russian Centre for
Refugee Reception, Distribution and Settlement,
Syrians continue to return from Lebanon and Jordan.
Overall, since 18 July, approximately 13,500 refugees
have returned to Syria, and 243,000 people have
returned since 30 September 2015. Furthermore, since
1 January, about 149,000 internally displaced persons
have returned to their homes, and since 30 September
2015, 1.2 million people have returned.
Furthermore,
the
Syrian
authorities
are
implementing socioeconomic measures geared towards
generating momentum for rebuilding key infrastructure
in the country. Those measures also aim to continue
the delivery of comprehensive humanitarian assistance
to civilians. Since September 2015, about 30,000
residential structures have been rebuilt or renovated,
as well as more than 5,000 educational and 150
medical institutions. For our part, during that period,
Russia organized and conducted 1,935 humanitarian
operations, during which over 3,000 tons of food and
basic necessities were provided and distributed. Russian

18-2886821/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

18/09/2018

military medical personnel delivered assistance to
approximately 93,000 Syrians.

law. We hope that those proceedings will be carried
through to their logical conclusion.

Despite the general trend towards greater
stabilization, the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
on the whole remains tense. Fighters continue to
intensively shell Syrian army positions and residential
areas in Government-controlled territory from the Idlib
de-escalation zone. In August, there were 554 violations
of the cessation-of-hostilities regime by illegal armed
groups with the use of mortars, anti-aircraft and heavy
machine guns, as a result of which 29 people were
killed and 71 were wounded.

We heard concerns today that the Syrian conflict
is liable to lead to more serious regional consequences.
That is also a concern to us, and we see that some of our
partners are using Syria as a springboard to unleash more
dangerous conflict with far-reaching, unpredictable
consequences. In that connection, we would like to call
once again for genuinely collective efforts to be carried
out with regard to all conflicts in the region, especially
along counter-terrorism lines, and to abandon attempts
to resolve issues in Syria behind Syria’s back.

As a consequence of terrorist bombardments,
civilians continue to perish. On 7 September, terrorists
using multiple-launch rocket systems in Maharda
killed nine civilians, including five women and
three children. Approximately 30 people were wounded.
On 13 September, when terrorists used improvised
launchers in Aleppo, a child was killed and 13 people
were injured.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

At the same time, fighters continue to launch
unmanned attack aerial vehicles in the direction of
the Russian Khmeimim air base. Since July, Russian
air defence has destroyed 58 such drones. In addition,
the Idlib de-escalation zone fighters and White Helmet
activists continue preparations with a view to staging
the use of chemical weapons. There is information
that such fabrications were already filmed in Jisr
ash-Shugur and Khan Shaykhoun. Syrians, including
children who had been abducted from Idlib and Aleppo,
were forced to participate. There is also evidence that
the Al-Nusra Front recently provided barrels of chlorine
to Jaysh Al-Izza in Al-Lataminah, and Kafr Zita. We
once again draw attention to that fact, about which we
have repeatedly warned.
The fighters’ activities are fuelled from abroad,
and that is also being reinforced in the light of blatant
disregard for Syria’s sovereignty, which Damascus has
a legitimate right to protect through the means available
to it, by those who advocate a credible peace process.
Facilitating extremists, even indirectly, is
unacceptable. We note that those who became involved
in the Syrian crisis are finally realizing the mistake
of relying on extremists. Some States have initiated
relevant proceedings to clarify the role of certain
Governments in supporting groups tha thad tarnished
themselves by cooperating with terrorists and through
their numerous violations of international humanitarian
22/26

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
sincere condolences to my dear friend and colleague the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation for yesterday’s
victims martyred as a result of the Israeli aggression
against the city of Latakia. The martyrs of Russia in
Syria are our martyrs. Their blood is our blood. We
share the same enemy and the same victory against the
same kind of terrorism. We, together with our allies,
are partners in the counter-terrorism strategy in Syria,
the region and the world in word and in deed.
We condemn Israel’s most recent aggression
against my country, which was carried out last night.
It is part of Israel’s aggressive policy and desperate
attempt to provide moral support to terrorist groups
following their defeat at the hands of the Syrian Arab
Army and after cleansing the Syrian territories from
their abomination. That comes after the repeated
and continued provocative Israeli violations of the
disengagement agreement of 1974 and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
350 (1974). My country calls on the Security Council
once again to assume its responsibility in maintaining
international peace and security and to immediately
take the necessary and decisive measures to hold Israel
accountable for its terrorism and its crimes, which
constitute a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law.
I was deeply disappointed, but not surprised, to
note that there was no mention of two elements in the
briefings on the humanitarian and the political situation
in Syria provided by the Under-Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy. Neither of them mentioned the
subversive Israeli role in Syria or the terrorist groups
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

operating in my country. That was despite the fact
that my dear friend, Mr. De Mistura, knows well that
we agreed in Geneva on four baskets that constitute
our agenda, one of them is terrorism. Therefore, it is
unacceptable that Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock do
not mention either foreign or domestic terrorism, which
is operative in my country. As Council members know,
Israel attacked my country twice this week. However,
it seems that some members of the Council were not
aware of those two acts of Israeli aggression.
Some permanent Council members continue
to disregard the information that we have been
providing to the Council for more than seven and a
half years. They continue to distort the facts. That is
unprecedented. I will not do what the representatives
of those States are doing. I will not fabricate stories. I
will not make arbitrary accusations. And I will not use
illegal ,desperate and miserable expressions. Rather, I
will use the words of their officials and members of
their Governments against them.
I would like to remind my colleague the
representative of France of a statement made by
Mr. Roland Dumas, former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, on the French television channel La Chaîne
Parlementaire in June 2013:
“Just about two years ago, before the hostilities in
Syria began, I happened to be in England ... where
I met with British officials, some of them friends
of mine, who had sought me out and told me that
something was being planned for Syria ... that the
United Kingdom was preparing a rebel invasion of
Syria ... The operation was long in the making. It was
arranged, conceived and organized with the very
plain goal of removing the Syrian Government.”
Mr. Dumas also said,

S/PV. 8355

(spoke in French)
That was another France. It was the France of
François Mitterrand. It was the France of Dominique de
Villepin. It was the France of Jean-Pierre Chevènement.
And it was the France of Roland Dumas.
(spoke in Arabic)
That is one testimony. I will give the Council
another one that is equally important. It is a statement
made by Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson, former Chief of
Staff to United States Secretary of State Colin Powell. In
a statement to the Real News Network on 11 September,
just a couple of days ago, he stated,
“Those who are calling for aggression against
Syria are looking for any kind of excuse to justify
such aggression. Syria will be their next target,
after Iraq. Their ultimate goal would be to topple
the Iranian Government.”
Colonel Wilkerson went on to say,
“My country, along with Britain and France, does
not have any evidence that the Syrian Government
used chemical weapons at any time in the past.
Moreover, the United States intelligence officers,
including those working illegally in Syria, were not
able to provide any evidence to substantiate their
allegations. To the contrary, all available evidence
points to the fact that terrorist groups were those
that used chemical weapons and carried out
such attacks.”
That is yet another testimony.
(spoke in English)
Once again, it was a different America — that of
Colin Powell and Colonel Wilkerson.
(spoke in Arabic)

“It is important to know, when it comes to this
region, that the Syrian regime has anti-Israeli
intentions. Consequently, everything that happens
in the region [hinges on that]. The Prime Minister
of Israel told me, ‘We are trying to get along with
the countries around us, but those with which we
can’t we will bring down’.”

Those Governments sought to start a war against
my country, Syria, to force its Government to change
its positions, policies and national identity in service
of a new Middle East. According to that plan, new and
warring countries will be established on religious,
faith-based, sectarian and ethnic grounds, just like the
Zionist project of a Jewish Israel, in order to deprive the
Palestinian people of their right to creating their own
independent State. After all, only Israel matters.

That happened in 2010, before the Arab Spring, the
African Autumn and the Asian Summer.

In order to protect the lives of Syrians, there
must be cooperation with the Syrian Government

18-2886823/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

and support to counter terrorism, instead of allowing
Western intelligence officers to support terrorist
groups through the use of deceptive terms, including,
for example, “moderate armed Syrian opposition”,
“non-State armed groups”, “the Islamic Caliphate
State” or “jihadist groups”. None of those terms include
the word “terrorist”, as if there were no terrorism in
Syria, only genetically modified moderate armed
Syrian opposition. We have those from Uzbekistan,
Turkistan, China, Chechnya, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Egypt and Europe. However, they are all genetically
modified armed Syrian opposition.
Let me read out a statement made last week by the
French Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on the
news channel BFM TV.
“The attack by the Syrian army against Idlib might
have direct implications for the security of Europe.”
That statement was also confirmed by the representative
of France a while ago. The Foreign Minister continued,
“This threat might be the result of terrorists
spreading out across the region and moving to
Europe. This security threat will remain as long as
there are many terrorists from Al-Qaida operating
in this region. They number between 10,000 and
15,000 and might be a direct threat to the security
of our region in the future.”
I ask my colleague the representative of France: Why
has the French Government continued to provide
political cover for terrorist groups in Syria, despite the
fact that such groups carried out attacks in Paris at the
Bataclan theatre and in Nice?
I will provide another example, which might be
of interest to my colleague the representative of the
Netherlands. As my colleagues in the Council know, a
few days ago our delegation provided them with some
serious information that was published by the Dutch
media. The Dutch Government has provided support,
funding and logistical assistance to a number of
terrorist groups in Syria, despite the fact that the Dutch
Public Prosecutor designated them as terrorist groups
affiliated with jihadist and Salafist groups. It seems that
there is some disagreement between the Government
and the Public Prosecutor of the Netherlands on that
issue. I ask the representative of the Netherlands: Does
such action by the Dutch Government not violate its
responsibilities as a member of the Security Council,
24/26

18/09/2018

especially when it pertains to maintaining international
peace and security?
To those who continue to boast about interfering
in my country, I reiterate that we will keep working
seriously to achieve a political solution through a
Syrian-led dialogue, without foreign interference. Our
priority throughout the political process will remain
counter-terrorism, ensuring the return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons, the start of
the reconstruction and recovery process and liberating
all remaining Syrian territories from terrorists and
illegal occupying Powers.
In that regard, I would like to ask Mr. Lowcock, who
strangely stated that he would need the approval of the
Syrian Government to deliver humanitarian assistance
to the Rukban camp: Why did he not mention that the
United States occupying Power at the Al-Tanaf camp
refused to allow humanitarian convoys to reach the
Rukban camp and stipulated that aid convoys should be
unloaded 10 kilometres away from the camp? Why did
he not say that?
Pertaining to the constitutional committee, the
Syrian Government has fulfilled its commitment, as
stated by Mr. De Mistura that we have provided a list
of participants.
The Syrian Government would like to thank Russia
and Iran for the efforts of their Presidents during
the most recent summit in Tehran. The Syrian Arab
Republic welcomes the agreement reached on Idlib
province, announced yesterday in the Russian city
of Sochi. The Syrian Government underscores that
the agreement was the result of intense consultations
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian
Federation, with full coordination between the two
countries. The Syrian Government is never the last to be
consulted. No one can sidestep the Syrian Government
in that regard.
The Syrian Arab Republic continues to welcome all
initiatives to stop the bloodshed and restore stability
and security in all areas affected by terrorism. We will
continue our war against terrorism until we liberate all
Syrian territories, whether through military action or
local reconciliation agreements. Such agreements have
proved to be successful in stopping the bloodshed and
restoring stability and security in the areas concerned,
while allowing refugees to return to their homes.
18-28868

18/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In response to the statement made by my colleague
the British Ambassador, the agreement announced
yesterday is time-bound with clear deadlines.
The agreement is a part of previous agreements
on de-escalation zones, established by the Astana
process since the beginning of 2017. The Astana
process has always been committed to respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of the
Syrian Arab Republic, while liberating all Syrian
territories from terrorism, terrorists and illegal foreign
military presence.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague the Permanent Representative of Britain,
who asked what action “the Syrian regime” was taking
to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance. What
kind of question is that? There is no representative of
the Syrian regime in the Security Council, or at the
United Nations. I am the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I would ask the representative of the
United Kingdom not to address a question to a fictitious
person. I do not know such a person, to whom I referred
to as Godot the last time (see S/PV.8344). There is no
representative of Syrian regime at the United Nations,
there is a representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
and there is the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: I would like to remind speakers of
our standard of a five-minute time limit for statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, let me
join others in offering our condolences to our Russian
friends for their loss yesterday.
As the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation explained, the summit between the Turkish
and Russian Presidents in Sochi yesterday focused on
the situation in Idlib. I would also like to share our
views on the outcome of the summit.
First, I would like to recall President Erdoğan’s
article in The Wall Street Journal, to which I referred
here in the Chamber on 11 September (see S/PV.8347):
“Idlib is the last exit before the toll. If the
international community ... fails to take action now,
not only innocent civilians but the entire world
stands to pay the price.”
With that awareness, President Erdoğan and President
Putin met in Sochi yesterday. The summit was an
expression of their determination to find a peaceful

S/PV. 8355

solution to address a major humanitarian disaster in
Idlib. The summit offered an opportunity to discuss
ways and means to implement the understanding
reached in Tehran last Friday, in line with the Astana
spirit of cooperation. The agreement reached in Sochi
builds on the Astana de-escalation arrangement and
aims to achieve the stabilization of the situation and
preserve the de-escalation zone in Idlib; the creation of
the necessary conditions to fight terrorism effectively,
in line with international humanitarian law; the
prevention of a humanitarian catastrophe; and paving
the way for the advancement of the political process.
The memorandum of understanding, which we
will circulate together with our Russian friends, was
signed by the Turkish and Russian Defence Ministers
yesterday and foresees the creation of a demilitarized
zone. The two sides agreed to continue working
on the details of that arrangement. In line with the
memorandum of understanding, all heavy weaponry
will be withdrawn from the zone by 10 October; all
terrorist groups will be removed by 15 October; the
existing Turkish observation posts will be fortified;
Russia will take all the necessary measures to prevent
military operations and attacks on Idlib; Turkey and
Russia will conduct coordinated patrols on both sides
of the demilitarized zone; the coordination centre for
the Astana guarantors will be reinforced in order to
strengthen the sustainability of the ceasefire regime;
and additional measures will be taken to ensure the
freedom of movement of people and goods.
In his briefing, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
once again depicted the dire humanitarian situation in
Idlib. The memorandum of understanding primarily
aims at averting the looming humanitarian tragedy
that the people in Idlib are facing. That arrangement
will not only prevent a military attack on Idlib, but also
serve the ultimate goal of accelerating both the political
process and the finding a negotiated solution in Syria.
As mentioned by Special Envoy De Mistura, efforts
to finalize the constitutional committee are under
way. Turkey hopes to see an acceleration of efforts
for the establishment of an inclusive and credible
committee, for the holding of free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision and for the Syrian
people’s legitimate aspirations for a democratic future
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) to be addressed.
We reiterate our call to the Council and the overall
international community to support our endeavours and
expedite the political process. Our collective efforts to

18-2886825/26

S/PV.8355

The situation in the Middle East

fight terrorism will contribute to the creation of viable
conditions to that end.
In Sochi, the Turkish and Russian Presidents
reaffirmed their resolve to fight terrorism in Idlib and
beyond. We will continue to combat all terrorist groups,
including the Democratic Union Party and the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units, which seek to undermine
the territorial integrity of Syria and represent a direct
threat to Turkey’s national security. That should be a
common source of concern shared by all of us.
As I underlined before the Council on 11 September,
the international community must shoulder its
responsibility and throw its weight behind a political
solution. Millions of Syrians who have suffered
tremendously are putting their faith in us. They deserve
a better future. They deserve to shape the future of
their homeland. We should not, and cannot, fail them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by expressing our condolences to the
Russian delegation over the loss of Russian lives in the
recent tragic events in Syria.
I would also like to express my thanks and
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock for
their efforts, as well as their briefings today.
The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the
agreement between Russia and Turkey to create
a demilitarized buffer zone in the governorate of
Idlib in Syria. The Sochi agreement is the result of
intensive, responsible diplomacy over the past few
weeks in Ankara and Damascus, followed by the
Iran-Russia-Turkey summit in Tehran. The agreement
is based on the Astana process principled approach
and spirit in creating de-escalation zones in order to
reduce the possibility of civilian casualties, while
fighting terrorism.
Stopping
violence
and
bloodshed,
while
eliminating terrorism in the area, is one the most basic
and principled positions in Iran’s foreign policy. As
President Rouhani stressed during the Tehran summit,
combating terrorism requires a comprehensive approach
by taking into account all aspects of that unpleasant
phenomenon. From that perspective, the fight against

26/26

18/09/2018

terrorism in Idlib is an integral part of the mission of
restoring peace and stability to Syria, but that fight
must not harm civilians.
The Russian-Turkish agreement is a step in the right
direction. It is in line with the determination expressed
by the Presidents of Iran, Russia and Turkey in Tehran
to continue cooperating with a view to eliminating
all terrorists, while taking into consideration the
humanitarian aspects. As during the Tehran summit,
the three leaders expressed their strong commitment to
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. That will enable Syria to restore its control
over other parts of its territory. Like any other State,
that is its inherent right.
The international community should welcome
that agreement and positively contribute to its
implementation. We hope that the agreement — within
the framework of the positive and successful Astana
process and in continuation of the recent Tehran
summit and diplomatic efforts by Iran — will quickly
help end disasters for the Syrian people and cleanse the
country of violent elements, while taking into account
humanitarian concerns.
Once again, we stress the need for the return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the ceasefire and national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process; it
is also critical in advancing a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process. The right to determine the
future of Syria belongs exclusively to Syrians.
To that end, cooperation towards establishing and
launching the work of the constitutional committee
is critical. While Syria is passing through a critical
stage in defeating terrorists and regaining its unity and
territorial integrity, the international community should
stand firm in breathing new life into the country. As the
Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria in defeating
terrorists, it will play a constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.
In conclusion, with regard to the allegations of the
United States representative, I must stress that they
reflect onlly endeavours to cover up the failure of
United States polices in Syria.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18-28868
