United Nations

A/RES/55/222

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 121

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/702)]

55/222. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of
18 December 1985, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 47/202 A to D of
22 December 1992, 48/222 A and B of 23 December 1993, 49/221 A to D of
23 December 1994, 50/11 of 2 November 1995, 50/206 A to F of 23 December
1995, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A
to E of 18 December 1998 and 54/248 of 23 December 1999 and its decisions
38/401 of 23 September 1983 and 52/468 of 31 March 1998,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences, 1 the reports of
the Secretary-General 2 and the note by the Secretariat on the distribution of
documentation, 3
Having also considered the report
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4

of the

Advisory

Committee

on

I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences, and
takes note of its report,1 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
2.
Approves the draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the
United Nations for 2001, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, 5 also
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make adjustments to the
calendar of conferences and meetings for 2001 that may become necessary as a
result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth
session;
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/55/32).
A/54/849, A/55/134, A/55/182, A/55/259 and A/55/410.
3
A/AC.172/2000/6.
4
A/55/430.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/55/32), annex.
2

00 57247

A/RES/55/222

4.
Reaffirms its decision that the headquarters rule shall be adhered to by all
bodies, and decides that waivers to the headquarters rule shall be granted solely on
the basis of the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations
recommended by the Committee on Conferences for adoption by the General
Assembly;
5.
Requests the Committee on Conferences and the Secretary-General, when
planning the calendar of conferences and meetings, to avoid simultaneous peak
periods at the various duty stations and to avoid scheduling meetings of related
intergovernmental bodies too close together;
6.
Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat took into account the
arrangements referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A and 54/248
concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Id al-Fitr and
Id al-Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions
when planning their meetings;
7.
Reaffirms the provisions established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 50/11 and reaffirmed in its resolution 54/64 of 6 December 1999
regarding multilingualism;
II
Utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities
1.
Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences to consult with
those bodies that consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of
their allocated resources for the past three sessions with a view to making
appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of
conference-servicing resources;
2.
Requests duty stations away from Headquarters to keep statistics of
requests for servicing of meetings;
3.
Reiterates that meetings of Charter and mandated bodies must be
serviced as a priority;
4.
Decides to include all necessary resources in the budget for the biennium
2002-2003 to provide interpretation services for meetings of regional and other
major groupings of Member States upon request by those groups, on an ad hoc basis,
in accordance with established practice, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, through the Committee on
Conferences, a report on the implementation of this decision;
5.
Notes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings
of Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental
bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far as possible, all
requests for conference services for meetings of regional and other major groupings
of Member States are met;
6.
Notes with appreciation, in particular in view of the increased requests
for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, that services
were provided for 84 per cent of the meetings requested by those groups, in spite of
the difficulties experienced in the meetings programme in 2000, and that 100 per
cent of the requests for facilities only were met;

2

A/RES/55/222

7.
Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some Member States
owing to the lack of conference services for some meetings of regional and other
major groupings of Member States;
8.
Urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to
take into account meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States,
to make provision for such meetings in their programmes of work and to notify the
conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized
conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to
meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide information on meetings of
regional and other major groupings of Member States not serviced by conference
services in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2002-2003;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for
conference services, to ensure that the level of resources proposed for temporary
assistance is commensurate with the full demand for services, estimated on the basis
of current experience;
11. Notes the initial steps taken by the Secretariat to establish a permanent
interpretation service at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and reaffirms that its
decisions in section B, paragraph 24, of resolution 54/248 and in paragraph 180 of
resolution 54/249 of 23 December 1999 should be fully implemented by January
2001;
12. Notes with satisfaction that the creation of a permanent interpretation
service at Nairobi offers great potential for Nairobi as a venue for United Nations
conferences and meetings, and takes note with appreciation of the efforts being
made by the United Nations Office at Nairobi to attract more meetings to its
facilities;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the utilization
rates of interpretation services and conference facilities at all duty stations;
14. Takes note of the information in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the report of the
Secretary-General concerning the improved utilization of conference facilities at the
United Nations Office at Nairobi 6 and the successful experience with respect to the
events and meetings held there in April and May 2000;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to consider improving and modernizing
the conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi in order to
accommodate adequately major meetings and conferences, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, through the Committee on
Conferences;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to issue a revision of administrative
instruction ST/AI/342 on the guidelines for the preparation of host government
agreements falling under General Assembly resolution 40/243 prior to the
substantive session of the Committee on Conferences in 2001, and to take into
account administrative arrangements with respect to the United Nations Office at
Nairobi;

6

A/55/259.

3

A/RES/55/222

17. Welcomes the fact that, despite various constraints, steps have been taken
to increase the utilization of conference centres at the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Economic Commission for Africa, and
notes the plans for the future in this regard;
18. Notes with concern the lack of sufficient operational guidance in the
management of the conference centres at the Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific and the Economic Commission for Africa;
19. Notes with deep concern the inadequate staff structure and the
insufficient financial resources allocated for the marketing of the conference centre
of the Economic Commission for Africa;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible options
to increase further the utilization of the conference centres at the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Economic Commission for
Africa, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session,
through the Committee on Conferences;
III
Documentation- and publication-related matters
1.
Notes with deep concern the low rate of compliance with the six-week
rule for the issuance of documentation, and encourages the Secretary-General, in
view of the impact of late submissions on the timely issuance of documents, to
intensify recent efforts with respect to planning meetings and forecasting
documentation;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that
documentation is available in accordance with the six-week rule for the distribution
of documents simultaneously in the six official languages of the General Assembly;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen accountability and
responsibility measures, where applicable, as requested in section C, paragraph 11,
of its resolution 54/248, to correct the alarming situation concerning the submission
of documentation consistent with the six-week rule, and requests him to submit a
report thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
4.
Invites intergovernmental bodies, during their organizational sessions or
other appropriate periods before the commencement of their substantive work, to
review with author departments the question of the availability of documentation for
the proper functioning of those bodies, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session through the Committee on Conferences;
5.
Decides that there should not be any exemption to the rule that
documents must be distributed in all official languages, and emphasizes the
principle that all documents must be distributed simultaneously in all official
languages before they are made available on United Nations web sites;
6.
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General direct all departments to
include, where appropriate, the following elements in reports originating in the
Secretariat:

4

(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

A/RES/55/222

(c)

Relevant background information;

7.
Reiterates that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the
Secretariat and expert bodies for consideration and action should have conclusions
and recommendations in bold print;
8.
Reiterates its request to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to submit its reports in accordance with paragraph 12 of
General Assembly resolution 53/208 B;
9.
Reaffirms its decision that, if a report is issued late, the reasons for the
delay should be indicated when the report is introduced;
10. Reiterates its decision that, if a report is submitted late to conference
services, the reasons therefor should be included in a footnote to the document;
11. Encourages chairpersons of intergovernmental bodies to institute time
limits, when appropriate, for the introduction of standard documents by the
Secretariat;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the texts of
all new public documents, in all six official languages, and information materials of
the United Nations are made available through the United Nations web site daily and
are accessible to Member States without delay;
13. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to publish, prior to the
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly, an updated version of the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations in the six official languages of the
Organization;
14. Further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to publish, as a
matter of priority, the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations in the six
official languages of the Organization, once their consolidation has been completed;
15. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to eliminate the backlog in
the publication of the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council, and
requests him to publish the current and future issues of the Repertoire in all six
official languages;
16. Notes the recent progress in reducing delays in the issuance of summary
records, and requests the Secretary-General to consider means, including increased
cooperation within the Secretariat, to continue efforts to accelerate their issuance;
17. Notes with concern the comments of the Committee on Conferences
contained in paragraph 112 of its report, 1 and requests the Secretary-General to
implement, as a matter of priority, the provision contained in paragraph 45 of annex
II to its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997 and reiterated in paragraph 7 of its
resolution 54/259 of 7 April 2000, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its fifty-sixth session;
IV
Translation- and interpretation-related matters
1.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue the efforts to
utilize new technologies, such as computer-assisted translation, remote translation,
terminology databases and speech recognition, in the six official languages so as to

5

A/RES/55/222

enhance further the productivity of conference services, and to keep the General
Assembly informed of the introduction and use of any other new technology;
2.
Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that training
opportunities in the six official languages are equally available to all language staff,
including those at duty stations away from Headquarters;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, in exceptional cases where an interpreter
is assigned to an interpretation booth for which he or she has not passed the
requisite competitive examination of the Interpretation Service, to set up an internal
examination with standards similar to those of the competitive examinations of the
Interpretation Service, which the interpreter must pass before such assignment;
4.
Reiterates its understanding that the introduction of remote interpretation
is not intended to replace traditional interpretation systems without the explicit
approval of the General Assembly;
5.
Reaffirms its decision that, in the absence of a decision of the General
Assembly to the contrary, the use of remote interpretation shall not constitute an
alternative to the current institutionalized system of interpretation;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that trials of remote
interpretation are not confined to specific duty stations and that each duty station is
considered as both recipient and provider;
7.
Reaffirms its decision that the use of remote interpretation should not
affect the quality of interpretation or in itself lead to any further reduction in
language posts, nor will it affect the equal treatment of the six official languages;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future reports on the
question of remote interpretation include an analysis of all costs of any proposed
system, its impact on the working conditions of interpreters, the level of service
provided to delegates, the satisfaction of delegations with the interpretation and the
technical aspects of this method of interpretation;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that efforts continue to be
made to improve the quality control of language services at all duty stations;
10. Takes note of the technical difficulties and timing problems, referred to in
paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee,4 regarding remote
interpretation, and requests the Secretary-General to clarify further the technical
issues involved;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to comply with paragraphs 33 to 36 of its
resolution 53/208 A, and also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, through the Committee on Conferences and the
Advisory Committee, a report on possible measures to alleviate the excessive
vacancy rates in language services at some duty stations and to ensure the required
quality of conference services Secretariat-wide;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to implement the
system of incentives to attract language staff to duty stations with high vacancy
rates, and requests him to submit a comprehensive report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-sixth session analysing problems relating to recruitment in language
services at all duty stations and proposing actions to address them;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that translation,
in principle, reflects the specificity of each language;

6

A/RES/55/222

14. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in order to improve
further the quality of translation of documents issued in the six official languages, to
ensure continuous dialogue between translation staff and interpretation staff, among
United Nations headquarters at New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi, and
between translation divisions and Member States with regard to the standardization
of the terminology used;
15. Further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to hold
informational meetings in order to brief Member States periodically on the
terminology used;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct consultations, with Member
States concerned, on the improvement of translation services;
V
Information technology
1.
Urges the Secretary-General to fill expeditiously the three official posts
in the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat relating to web sites in
Arabic, Chinese and Russian, in accordance with paragraph 151 of General
Assembly resolution 54/249;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session on policy issues regarding the translation of non-parliamentary
and public information material into all official languages and the possibility of
providing those materials on the United Nations web site in all official languages;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-sixth session on the implementation of the new re-engineered optical disk
system, referred to in paragraph 9 of his report; 7
VI
1.
Reaffirms its decision 38/401 concerning the prohibition of smoking in
small conference rooms and the discouragement of smoking in large conference
rooms;
2.
Calls upon representatives of Member States to abide strictly by its
decision 38/401, and strongly encourages all users of United Nations conference
facilities to refrain from smoking in order to avoid exposing non-smokers to
involuntary passive smoking;
3.
rooms.

Strongly discourages smoking in the immediate vicinity of conference

89th plenary meeting
23 December 2000

7

A/54/849.

7
