S/PV.7943

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7943rd meeting

Thursday, 18 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 28 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/379)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14188 (E)
*1714188*

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 28 April 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/379)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/379, which contains a letter dated
28 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the fifty-first report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to be
here today to brief the Security Council on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country in which the
international community’s commitment and unity
remains crucial to achieving our shared goal, which
is none other than sustainable peace and security in
the Balkans.
(spoke in English)
These are special days for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as it will celebrate on 22 May the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its admission as a full-fledged State
Member of the United Nations, along with Croatia
2/24

18/05/2017

and Slovenia. But these days are also special for
my home country, Austria, as it was presiding the
Security Council in the month of May 1992, exactly
25 years ago. The Ambassador of Austria at that time,
Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, as President of the Security
Council, on 20 May 1992 (see S/PV.3079) proposed
that the Council adopt a decision recommending to
the General Assembly that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted to the United Nations. At the same meeting,
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
755 (1992), endorsing that recommendation. Upon that
historic recommendation, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
admitted under General Assembly resolution 46/237,
adopted without a vote, 25 years ago, on 22 May 1992,
as a Member of the United Nations.
I wish to use this occasion to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina wholeheartedly, and I am very
glad that — as predicted 25 years ago — Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made a significant contribution to
the work of the Organization, most recently with its
successful tenure as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, as well as — and I stress this — with
its peacekeeping forces worldwide.
As this is my first opportunity to do so, I would also
like to take a moment to express my sincere and heartfelt
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of
Ambassador Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin, who had such a
dramatic impact on the work of the Council over many
years. He was also involved in the talks on the former
Yugoslavia as Special Representative of the President
of the Russian Federation.
When we speak of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
should also keep in mind what has happened over the
past six months. I must say that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has maintained its commitment to making progress
along the path of Euro-Atlantic integration, while also
continuing to face internal challenges to its sustainable
stability and advancement.
On the positive side, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities formally received the European Union (EU)
questionnaire in December, and the adaptation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU
took place that same month. I wholeheartedly welcomed
both developments and have consistently called upon
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities at all levels to
maintain their focus on the EU agenda.
I would also like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts of the EU, under the capable leadership of
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

its Special Representative Lars-Gunnar Wigemark,
towards assisting the Bosnian authorities in achieving
their aspirations to integration with the Union. Equally
significant are the efforts of Enlargement Commissioner
Hahn and of High Representative Federica Mogherini,
who has invited the Balkan leaders to an important
regional meeting in Brussels next week.
Equally encouraging was the consensus and
forward-looking pragmatism demonstrated during
the reporting period by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency in adopting the so-called defence review of
military forces last November — an issue which had
been outstanding for quite some time. This is one of the
requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina in its efforts
to participate in the NATO membership action plan.
On the regional level, bilateral cooperation and
overall reconciliation between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia have continued to improve, in large
part due to the committed engagement of Serbian
Prime Minister and soon to be President Aleksandar
Vučić, and also through the efforts of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers Chair Denis Zvizdić.
Good cooperation between Sarajevo and Belgrade,
and also between Sarajevo and Zagreb, has manifested
itself through joint Government sessions and through
the visit of Croatian Prime Minister Andrej Plenković
to Mostar.
Despite all these positive developments, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has also seen some significant
challenges over the past six months. First and foremost
was the political controversy between Bosniak
political representatives and Serb political parties
over whether Bosnia and Herzegovina should submit
a request for revision of the International Court of
Justice 2007 Judgment in the genocide case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro. This
issue split Bosniak and Serb parties and officials
within the state-level coalition to an extent not seen
for many years, delaying progress. Two different legal
interpretations on whether the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency needed to renew the mandate of the Bosnian
agent to the Court before submitting such a request
proved to be irreconcilable, increasing tensions within
the Presidency.
The now former agent of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the International Court of Justice, Sakib Softić
submitted the request for revision to the Court, which
later proved to be even more controversial when it

S/PV.7943

came to light that the Court had already notified
him that a renomination of the agent by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities would be needed. The
situation was ultimately resolved when the Court made
its decision on the non-admissibility of the request, but
the overall dynamic whereby leading politicians focus
disproportionately on ethnically divisive issues, while
showing little urgency in addressing the need for real
reforms, is a serious cause for concern.
The second negative trend during the reporting
period surrounded the activities of the Republika
Srpska authorities to implement their unconstitutional
referendum, including ostentatious celebrations of the
9 January holiday, with the participation of some Serb
members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces.
In addition, during the reporting period, some
Croat politicians intensified calls for the federalization
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was understood by
some to imply the further ethnic division of the country
into three to four federal units, one of which would
have a Croat majority.
Increasingly, the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina appear unable to act even in their own
self-interest in a win-win situation, for instance
in addressing the commitments made under the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) arrangement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The continued failure to meet
the IMF prior actions for the completion of the first
quarterly review will hold back significant international
assistance to the country’s fiscal stability and economic
development. In that regard, I would like to express my
praise and support for Francisco Parodi, IMF Resident
Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
ongoing efforts of the IMF to encourage meaningful
structural reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Furthermore, the situation with regard to rule of law
in the country continues to deteriorate. Corruption is a
serious problem, and continued challenges to state-level
institutions, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court and the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, contribute to the further weakening of
the rule of law.
Finally, during the past six months, the frequency
and intensity of the Republika Srpska President’s
public remarks advocating for secession have lessened,
although the independent status of Republika Srspka
remains part of his party’s official platform, and only

17-141883/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

this week he publically expressed his certainty that such
an independence referendum will eventually take place.
The lessening of such rhetoric follows the
imposition of financial and travel sanctions against the
Republika Srpska President by the United States. This
reaffirms to me that we, as an international community,
can have an impact when we are ready to send a strong
message to authorities and leaders who openly reject
the rule of law and reopen the wounds of the past that
they are leading themselves and their constituencies
into isolation.
In sharp contrast to divisive rhetoric are the
efforts of high-school students in the historic city of
Jajce, who, with their determination and perseverance,
prevented the partition of their high school based on
ethnic segregation, as planned by some political parties.
Equally encouraging is today’s news from Srebrenica,
where Bosniaks and Serbs, Muslims and Orthodox
students, are celebrating together their graduation from
high school. They have stressed that we are all human
beings and that, with their common festivities, they
wish to demonstrate their mutual respect and desire for
reconciliation. The students said that this is the latest
and most realistic message out of Srebrenica. They
have stressed unity, love and a common future. This is,
of course, a good message.
Looking ahead, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
have its next general election in the autumn of 2018.
With the difficult period surrounding the International
Court of Justice crisis and the celebration of Republika
Srpska Day over, political discussions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will now most likely focus on amendments
to the national election law. Thus far, no consensus has
been reached on this issue, which has the potential to
create a new political stalemate in the country.
Keeping in mind that some 18 months remain
before the elections, I would strongly encourage the
current authorities to make the most of the forthcoming
period and demonstrate to voters that they are able
to look past divisive issues and deliver meaningful
reforms to improve the economic situation in the
entities and throughout the country. Foremost on this
list should be the economic reforms demanded by the
country’s international creditors, as well as EU-related
issues, in order to open the early possibility of future
EU candidate status for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I also expect the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, foremost the parties represented in the
4/24

18/05/2017

State Parliament, to finally resolve the legislative
vacuum that has prevented citizens in Mostar from
electing local representatives since 2012. That will
require compromise on all sides and willingness to
resolve issues pragmatically.
Finally, it is simply unfathomable that, more than
seven years after the European Court of Human Rights
ruled that the current electoral system discriminates
against individuals that do not belong to one of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s three constituent peoples,
a considerable number of citizens are still denied the
basic right to run for public office on the basis of
ethnicity. The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must correct the discrimination identified in the SejdicFinci case and in related cases as a priority.
Six months ago (see S/PV.7803) I described two
parallel trends in Bosnia and Herzegovina — positive
advancement in Euro-Atlantic integration and a negative
tendency to flout the rule of law and focus on divisive
backward-looking issues. With the continued support of
the international community, the elected representatives
of Bosnia and Herzegovina can make progress and
ensure that the first trend becomes the dominant one,
but they will need to refocus their attention.
In the meantime, the international community
should retain all the instruments at hand. We need to
be mindful of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a complex political and security environment where
negative scenarios can quickly endanger the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the progress achieved after Dayton.
For that reason, I am firmly convinced that there is still
a need to maintain the EU military force on the ground
with an executive military mandate, and I fully support
its extension in November, when it is reviewed by the
Security Council.
The European Union Force is a relatively inexpensive
but necessary investment in peace and stability in the
Balkans. In my view, it provides an essential baseline
of physical and psychological security that supports the
EU, my Office and other international organizations in
our pursuit of our common goal of sustainable peace
and prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
people. Recent scenes witnessed in the Parliament of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remind
us of how quickly an incident can escalate in the
Balkan countries.
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7943

Despite the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made in the past two years in its pursuit of EU
candidate-country status, the country still faces
fundamental challenges. As we enter the third decade
of peace implementation, it cannot be assumed that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on a glide path to a peaceful,
viable State that is irreversibly on course towards
European integration.

strong commitment to implementing its reform
agenda — focused on security, stability, democracy
and socioeconomic development. We welcome positive
ongoing dialogue between the Governments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia — with regular contact at
very high levels — and we welcome the results of the
meeting held in Belgrade in January. We encourage
them to carry those results forward.

I thank the international community for their
continued attention and commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is necessary, but insufficient
to deliver the changes needed to bring Bosnians and
Herzegovinians greater prosperity, stability and
membership in Euro-Atlantic institutions. Only
the leaders and institutions can do that. But we
can — and in my view we must — continue to offer
institutional support and a vision based on integration
and functionality.

The European Union (EU) Force must also
focus on converting defence properties into State
and civilian structures, greater fiscal responsibility
and sustainability, strengthening the Parliamentary
Assembly and developing media and broadcasting
communication. The country needs further support in
order to improve its energy system and infrastructure,
foreign trade, economic relations and other areas
of socioeconomic development. The question of
returning refugees and displaced persons and their
resettlement must also be addressed. More needs to be
done to improve the daily lives of the citizens and to
promote reconciliation.

In addition we must be firm in upholding the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, while providing a framework of stability
and respect for the Peace Agreement. In those things,
our commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
wonderful and talented people remains unwavering.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank High
Representative Inzko for his substantial report
(S/2017/379, annex). Our delegation would like to refer
to some key salient points and make some observations
and recommendations.
Obviously, we see progress, but there are some areas
that need close monitoring. The recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must continue to receive
attention. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a country
in transition. It needs the support of all if it is to
become a nation with strong State institutions with
inclusive dialogue in its democratic procedures and
trust in progress and normalization. We urge all parties
to the Peace Agreement to comply with all procedures
and institutions that are integral components of that
settlement, including the Constitutional Court.
Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which in turn has demonstrated its

The progress achieved on the EU integration
track will catalyse reconciliation and resolve longstanding issues while addressing the various reforms.
It is equally important for the political leadership to
demonstrate responsibility and accountability. The
strong engagement of the international community is
an obvious necessity for the sustainable development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and must include measures
to improve housing, education and health care, and
promote gender equality with the active involvement of
civil society.
Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs international
support to fight corruption, terrorism and organized
crime. In that regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the
initiatives aimed at combating violent extremist
activities, including the training of Da’esh fighters,
as well as the reintegration of such fighters into the
community. A good example is the strategy of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on preventing and combating of
terrorism for the 2015-2020 period. The strategy
seeks to protect the rule of law, good governance and
human rights, in order to maintain peace, security and
stability in the region. Given its impact on European
stability, that work should be followed closely by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the EU, the European Union Force and NATO.

17-141885/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

18/05/2017

Finally, the international community should
support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s move towards
stability for inclusiveness in the political success of the
country and fostering ethnic harmony in cooperation
on national programmes. Ultimately, we must reach a
stage of stability, while overseeing the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement, which
will demonstrate a new level of peace and prosperity.

Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
it was unlawful to celebrate Republika Srpska Day
on 9 January. This one-sided, politicized decision
compelled the Bosnian Serb authorities to resort to the
highest form of democracy: the free expression of the
will of citizens. The recommendational nature of the
results of the referendum was underscored in the recent
Republic Srpska report to the Secretary-General.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened very carefully to the briefing by
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. We also thoroughly reviewed his
report (S/2017/379, annex) and must say once again, as
was the case on other occasions, that the document does
not provide an objective narrative of the country. It is
a one-sided account with politicized assessments. We
call upon Mr. Inzko to change his credo and to stop
blaming the Bosnian Serbs — and recently Croats — for
all the difficulties. Instead, he must focus on moving
towards dialogue based on mutual respect that takes
into account the needs and concerns of all.

As a result, the decision was made to introduce
changes into the law on Republika Srpska’s main
holiday. This decision was not questioned. We did not
agree with the statement that celebrating Republika
Srpska Day had caused the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina or the Republika Srpska to deteriorate.
This is not borne out by the facts, and there have been no
negative consequences. The conclusions reached about
the concerns of the Bosniaks who live in Republika
Srpska, including refugees, are simply made up and
have nothing to do with reality.

In the course of recent months, the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina deteriorated and
culminated in a very deep constitutional crisis at the
end of February. That resulted from the attempts of
politicians in Sarajevo to carry out a review of the 2007
verdict of the International Court of Justice in the case
Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro.
We would like to underscore that these steps bypassed
the Presidency as well as other pan-Bosnian structures,
thereby undermining their efficiency and authority.
This represents a very alarming trend in the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This is weakening the trend of having a mutually
respectful dialogue, compromise and consensus among
all constituent entities on all theimportant issues. Let
us not forget that this principle forms the letter and the
spirit of the Dayton Agreement. It is the basis and the
foundation of national reconciliation, as well as a gauge
and a guarantee of stability and security in the country
and in the region as a whole.
In the meantime, the Dayton Agreement and its key
basic principles are being attacked; this did not begin
just recently. Let us recall the situation that prevailed
in the summer of 2016, when the results of the census
were announced and the well-founded objections of
Bosnian Serbs were ignored. Let us also recall the
trials and tribulations surrounding the ruling of the
6/24

The situation in Republika Srpska can be
characterized as stable and sustainable, including in
Srebrenica, to which special attention is being paid by
the international community. There is no justification,
therefore, for the one-sided sanctions introduced last
year by the former United States Administration against
Republika Srpska. This decision needs to be rescinded.
Unfortunately, we cannot speak of stability and
sustainability in connection with Bosnian institutions
and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
addition to the provocative attempt to review the
decision of the International Court of Justice, it is
also dangerous that a number of leaders are not ready
to agree on key issues relating to equality for the
representatives of all ethnicities in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Chronic issues are facing Mostar, where elections
have not been held since 2008, and the implementation
of the European Court of Human Rights ruling on
Sejdić and Finci. In addition, the issue of introducing
changes to the electoral law relating to legislative
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina is problematic. We
are convinced, and let me underscore this point once
again, that the electoral law must reflect the interests of
all three constituent entities of the country, which is the
basic philosophy of Dayton. The key to contemporary
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina lies in the
fact that the level of inter-ethnic trust is low, a trend
to which we need to pay special attention, as does the
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

High Representative, because he represents the entire
international community, not just a part of it.
We need to stop appointing guilty parties. Once
again we need to work on promoting dialogue. We
must stop telling untruthful stories about separatist
tendencies in Banja Luka and inventing negative
trends with respect to Republika Srpska. The President
of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, in his most
recent report to the Secretary-General, countered all
such accusations. It would be useful to cite excerpts
from this official document in the report of the
High Representative.
Given the current political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we see no danger to regional
stability. However, the evolution of some processes
following a negative scenario with the involvement
of external forces, including extremist andterrorist
forces, could make the situation into a source of
concern. Unfortunately, the High Representative has
paid minimal attention to the important topic of the
spread of extremist religious teachings in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But this is something that exists, and the
international community must monitor the situation
very closely.
The quality and depth of the analysis contained
in the High Representative’s report leaves a lot to be
desired. Once again, we see a biased attitude towards
Serbs, as well as unacceptable comparisons and
historic parallels, for which the High Representative
will have to apologize later. Mr. Inzko spent more than
a decade in the region, so he should not make those
kinds of allegations. It is not entirely clear from the
report how exactly the High Representative is helping
in the implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina of
the 5+2 agenda, on the drawdown of the Office of the
High Representative. There has been no progress in
that respect; the spectrum of preconditions and criteria
is so wide that we cannot count in its implementation
happening anytime soon. Instead, Mr. Inzko is very
fond of promoting the Euro-Atlantic agenda. This is
not his mandate. He is a representative of the entire
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the current conditions, we see no added value in
the remaining elements of the international presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support the closing of the
Office of the High Representative drawing down his
the Bonn powers as quickly as possible, because they
have outlived their usefulness, as have the protectorate

S/PV.7943

methods. They do not help national reconciliation but
impede the harmonious development of the country as
a whole.
Russia, as one of the guarantors of the Dayton
Peace Agreement will continue firmly promoting
the stabilization process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
abiding very strictly by the Dayton Agreement. It
is unacceptable to try to review its principles, which
are enshrined in Security Council resolutions. We
are committed to transferring full responsibility for
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to Bosnians
themselves. All changes must come about as a result of
a conscious choice by the Bosnian side and be carried
out strictly in line with the consensus provided for in
the Dayton agreement.
We are interested in the development of a mutually
beneficial cooperation in Bosnia and its entities
and ensuring that there is true equality for all three
constituent entities in the country.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his update on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Office of the High Representative has played
an essential role over 22 years to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina move towards peace and prosperity and to
secure the stability of the region as a whole.
I want to express our sincere thanks to High
Representative Inzko for his tireless efforts and
convey our strong support for his mandate as the final
authority under the Dayton Agreement with regard to
the interpretation of the civilian implementation of the
peace agreement.
The United States remains dedicated to upholding
the Dayton Peace Accords, maintaining the sovereignty
and territorial Integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
promoting its continued development and integration.
We commend Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
towards those goals and integration with Euro-Atlantic
institutions. The completion of the defence review
in November, continued progress towards NATO
standards, the registration of defence properties and the
work with European Union are all positive steps.
Continued progress towards integration with
both NATO and the European Union, however, will
require vision, political will and real follow-through
on commitments, but, for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
achieve its full potential, it will have to resolve long-

17-141887/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

standing political issues. Bosnia and Herzegovina
must continue diligently to enhance the rule of law,
address corruption and improve the overall political
climate in the country for the benefit of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is particularly important to
address reforms now before campaigning for the 2018
elections begins.
We share the concerns voiced by High Representative
Inzko about the actions of anyone who seeks to
erode state-level institutions whether by ignoring the
decisions of the Constitutional Court and acting outside
the established decision-making process or advocating
for further divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. United
States sanctions against Republika Srpska President
Milorad Dodik should be a warning to those who seek
to undermine the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States reiterates its strong support
for ongoing efforts to make sure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We anticipate the day when we can say
with absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a peaceful, viable State irreversibly on course for
European integration. We are not there yet, but look
forward to Bosnia and Herzegovina meeting the
objectives and conditions established by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. We encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s leaders and all members of the
international community to support the actions and
reforms needed to reach that milestone. Until that
time, the international community must deliver on
its commitment to provide all necessary support and
funding to the Office of the High Representative to
fulfil its mandate and goals for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in welcoming back Mr. Inzko to the Security Council
and thanking him for his report (S/2017/379, annex)
and briefing. He has the United Kingdom’s continued
support in his role as High Representative. We are
grateful for all the work that he does for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its people.
Looking back over the reporting period, it is
clear that 2017 was full of promise for Boznia and
Herzegovina. The path to accession to the European
Union (EU) lay ahead — finally unblocked after years
of inertia — and the reform agenda had begun to
deliver the jobs and growth for which so many cried out
when they took to the streets in 2014. Yet as the High
8/24

18/05/2017

Representative’s report makes clear, narrow interests,
whether personal or political, have instead set back
progress this year and dampened the prospects and
potential of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On too many occasions this year, Bosnia’s leaders
returned to the divisions of the past instead of delivering
for the future. Those setbacks have only served to
distract attention away from much needed progress
on the reform agenda embodying reforms that would
promote greater security stability and prosperity across
the country. We clearly saw that in the celebrations in
the Republika Srpska on 9 January.
The referendum on the national debt was in
clear defiance of the Bosnian Constitutional Court’s
authority and a direct challenge to the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The participation of Serb members of the
Bosnian armed forces raised tensions even further and
underscored the urgent need to implement the defence
review. Furthermore, the continued efforts of Bosnian
Croat politicians to advocate for electoral reform this
year have also distracted attention from the reform
agenda and much needed socioeconomic reforms. We
have seen economic legislation blocked and delayed
because leaders have chosen to act in the interests of
one of the constituent peoples and not in the interest of
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s people.
Finally, we have seen the Bosniak member of the
Presidency undermine trust in the ruling coalition by
unilaterally and unsuccessfully launching a revision of
the legal case accusing Serbia of complicity in war-time
genocide. That sort of backward-looking and divisive
politicking has no place in 2017.
There is still time for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
leaders to deliver this year. Through the reform agenda,
they have a clear map charting the way ahead. It is a
path that will lead to growth and stability, but one that
needs renewed commitment and engagement. It is a
path that remains central to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
EU membership — an aspiration shared by so many
across the country. It remains, however, a path not yet
taken, and that has not been without cost. More than
$75 million dollars of International Monetary Fund
(IMF) funding was delayed late last week by the failure
to adopt the law on excise duties. More than $1 billion
of further IMF funding now at risk.
As my Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson, made
clear during his visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina last
month, it is long past time for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

leaders to work together so as to deliver the reforms
that would enable the country to compete and thrive
in the modern global economy. During the past recent
months, we have seen that they can find common
ground. The successful repeat elections in Stolac show
that the authorities can deliver for the people. But it
is also clear that, until national interests trump narrow
interests, stability in Bosnia will not be entrenched and
all concerns about the political and security situation
will remain, because continued divisive rhetoric
and repeated political crises only put pressure on the
country and distract from much needed reforms.
We therefore share the High Representative’s
assessment that the European Union-led peacekeeping
force with an executive mandate remains vital.
Accordingly, we will support the retention of that crucial
asset when its mandate is up for renewal in November.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the High
Representative for his briefing and reiterate our support
for his work.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.
At the outset, allow me to emphasize that the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the European
Union. The country has made significant steps forward
during the past year, thereby demonstrating its ability
to find unity of intent and capacity to embark upon
difficult but necessary structural reforms. The reform
agenda, which was developed with the assistance
of the European Union and international financial
institutions, has outlined the key areas of action to
trigger development and consolidate the stability of
the country. Nevertheless, the recent failure to adapt
key legislative reforms required by the International
Monetary Fund risks jeopardizing the results achieved.
We call on all institutions and political forces to
stay committed to the reform process and maintain
momentum towards the fulfilment of political and
economic goals. Such reforms are needed, first and
foremost by, the people. The political leadership will
be held accountable based on the results that it delivers
to its citizens.
I underscore that the reform agenda has paved
the way for the country to present a formal request of
accession to the European Union. We look forward to
the finalization of the questionnaire of the European
Commission and encourage the authorities to keep

S/PV.7943

this goal in focus and achieve it through efficient
coordination of all institutional levels.
This is indeed a crucial time for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For that reason, we urge all institutions
and political forces to refrain from raising issues that
could divert attention from the reform agenda and the
European track. Recent political tensions must be set
aside. Any dispute should be addressed through frank
and inclusive dialogue and by abiding fully with the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in full respect
for and cooperation with the institutions established
therein, starting with the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We expect that the discussion on the Election Law
will be addressed as much as possible in a consensual
way, without endangering the institutional architecture,
and with the aim of establishing a functional legal
framework for the elections in autumn 2018. At the
same time, it is important to consider how the need for
institutional reform represents an important step that
Bosnia will be called on to fully accomplish in the future
in the perspective of the European integration path.
Ethnic divisions are still entrenched in Bosnian
society. We call on all the authorities to tackle them
and to focus on the many needs of the Bosnian people.
The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially the
youngest, do not need divisive rhetoric. They deserve
concrete opportunities to build the future in their own
country. They want to be recognized as enjoying the
same rights and freedoms as all European citizens.
From outside, we will continue to provide support along
with the European Union.
Secondly, I would like to add that the regional
dimension is of the utmost importance. Integration and
cooperation among Western Balkan countries is key
to their stabilization and development and conducive
to their European path. It will strengthen mutual
confidence, improve connectivity and freedom of
movement, develop the private sector and encourage
youth mobility. That is true especially for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As Chair of the Western Balkan process
in 2017, Italy is engaged in a fruitful dialogue with all
Western Balkan countries to identify with them their
priorities to boost regional integration. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is actively contributing, as it has already
proved by hosting a regional summit last March in
preparation of the annual Western Balkan summit that
Italy will host in Trieste on 12 July. We are committed

17-141889/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to making this entire process meaningful and beneficial
to these countries. In a few days, on 24 May, we will
host another preparatory ministerial meeting in Rome.
In conclusion, our support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina is driven by respect for its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as enshrined in the Dayton Peace
Agreement; our full support to the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea, authorized by the Council;
and our staunch commitment to accompanying the
path Bosnia and Herzegovina has chosen towards the
European Union. In that regard, we urge the country
to redouble its efforts to take forward the 5+2 agenda
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of High Representative and to
steadily advance in approaching the European Union.
As the country’s stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved on reforms and
on the European Union path, we look forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We, too, align ourselves with
the statement to be made by the Head of the Delegation
of the European Union (EU).
I should like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr Valentin Inzko, for his
briefing this morning and for the work he and his team
are doing on the ground. Mr Inzko is the seventh High
Representative since the creation of the Office under
the Dayton Accords 22 years ago. When Carl Bildt was
appointed as the first High Representative in 1995, he
said that
“the history of the conflict in Bosnia — as well
as in all of the former Yugoslavia — is the history
of the most flagrant violations of human rights we
have seen in recent European history”.

18/05/2017

after the war to rebuild their country, while others
remained and have enriched our society, including on
the football field. We have contributed personnel to the
United Nations Protection Force, the Implementation
Force, the Stabilization Force and, most recently, the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Althea.
Sweden’s Foreign Minister Margot Wallström
recently visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, where she
welcomed progress in the country’s EU accession
process and reiterated our firm support for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s continued EU integration, while
underlining the importance of dedicated implementation
of the reform agenda, focusing on challenges regarding
socioeconomic development, corruption, organized
crime and fundamental freedoms. These reforms,
including that of the Election Law, need to be pursued
in an inclusive and transparent manner in order to
be sustained. Minister Wallström urged Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political leaders to remain focused on
their common goal of a better future for all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, irrespective of party
affiliation or ethnicity. While Bosnians will set the
pace for their country’s EU integration, Sweden will
continue to assist, both politically and through our
development cooperation.
Looking forward, there are three points that I
would like to make.
First, we welcome the relatively calm and
stable security situation, as reported by the High
Representative. The recurrence of nationalistic rhetoric
and incidences of ethnically motivated disputes is of
concern, however, particularly in light of regional
instability and the weak functionality of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina state. All parties should do everything
possible to avoid such rhetoric and actions, which
undermine the reform process.

Despite the fact that challenges still remain, High
Representative Inzko’s briefing today underlines the
remarkable progress that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made since then. This has happened thanks to the efforts
and support of successive High Representatives and the
international community, not least the European Union,
which has remained committed to building an equitable,
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, the Dayton Accords provide a framework
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The unity of the country is crucial to its further
development. It is important that efforts towards
continued reconciliation and an inclusive society be
supported. In that regard, crimes committed during
the war, including sexual and gender-based violence,
should be addressed. Impunity threatens stability and
social cohesion, making reconciliation more difficult.

Sweden has shared the road with Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its journey. During the war, Sweden
offered refuge to many Bosnian refugees. Some returned

Thirdly, as stability continues to be strengthened,
there is a need for a discussion on the reconfiguration of
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

10/24

17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7943

including the phasing out of the executive mandate of
EUFOR Althea, to ensure stronger national ownership
and responsibility. For that reason, we welcome the
strategic review of the mandate of EUFOR Althea this
autumn, which will serve as an important basis for
evaluation of the continued mandate for the mission.

region. Two days ago, the Council discussed Kosovo (see
S/PV.7940). In the past few months we have witnessed
tensions and even an attempted coup d’état in the
Balkans. Those developments all demonstrate that the
shift from a post-conflict to a pre-conflict environment
in the region is, unfortunately, still possible.

Finally, as EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini said in the Chamber only last week (see
S/PV.7935), the countries of the Western Balkans,
including Bosnia and Herzegovina, have made
impressive steps forward towards peace, regional
cooperation and economic growth. The European
Union has been instrumental in these efforts by
creating a European perspective. That is not in doubt.
By continuing the path of reform, the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will take their place in a Union of over
500 million people committed to prosperity, peace,
stability and equality for all its citizens.

Of course, the problems and challenges of each
country are very different and sometimes incomparable
but their roots are rather similar. Quite often, internal
tensions are stoked by certain external players, who stir
up instability in the Balkans to reverse European and
Euro-Atlantic integration of the region and to keep the
Balkan States in the imagined sphere of influence. It is
an irresponsible policy to conduct in a region that is as
complex as the Balkans.

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko for his important
briefing and assure him of Ukraine’s full support
for his activities. In the current circumstances of
political instability and internal tensions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, his role and leadership have become even
more important.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
deliver on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Despite the Council’s efforts and calls on the
competent authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
work actively to consolidate the results of the political
process, engage in dialogue to settle their differences
and comprehensively implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the internal situation in that country
remains tense, with a risk of further escalation. The
need to overcome selfish interests and ethnic divisions
and reach the necessary progress in the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda is as pressing as never before. In that
regard, Ukraine condemns the decision of the Republika
Srpska authorities to cease all communications and
contact with the Office of the High Representatives, as
well as their denial of access to official information and
documents. I would like to underline that such actions
violate the General Framework Agreement for Peace
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and are
therefore unacceptable.
Unfortunately, existing differences in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are not unique in the Balkans. Political
tensions are becoming the new normal in the whole

I recall the Council’s discussion before and after the
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) in November 2016.
Ukraine and many other Council members then strongly
condemned the holding of a so-called referendum by
the authorities of Republika Srpska, which was in clear
contravention of the final and binding decisions of the
Constitutional Court. Despite that condemnation and
calls for restraint, as well as an annulment of the results
of the so-called referendum by Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court, the Republika Srpska authorities
continued their provocative actions, violating the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Such actions
include the “Republika Srpska Day” celebrations,
with the participation of the army’s Third Infantry
Regiment, the adoption of the law on “Republika
Srpska Day”, divisive rhetoric and threats of cessation,
rejection of the authority of the High Representative
and many others.
During the negotiations on resolution 2315 (2016),
many Council members, including Ukraine, insisted
on the inclusion of condemnation of the so-called
referendum, as that would have sent a strong and clear
signal to the authorities of the Republika Srpska.
That did not happen due to opposition by the Russian
Federation. Why was that? In the light of the recent
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the answer
is obvious. The failure to take resolute consolidated
steps against separatist actions by the leaders of
the Republika Srpska challenges the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and may lead to the destabilization of the Balkans.
It would thus would punch another big hole in the
infamous instability belt. Ukraine joins the High
Representative’s call and underscores that the entities

17-1418811/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

have no right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and that the General Framework Agreement for Peace
guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the constitutional position
of the entities.
We are encouraged that, despite the negative
developments, during the reporting period we
also witnessed substantial progress by Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path to European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. In particular, I commend the adoption of
the long overdue defence review and the signing of
the protocol on the adoption of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union. We
also look forward to the EU Commission opinion on
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU membership application
and hope that it will attain the status of a candidate
country in the near future.
Ukraine commends the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea for its efforts to enable the
security forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to operate in
an independent manner and to participate in building a
peaceful society. We look forward to a strategic review
of the issue by the European Union.
It is important to continue efforts to implement the
reform agenda, which includes socioeconomic issues,
the rule of law and public administration reforms. Of
equal significance is to demonstrate progress in the
functioning of the judiciary, including through the
implementation of the relevant Constitutional Court
decisions and the fight against corruption, organized
crime, radicalization and terrorism. Such progress is
essential for the further stability and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the whole region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia takes note
of the report (S/2017/379,annex) presented by the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko.
Once again, Bolivia reaffirms its full support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We call upon all parties to support and
implement the Dayton Peace Accords as the legal basis
that could pave the way for stability and the peaceful
settlement of differences between the parties, with a
view to achieving lasting peace.
12/24

18/05/2017

We also take note of the work of High Representative
Inzko and we encourage him to continue his efforts
in fulfilling his mandate, according to principles of
transparency and impartiality, through an inclusive
dialogue that takes into account the approaches and
opinions of all actors involved, in accordance with the
Dayton Peace Accords.
In that regard, Bolivia urges the parties to continue
to work for the good of their country and the welfare of
its constituent peoples, who control their own future and
are fully sovereign in their decisions. We call on them
to continue their joint efforts to foster dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in order to advance
respect for human rights, cooperation and economic
and social development. Similarly, we also encourage
the parties to step up their efforts in the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda, as a requirement for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
Finally, given the complex situation in the region,
we would like to urge the international community to
pay attention to the concerns of all parties involved,
with a neutral and equitable approach to avoid repeating
errors of the past, while supporting and encouraging the
development and well-being of this brotherly country.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing.
France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered shortly on behalf of the European Union.
More than 20 years after the Dayton-Paris
Agreement was signed, it continues to be the key to
institutional stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
unanimous adoption in November last year of resolution
2315 (2016) served to underscore that all the members of
the Security Council share the same cardinal principles
with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also recalled
the urgent need for everyone to abide by the principles
and institutions set up by the Dayton-Paris Agreement
and respect the desires of all of the country’s stakeholders
with regard to the European Union, as well expressing
support for the presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea, which, for the time being,
has an executive mandate.
The unity of the Council on that common basis
conveys a message of peace to a region that remains
fragile, as the past few months have shown. It reflects
the fact that the international community agrees to
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

support the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which cannot be called
into question by any one of its entities, and to respect
the choices made by the country, provided that they
are in line with international law and the framework
established by the peace agreements.
In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the various developments that in recent months have
revived tensions among the communities and brought
memories of past differences back to the fore. First, a
referendum was organized in Republika Srpska on the
issue of a national day. The vote was held in violation
of two judgments of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, whose decisions are binding and
final under both the Bosnian Constitution and the
Peace Agreement. The question of respect for the rule
of law is therefore a major issue. We also lament the
tensions surrounding the recent filing of an appeal for
review of the 2007 ruling of the International Court of
Justice. Political leaders must act within the framework
of national institutions and their respective functions.
The International Court of Justice dismissed the appeal
because it found that that had not been the case.
In general, we call for greater vigilance with regard
to any initiative that is likely to create new divisions
in the country. We once again urge all parties to
cooperate with the institutions mentioned in the Peace
Agreement, namely, the Bosnian Constitutional Court,
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Office of the High Representative. We expect
that the High Representative will focue his efforts
on facilitating a peaceful daily dialogue among the
different communities and entities.
It is more important than ever that the political
leaders grasp the full extent of their responsibilities.
The failure to adopt the necessary measures for the
granting of International Monetary Fund assistance is
a cause for concern in that regard. We therefore call
on all stakeholders to abandon their divisive rhetoric
and political games. The time has come to focus on the
implementation of the economic and social reforms,
which are the crux of the common aspirations of all the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of their
community of origin.
However, despite that fragile situation, we remain
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is moving towards normalization. Without calling into
question the founding principles of the Dayton-Paris

S/PV.7943

Agreement, our objective for the upcoming years
is to develop the international presence so that it is
fully adapted to the realities of the day. In particular,
consideration as to reconfiguring the Office of the High
Representative must also continue.
France welcomes the fact that the European
perspective is today the main engine for developing and
strengthening the country. In that regard, we welcome
the many positive developments in the past few months
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the areas of reform and
European integration. The official handing over to
the Bosnian authorities of the questionnaire to initiate
the European Commission’s consideration of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s candidacy for European Union
membership is certainly one such positive development.
That is taking place in a context in which the prospect
of European integration is receiving massive support
on the part of the Bosnian population and enjoys
unanimity among the institutions, from the Presidency
to the cantons and the entities, which we welcome.
In that context, the European Union will continue
now more than ever to help the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in implementing reforms that fulfil
the people’s aspirations. The reform agenda is central
in that respect. While much remains to be done, we are
pleased that initial concrete results have already been
achieved. As to the questionnaire, we attach particular
importance to demonstrating that the European
coordination mechanism is fully functional.
Lastly, as has been mentioned here, the European
Union-led stabilization force Althea will also continue
its activities and will adapt to the changing security
situation on the ground in order to allow the Bosnian
security forces to operate autonomously and to
participate in consolidating a peaceful and forwardlooking society. It will be the subject of a strategic
review in autumn by the European Union, which will
guide its work in the years to come.
Twenty-one years after the horror of the war and
25 years after the start of the conflict, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction, with the
support of the European Union and its other partners.
The responsibility of the international community, and
especially of the Council, is to encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina along this path so that it finally turns the
page on the divisions of the past.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First, let
me thank, Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative

17-1418813/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the detailed report
(S/2017/379, annex) he has just presented to us. We
reaffirm our full support to him and invite all the
parties to cooperate with him in good faith.
More than 20 years after the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, known as the Dayton-Paris Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues, despite its pitfalls,
its progress towards reunification and building a nation.
Our statement today, like the one we delivered
here in the Chamber six months ago (see S/PV.7803), is
centred around the political, economic and institutional
dimensions in Bosnia Herzegovina.
At the political level, progress has certainly been
made with the adoption, in November 2016, of the
defence review document for the country’s integration
into NATO, but also the agreement and official signing
of the protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement. However, we must
recognize that the period covered by the report also
saw a resurgence of tensions among Bosnian, Croat
and Serb communities. It was marked in particular by
nationalist rhetoric and a spiralling of activities — to
the point that the Dayton Agreement, which put an end
to a terrible war in the heart of Europe, now seems to be
fragile, if not questioned. The country’s nation-building
requires an climate of serenity and open dialogue
among all communities and entities of the State, in
strict compliance with the provisions of the Dayton
Agreement and the Constitution and the laws of the
country, which are the guarantee for safeguarding
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
During the period under review, even if the
country could not fulfil its commitments within the
time frame of the International Monetary Fund, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continued to benefit from the support
and assistance provided by that financial institution,
which we welcome. Similarly, the economic progress
in the country, which we welcomed when we discussed
the previous report (S/2016/911, annex), needs to be
strengthened to promote harmonious development, the
country’s stability and the well-being of its people. We
therefore call on the three ethnic groups to cooperate
even more closely and to further develop the common
will to live together in a stable, strong State that has a
voice in the community of nations.
14/24

18/05/2017

As is stated in the report of the High Representative,
the presence in the country of the European Union’s
military mission, with an executive mandate, is still
needed insofar as it enables his Office and other
international community actors to carry out their
respective mandates and to reassure citizens from all
ethnic groups as to security in their daily lives.
Combating terrorism is one of the challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing now in a context
in which the return of foreign fighters and complex
migratory flows represent added risks to the security
of the country and the region. It goes without saying
that tangible results cannot be achieved in this struggle
without strengthening cooperation at all levels among
both State authorities and ethnic groups in the country.
It is therefore important to effectively implement the
2015-2030 plan drawn up for that purpose.
Senegal calls upon the international community, in
the context of the reform agenda, to continue to support
the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to help it
become more resilient in the face of the socioeconomic
problems that it must nevertheless have to tackle. The
same applies to strengthening the country’s security
forces so that they can overcome the strategic and
operational gaps in an environment where the terrorist
threat remains.
Finally, I would like to encourage the international
community, first of all the Council, to maintain its
commitment and current level of cooperation in
addressing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
order to safeguard the positive momentum the country
has experienced in the more than two decades since the
signing of the Dayton-Paris Accords.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Valentin Inzko for his briefing.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice of the Bosnian people
in determining their country’s future. We support
the efforts of Bosnian people of all ethnicities to live
harmoniously and seek common development. We
welcome the effort of the country to promote national
reconciliation and economic and social development
and strengthen the rule of law. We note that the country
is still faces challenges in its pursuit of national stability
and social development. We hope that Bosnian people
of all ethnicities will work actively to consolidate the
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

political and social progress achieved thus far, engage
in dialogue to settle their differences, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and continue
to strive for greater progress in all areas so that they
may share in the peace dividend.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country in
the Balkans. Its stability and development, as well as
harmonious coexistence among all ethnic groups, is in
the interests of the international community in general,
and of the States of the region in particular. The
international community should pay attention to the
views of all the parties concerned and take a balanced
and prudent approach to the country’s issues, while
also heeding the concerns of all the parties concerned.
China welcomes the efforts by High Representative
Inzko to promote the political process. We hope that, in
accordance with his mandate, he will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also hope that
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to work with the relevant
parties to play a positive role in maintaining security
and stability in the country. China is ready to work
with the international community as a whole and will
continue to contribute to the achievement of lasting
peace, stability and development in the country.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing on
his latest report (S/2017/379, annex) concerning the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
As this is the first time that we we speak on the
issue, we would like to affirm our support for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We would also like to welcome the signing of the
protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU),
which took place during the reporting period. We believe
that progress demonstrates the country’s commitment
to the EU integration process and offers far-reaching,
long-term and positive contributions to the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We
also take note of the continued exchange of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders of the countries
in the region, which, in our view, will strengthen good-

S/PV.7943

neighbourly relations and enhanced cooperation in the
Western Balkans.
We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that undermine the political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, we
take note of the continued deterioration of the rule of
law, including actions that challenge the constitutional
order and integrity of the State-level judiciary system
in the country. In that regard, the authorities and
political leaders should fully respect the decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
our hope that the ruling issued by the Constitutional
Court on the review of the country’s election law will
be implemented while taking into account the equality
and interests of all constituents. It is important that
all parties refrain from any provocative statements
and actions that could undermine the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Respecting the rule of law and the authority of State
institutions, which are established under the Dayton
Peace Agreement, is fundamental for the State-building
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hence, there is a
need for all parties to demonstrate a serious political
commitment to the matter.
We also take note of the political crisis and
stalemate that occurred within the Presidency and
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
over the reporting period. We believe that such a
paralysis in the normal functioning of State institutions
serves the interests of no one. We therefore urge all
parties to resolve their political differences amicably
and to work constructively towards reconciliation and
actions that safeguard the interests of their citizens.
In conclusion, we would like to express our full
support to the High Representative and his Office in
the discharge of the mandate and in monitoring the
implementation of the civilian aspect of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We call upon parties to extend the
necessary cooperation, which is vital to the work of
the High Representative. We also recognize the vital
role played by the EU military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA, in maintaining safety
and stability in the country.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for
his informative briefing. Japan appreciates the High

17-1418815/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Representative’s ongoing contributions to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Japan fully supports efforts by the Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join NATO and the
European Union (EU). Progress in such efforts is
conducive to lasting peace and stability in the country
and in the Western Balkans. We particularly welcome
the application for EU membership in February last
year and the adoption of the defence review by the
Presidential Council last November. Japan strongly
supports further efforts by the central Government as
well as by the two entities.
Nevertheless, we are disappointed by ethnically
divisive actions, even 22 years after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. The leaders of every ethnic
group must pursue the broader national interests,
as opposed to more narrow concerns. The current
political dysfunction at all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the attempted request for a revision
of the 2007 International Court of Justice’ judgment is
deeply regrettable.
Japan has provided support to reconciliation efforts
among ethnic groups since the end of the conflict. In
partnership with the private sector, Japan is conducting
a project in Mostar for children of different ethnic
backgrounds to learn sports together. Children are the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we very much
hope that they will understand the critical importance
of cooperation, irrespective of their ethnic origin,
through soccer and other sports. An agricultural
project has also been carried out in view of supporting
reconciliation and economic self-reliance for citizens in
Srebrenica, who have taken steps to live side by side in
peace while overcoming difficulties. Moreover, Japan
will also continue to assist with demining activities in
order to ensure the safety of every citizen.
The international community should bolster
reconciliation and efforts to reduce ethnic tensions.
The Security Council must speak with one voice in
urging dialogue among various ethnic groups. As a
member of the Peace Implementation Council, Japan
emphasizes neutrality towards different ethnic groups,
and will contribute to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We fully support the efforts of Mr. Inzko
and the Office of the High Representative to that end.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
16/24

18/05/2017

and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his very
comprehensive briefing on his latest report (S/2017/379,
annex) on the implementation of the Agreement. Egypt
fully supports his efforts.
Egypt welcomes the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the improvement
in good-neighbourly relations and efforts to join
European and Euro-Atlantic institutions. That could
help to consolidate security and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will lead the country to reforms
that will ensure complete integration with the rest
of Europe. By way of example, we would mention last
November’s defence review, the European Commission
questionnaire to be completed by various institutions
in the country and the signing, last December,
of the protocol on adapting the Stabilization and
Association Agreement.
However, Egypt is concerned about the worsening
of the political situation in the country, with increased
political and religious polarization, as a result of the
attempt to submit a request for revision of the judgment
of the International Court of Justice of 26 February
2007, as well as the activities of Republika Srpska
authorities to celebrate “Republika Srpska Day”, which
contravenes a decision of the Constitutional Court.
We would also like to express our concern about the
deterioration of the rule of law and the non-respect of
Court rulings by Republika Srpska authorities. Egypt
believes that will damage the country’s cohesion
and stability.
Those events are taking place against the
backdrop of progress on the five objectives and two
conditions — the 5+2 plan — being delayed as a result
of various challenges and secessionist calls on the part
of certain political parties in the Serbian entity, which
represents a danger for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and which could
have repercussions not only for the country but also for
the entire region. We call upon all political leaders to
overcome their narrow political interests and advance
the national interests of the people.
Finally, Egypt reaffirms that the Dayton Accords
remain the framework for peace and the cornerstone
for institutional stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also reaffirm the importance of respecting the unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its stability, territorial
integrity, its Constitution and all the rulings of its courts
by all parties in order to build stability in the country.
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Egypt calls on all factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to address those challenges and underscores the
importance of everyone working together to fully
implement the 5+2 plan.
Egypt urges coexistence among all communities
and religious groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Only
through serious efforts to embrace the concept of
peaceful coexistence and political consensus will the
country succeed in consolidating peace and speeding
up the reform process, which must go hand in hand
with genuine international and regional support for
those efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Permanent
Representative of Uruguay.
I thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
detailed briefing.
As we have indicated on previous occasions,
Uruguay adheres to strict respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States. In that spirit, we
reaffirm once again our support for the unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.7943

and belligerent rhetoric and acts that offend other
communities or the victims of war. We must continue
to work to leave behind the bitterness that is the product
of a conflict that was an affront to humankind and
represented one of the darkest chapters in the history of
the region and the world.
Bosnia and Herzegovina should focus on the goals
shared by all communities. We note with interest the
progress made towards the country’s integration in
the European Union and in improving its regional
relations. In that context, the resolution of issues related
to defence and State property, fiscal sustainability and
the strengthening of the rule of law are of particular
relevance. We also appreciate the work being carried out
on the ground by the Office of the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by Operation Althea of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which represents a guarantee for
political and social stability in the country.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Uruguay’s desire and
commitment to ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina
becomes stable and sovereign, with inclusion for all of
its citizens and a focus on the common good.

Our country attaches the utmost importance to
the rule of law and the authority of the institutions
arising from the General Framework Agreement for
Peace of 1995. Respect for them is part of the path
towards stability and harmonious coexistence. We
believe that the rulings of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be complied
with in full. As a general rule, we also believe that
politicians must act responsibly and constructively in
order to achieve national objectives that benefit the
entire country, such as economic development and the
reforms needed for stabilization. Along those lines, the
international community must continue to support the
implementation of the 1995 Comprehensive Framework
Agreement for Peace as a way to settle differences
among the three communities.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
asset, not just for the country but for the region as a
whole. Equality of rights, duties and guarantees is
a fundamental assumption of societies. Respect for
each community and the harmonious integration of
minorities, as well as their adequate representation,
lead to a stable and positive political environment.
We condemn ethnocentric discourse, divisive

Bosnia and Herzegovina further intensified its
efforts during the reporting period in the implementation
of the reform agenda and continued to work vigorously
to implement the socioeconomic reforms necessary
for integration into the European Union (EU). Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities at all levels have
synchronized their activities as they prepare answers
for the European Commission questionnaire.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on our
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I wish you and your delegation
every success.
We welcome the presence in the Council today of
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report
(S/2017/379, annex) on the situation in the country,
which covers the period from 22 October 2016 to
21 April 2017.

17-1418817/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

18/05/2017

In December 2016, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union signed the protocol on the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement. The
signing of the protocol represents an important step
forward on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s path towards
joining the European Union. The protocol begins a
new stage of trade cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and EU member States. In addition, the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Denis Zvizdić, in his capacity as a
Chair of the EU-Bosnia and Herzegovina Stabilization
and Association Council, signed a decision on foreign
trade that will simplify trade with the EU and the wider
region. Specifically, the decision replaced bilateral
rules of origin with preferential rules of origin, in
accordance with the Regional Convention on panEuro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin. We
would like to express our appreciation to the European
Union for its unwavering commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s membership in the EU. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has also enhanced its cooperation
with NATO.

amended penal code, continues to prosecute terrorist
fighters as well as those facilitating their recruitment.

One of the most important goals of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region. The perspective of integration
into the European Union remains a crucial factor not
only in regional cooperation but also in the stability of
the Western Balkans. Cooperation within the framework
of the Berlin process, which provides assets for traffic
and energy infrastructure, is particularly important for
regional development.

With regard to the economic situation, I would
stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy, like
other economies in the region, has been affected by the
global economic slowdown. Nevertheless, its economy
grew at a solid pace in 2016. In comparison to 2015,
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy has grown 2.8 per
cent and its exports have increased by 3 per cent. The
inflation rate was -1.1 per cent, which means that in
2016 consumer prices fell slightly by comparison with
the previous year.

Countries of the Western Balkans continue to hold
regular meetings at the highest level that generate a
positive political environment. At the last meeting of
Western Balkans Prime Ministers, held in Sarajevo
on 16 and 17 March, the States’ Prime Ministers
expressed their full commitment to the prospect of
EU accession and welcomed the European Council’s
unequivocal support in that regard. They stressed that
firm and credible EU prospects continue to drive the
transformation and modernization of the region through
political and economic reforms.

The international migrant crisis still constitutes
a significant challenge to the States of the region and
their economies. Since the closure of the Western
Balkans route, we have witnessed a significant decrease
in the refugee and migrant flow through our region.
However, the States of the region continue to be on
the forefront of the international migrant crisis. In that
context, I note that Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
have undertaken a set of comprehensive measures in
the humanitarian, security and other spheres. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has implemented its strategy on
migration and asylum, through its plan of action for the
2016-2020 period. That document specifies our policy
on migration and asylum, which is consistent with the
highest European and international standards.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
to strengthen the rule of law in several key areas. In the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued
to fulfil its international obligations with regard to
countering terrorism and violent extremism. Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in accordance with provisions of its
18/24

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judicial and security
institutions have been implementing their strategy
for preventing and combating terrorism. In addition
to security measures, the strategy for preventive
activities for de-radicalization carried out by national
stakeholders, such as religious communities, educational
institutions, civil society organizations and the media.
In the same period, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s rule of
law and security institutions have made progress in
combating organized crime, corruption and moneylaundering.
As for prosecuting war crimes in domestic courts,
we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity at
the local level is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the National War Crimes Strategy,
regardless of the national or religious origin of
perpetrators or victims, is essential to reconciliation
and long-term stability.

The security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has remained peaceful and calm, as regularly reflected
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

in the reports of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Althea mission, as well as in the
relevant Council resolutions. We stress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a host country, has had respectable and
fruitful cooperation with EUFOR Althea, particularly
in capacity-building and the training of the armed
forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is actively contributing to
international peace and security by providing military
and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, currently deploying 42 peacekeepers worldwide.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for
its citizens. In that regard, we thank our international
partners for supporting us on that path.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Vale De Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
I join others in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko back to the Security Council and in
assuring him of the European Union’s continued
support. I also welcome our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his statement.
(spoke in French)
The year 2016 was very good to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with progress towards reform and
European integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina
formally applied for accession to the European Union
in February 2016. On 20 September of the same year,
the Council instructed the European Commission to
review that candidature.
At the request of the Council, Mr. Hahn,
Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and
Enlargement Negotiations, presented a questionnaire
to the Sarajevo authorities on 9 December, 2016, to
enable the Commission to deliver an opinion on the
country’s preparations. That questionnaire of 3,242
questions will provide a comprehensive overview of the

S/PV.7943

country’s constitutional, political, economic and social
landscape. It will also be a first test for the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina of their ability to work
together, throughout the country.
On the basis of the replies provided, the
European Commission will present an assessment and
recommendations to the EU Council concerning not
only the candidate status of Bosnia and Herzegovina
but also the accession negotiations. Those will include
the priority areas on which Bosnia and Herzegovina
will need to focus if it is to move forward towards
European membership.
(spoke in English)
After years of stagnation, these positive
developments are the result of the reform agenda for
Bosnia and Herzegovina 2015-2018, which Governments
of State and entity levels have crafted in the framework
of the renewed approach of the EU integration process,
and which since 2014 have prioritized social and
economic reforms. The new EU approach has yielded
results, but the implementation of the reforms has
had limited success and the sociopolitical outlook
remains uncertain. It is time for sincere reform efforts.
Without them, an increase in radicalism, socioeconomic
problems and nationalistic tensions could result in longterm instability.
Bosnia and Herzegovina initially made good
progress, and the pace of reforms should not decrease. We
therefore expect continued and effective implementation
of this reform agenda. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
entered a phase in which it faces difficult decisions
regarding the economy and public administration.
Success in these reforms can bring significant benefits
for citizens and help the country advance in the EU
integration process. The much-improved economic
growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina — more than 3 per
cent in 2016 — and the growth in private-sector jobs are
signs that, with the right policies, economic progress is
within reach. Thus Bosnia and Herzegovina can make a
positive contribution to regional cooperation, which is
also an important factor in the country’s EU path.
Despite these efforts at economic reform, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to suffer from agendas
driven by constituency interests, which divert attention
from much-needed reforms. Controversies are pulling
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the wrong direction.

17-1418819/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The judiciary should not be instrumentalized
to justify the lack of a common vision. It is the
responsibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
authorities not only to forge a country-wide agenda
but also to comply with judicial decisions once they
have been issued. The rulings of the Constitutional
Court on the election law will have to be addressed in
an appropriate manner by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities. Ensuring the smooth conduct of the general
elections, scheduled for autumn 2018, is key.
But, as I said, 2017 should be used to focus on and
resolve pending issues that present a challenge to the
socioeconomic environment and democratic institutions.
I would also like to encourage the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward its European
agenda and contribute to establishing a democratic
and well-functioning society in which the equality of
Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs and all other citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is ensured.
The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a sovereign and united country. The European Union
will continue to use all available instruments to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability and progress. The
overall security situation has remained relatively calm
and stable; however, security is not yet fully entrenched.
In that context, the European Union confirms
that Operation Althea of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
through its executive mandate, retains the capability to
contribute to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities’
deterrence capacity, if the situation so requires, while
focusing on capacity-building and training.
As the country’s stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, discussions
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence. In that
regard, the European Union calls on the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue the reform agenda
and to increase their efforts to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the future closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
(spoke in French)
To conclude, I should like to say that in the course
of the two decades during which the Council has
20/24

18/05/2017

been considering the situation in the country, we have
witnessed progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina in many
areas — socioeconomic progress as well as advances
in the democratic and security areas. Reconciliation
among its citizens requires, in turn, greater efforts for
continued reform and for inclusivity.
I reiterate what I said yesterday: the doors of the
European Union are open, and it is incumbent on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the
measures necessary to solidify this clear prospect and
to join the European Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.
As a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears special responsibility for the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia is Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s first European Union (EU) neighbour and
trade partner. Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina
are therefore one of Croatia’s foreign-policy priorities
and its integration into the European Union and NATO
our strategic goal.
A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina where genuine institutional equality
among the three constituent peoples and all citizens is
guaranteed should play a valuable role as a generator of
stability in south-eastern Europe as well as a contributor
to the stability of the European Union as a whole.
The European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its consequent EU and
NATO membership is a goal that Croatia will continue
to staunchly support. We see this as the best catalyst
for addressing outstanding internal issues as well as a
safeguard for further democratization, the strengthening
of institutions, and ensuring freedom of the media and
an independent judiciary. The implementation of the
reform agenda is also vital to achieving this goal.
We have supported the application of Boston and
Herzegovina for membership in the European Union.
We want to encourage the authorities at all levels of
Government to redouble their efforts to submit credible,
well-prepared answers to the European Commission’s
questionnaire, so that we can discuss the candidate
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

status for Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible.
We would like to see Bosnia and Herzegovina catch
up with its neighbours in the field of the European
integration, and in pursuit of this pivotal goal we
shall continue to extend our political, technical and
expert support.
In addition, Croatia would like to stimulate
greater cross-border cooperation on the part of local
and regional self-government units on both sides of
the border, which should result in the implementation
of joint projects and better use of EU funds. Flexible
cross-border cooperation and tangible benefits from
EU funds enable people at the local level to feel closer
to the EU.
On the Euro-Atlantic front, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has achieved concrete results, namely, the adoption of
the defence review and a solid record in the registration
of defence property, making the activation of the NATO
membership action plan plausible and justified.
While progress has been achieved in a number of
fields, including the economy, political crises, often
repetitive in nature and substance, continue to plague
the political landscape of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
has a negative impact on reform-oriented processes and
is preventing Bosnia and Herzegovina from moving
forward and unleashing all of its potential. The political
impasse and divisive rhetoric pose the risk of derailing
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the path of much-needed
reforms and undermining the very functionality and
stability of the country.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned at the fact
that political polarization, intensified by years of
economic hardship, is increasing radicalization and
extremism within Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
among the younger population. This deterioration fits
within the wider context of the challenges facing southeastern Europe. In that context, we have to put all the
tools at our disposal to good use.
Besides socioeconomic reforms and the implementation
of the reform agenda, it is of the utmost importance
not to lose sight of the political issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As shown by the recent institutional
crisis caused by the application for revision of the
judgment in the genocide case against Serbia, focus
must be maintained, as well, on urgent political
questions so as to achieve stability and prevent future
internal destabilization.

S/PV.7943

The most urgent political question is the reform
of the Election Law, especially in the light of the
decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina dated 1 December 2016 and the decision
of the Constitutional Court on the city of Mostar.
The former decision states that certain provisions of
the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina are in
contravention to the Bosnian Constitution, since they
breach the constitutional principle of the equality of
the three constituent peoples — Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs — and their right to legitimate representation.
The reform of the Election Law therefore presents
a welcome opportunity to ensure the institutional
equality of the three peoples and all citizens, and a
chance to leap forward towards political stability and a
more integrated country. The refusal to implement the
decision of the Constitutional Court on the reform of the
Election Law further jeopardizes the fragile stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby leaving open the
space for further political manipulations, which have,
as witnessed in the recent past, a destructive impact
on the equality of the smallest in number of the three
constituent peoples.
Politically dominant actors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to reject the implementation
of the aforementioned decision of the Constitutional
Court, thereby demonstrating their determination
and persistence in opposing the realization of the
constitutional principle of the equality of the three
constituent peoples. We recall that the enjoyment of
rights emanating from that principle represents the
very foundation on which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
built as a State and therefore should be seen as conditio
sine qua non.
In accordance with its responsibilities and
obligations as a signatory to the Dayton Agreement and
as a country that shares a 1,000-kilometre land border
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia cannot remain
silent and inert while witnessing the continuation of such
destabilizing policies. We urge all who are genuinely
interested in the democratic stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take action on the prolongation of a
situation in which decisions of the central judicial body
are not obeyed or implemented.
The question of institutional stability is crucial to
the capability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to efficiently
and promptly fulfil its obligations arising from the
process of European integration and to fight political

17-1418821/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

radicalism and elements of religious extremism. Croatia
is ready to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in improving
its institutional and administrative capacity and in
meeting the requirements on the path to the integration
in the EU. Furthermore, we encourage our neighbour to
proceed without delay with the reform of the judiciary in
order to strengthen its independence, professionalism,
accountability and impartiality. It is also important
that Bosnia and Herzegovina assume ownership of
its judiciary institutions. The implementation of all
outlined and much-needed reforms will strengthen the
country from within and give impetus to everybody in
Bosnia and Herzegovina — all constituent peoples and
all citizens — to move forward on the European and
Euro-Atlantic path.
Let me finish by quoting from the recent joint
statement of the Justice and Peace Commissions
(Justitia et Pax) of the Bishops Conferences and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia, which took
place earlier this month:
“Today the Catholics in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the most endangered part of the Catholic Church
on the entire European continent”.
The Commissions appealed to the international
community to extend more efficient assistance to the
country as to ensure that genuine and real equality of
the three constituent peoples — Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs — and all other citizens is achieved in the whole
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a supporter
and advocate of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability,
prosperity and territorial integrity, Croatia echoes
this appeal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Before I begin, I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
In all our statements in the Security Council on
this topic, regional stability and the development of
all-round cooperation with Serbia’s closest neighbours
have been accentuated as its most important foreign
policy priorities. These issues, we believe, should
continue to be the fulcrum of attention of the countries
of the Western Balkans and South-East Europe as they
plan their activities and take concrete actions. In that
context and to those ends, my country sees Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a key partner.
22/24

18/05/2017

The European Union is facing many challenges
and its enlargement may not be at the forefront of
its ongoing endeavours. Yet the continuation of the
process of enlargement and the region’s steady progress
towards reforms are needed by the countries of the
Western Balkans, perhaps more than ever before. We
therefore look forward to each and every step made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina in that direction as it brings us
closer to our common European future. As a candidate
country, Serbia considers that the European integration
by Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important process
and is ready to render its unyielding help and allround support.
Strengthening comprehensive regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans is an indispensable part of its
European integration. We are convinced that ample
possibilities exist for cooperation between Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and stand ready and willing
to step up our efforts in promoting the all-important
task of furthering such cooperation. In order to do so, it
is necessary that our two countries undertake realizing
our common interests as that provides the most solid
and reliable basis for a better future of the citizens of
both Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Commitments to promoting stability and allround cooperation and avowed readiness to undertake
reforms conducive to the process of European
integration feature prominently on the political agendas
of the Governments of our region. Yet we have borne
witness to various recent trends that cause unnecessary
political tensions and send messages reminiscent of
the troublesome past, while a constructive approach
has often been pushed aside. They have marked the
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
relations between its entities and constituent peoples
and, by extension, the situation in the region.
My country firmly believes that its active policy of
promoting reconciliation in the Western Balkans and
strengthening good-neighbourly relations is rightful
and correct. We must continue to promote political,
legal and economic reforms, strengthen the rule of law
and institutions, and pledge allegiance to European
values as the only avenue to a more prosperous and
stable region.
I also emphasize on this occasion that respect for
territorial integrity is an international standard and a
principle that must always be honoured and upheld.
The past of the Western Balkans makes it imperative
17-14188

18/05/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

for us to accept the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States as the basis of a different and better future.
In accordance with the provisions of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, therefore, Serbia has been consistently
and lastingly committed to the maintenance of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Dayton Peace Agreement was signed more
than 20 years ago in order to bring an end to the tragic
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As its guarantor,
Serbia considers that the Agreement continues to be a
condition sine qua non for peace and stability. Since we
are called on to safeguard peace and stability, we must
therefore keep the Agreement. Genuine reconciliation
is needed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, all the more so
as differing views and other challenges are becoming
increasingly evident in the region.
Over the past two decades, it has been said and
demonstrated many times that dialogue and agreements
are the best and safest ways to address the outstanding
issues affecting relations between the country’s entities
and constituent peoples. We believe that is the only way
that we can ensure that potential solutions are acceptable
and implementable as they help to build confidence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia considers outstanding
issues — such as the observance of Republika Srpska
Day, the functioning of shared institutions, election
laws and others that are the focus of differences between
the entities — to be internal questions for the country.
We therefore support an active dialogue within
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the right way to find solutions
acceptable to all and to build confidence. It will help
strengthen cooperation, transparency and effectiveness
in the shared institutions, promote confidence between
the entities and have a positive influence on the situation
in the region. Without it, there may be efforts to resort
to unilateral acts, such as the attempt to institute
legally unfounded proceedings aimed at revising the
judgment of the International Court of Justice in the
case concerning Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro).
The Court’s rejection of the request confirms the need
for conducting political dialogue aimed at addressing
disagreements and solving outstanding issues to the
benefit of all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia has given special attention to continuing
and intensifying its political dialogue with Bosnia and

S/PV.7943

Herzegovina, which we see as one of the most important
elements promoting general good relations. In that
context, I should point out that Mr. Aleksandar Vučić,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, has visited
Bosnia and Herzegovina this year on two occasions,
in March and April. He took part in a meeting of the
Prime Ministers of the Western Balkans on 16 March,
convened to help prepare for the Western Balkans
Summit, to be held within the Berlin process initiative
in Trieste in July. In Sarajevo, the Prime Minister
emphasized once again the importance of regional
stability, strengthening economic cooperation, free
trade and interlinkages, and the European prospects
of the Western Balkans. On 3 and 4 April Mr. Vučić
also visited Mostar for the opening of the twentieth
International Economic Fair, where he met with
high representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
discussed regional stability, promoting cooperation and
realizing regional projects.
On 10 April, Ms. Zorana Mihajlović, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Civil Engineering, Transport
and Infrastructure of the Republic of Serbia, visited
Srebrenica, where she commissioned the construction
of a kindergarten financed by a donation from the
Serbian Government. The children of Srebrenica,
Bosniak and Serb alike — the town’s future — will
attend the kindergarten together. Mr. Denis Zvizdić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, visited Belgrade on 21 January. In his
discussions with Serbian Government officials, the
two countries recommitted to promoting peace and
stability and furthering cooperation, including on joint
infrastructure projects connecting the two countries,
such as new bridges, highways and railways. On 13 May,
Mr. Igor Crnadak, Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the representative of a partner country,
visited Serbia to open the eighty-fourth Agricultural
Fair in Novi Sad, alongside Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.
Serbia continues to be interested in promoting
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Trade between the two countries is growing, with a
5.8 per cent increase in 2016 over the previous year.
Serbia’s total investment of €900 million in Bosnia and
Herzegovina makes it one of its biggest investors. We
believe that the creation of ties between our peoples
and economies should be a priority for Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, just as they are for the other

17-1418823/24

S/PV.7943

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

countries of the Western Balkans, especially in the
areas of infrastructure, energy, tourism, free trade and
elsewhere. We simply must continue to promote projects
that bring us together. We trust and believe that Bosnia
and Herzegovina and our other neighbours are ready

24/24

18/05/2017

to embark on joint and responsible efforts to achieve
all our goals, creating a better future and avoiding the
pitfalls of the past.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-14188
