S/PV.9368

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9368th meeting

Thursday, 6 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-19629 (E)
*2319629*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

06/07/2023

“there can be no lasting security without a restoration
of democratic institutions — and it is impossible
to achieve lasting and fully representative political
solutions without a drastic improvement in the
security situation”.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti

(spoke in English)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Barbados, the Dominican Republic,
Haiti and Jamaica to participate in this meeting.

Since my first briefing to the Council, two and a half
months ago (see S/PV.9311), some progress has been made
on the implementation of the 21 December agreement,
which defines the framework for our engagement with
national authorities and other stakeholders. Within that
framework, the High Transitional Council organized
a forum in May that brought together representatives
from across the country from the political, civil
society and private sector, including non-signatories
to the 21 December agreement. The forum provided an
opportunity for all Haitian stakeholders to discuss key
issues concerning constitutional and electoral reforms,
good governance and socioeconomic issues. The forum
adopted a joint declaration that included a call for
the deployment of robust international support to the
Haitian National Police.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Andrew Holness, Prime Minister of Jamaica; His
Excellency Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Worship of Haiti; and His Excellency
Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Dominican Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. María Isabel
Salvador, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; and Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles, civil
society representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Ms. Salvador; Ambassador Michel Xavier Biang,
Permanent Representative of Gabon, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti; Ms. Gilles; and
Mr. Holness, on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
I now give the floor to Ms. Salvador.
Ms. Salvador: Tomorrow, 7 July, marks the
second anniversary of the assassination of President
Jovenel Moïse. The call for those responsible for that
heinous crime to be brought to justice continues. His
assassination plunged Haiti into a deeper political
crisis, which has been exacerbated by an unprecedented
breakdown of security, with criminal armed gangs
imposing a regime of terror and violence in most parts
of Port-au-Prince. This grave situation is compounded
by the humanitarian, human rights and socioeconomic
crises the country is facing.
(spoke in French)
As the Secretary-General said during his recent visit
to Haiti,
2/23

As part of the Haitian political dialogue, I want to
highlight the initiative of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), through its Eminent Persons Group, to
organize a meeting last June in Jamaica of Haitian
stakeholders, which brought together Prime Minister
Henry, political parties and civil society groups. Upon his
return from Jamaica, Prime Minister Henry committed
to changes in the Cabinet to make it politically more
inclusive, to the enlargement of the High Transitional
Council and to expediting the submission of candidates
for the Provisional Electoral Council. I hope those
commitments will soon materialize.
Through my good offices, I will spare no effort
to continue supporting dialogue initiatives on the way
forward. As parties engage in continuous dialogue, I
look forward to the visit to Haiti of CARICOM’s Eminent
Persons Group in continued support to furthering
inter-Haitian consultations under the auspices of the
High Transitional Council. The Secretary-General’s
solidarity and working visit to Haiti cast the limelight
on the imperative of action by Haitians and the
international community. The Secretary-General met
with Prime Minister Ariel Henry, the High Transitional
Council, a cross-section of the political parties and civil
society organizations. He impressed upon all the need
to move forward with dialogue and his unwavering
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

support for the deployment of a robust international
force to assist the Haitian National Police.
There is widespread backing for the deployment of
such a force. While it is true that talk of the presence
of an international force in Haiti could elicit mixed
reactions, as the Secretary-General heard during his
visit to Haiti, I too have heard appeals for international
security support since my arrival. The robust
international force that Haiti needs must complement
and strengthen — not replace — the Haitian National
Police, with full respect for Haiti’s national sovereignty.
When discussing Haiti at the CARICOM Conference of
Heads of Government held this week in Trinidad and
Tobago, the Secretary-General reiterated the urgent
need for a robust international force authorized by the
Security Council, a call he reiterated earlier today.
While the political transition and the fight against
gangs should remain on separate tracks, the two are
inextricably linked. Improved security and continuing
political dialogue could create the possibility of
holding elections, which is a critical step on the path
to re-establishing democratic institutions and elected
officials at all levels of Government. The justice sector
continues to face severe challenges, but there are some
glimmers of hope, including the adoption of a decree
against corruption, money-laundering and the illegal
arms trade. I am also made hopeful by the national
authorities’ ongoing efforts to improve the vetting and
certification process within the judicial system.
The dire security situation in Haiti has become
worse since my first briefing to the Council. The
violence continues and has intensified, moving beyond
Port-au-Prince, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/492). The appearance of vigilante
groups adds another layer of complexity. Since April,
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
has documented the killing of at least 264 alleged
gang members by vigilante groups. Gangs continue
to use sexual violence, including collective rape and
mutilation, to terrorize and inflict pain on populations
and neighbourhoods under the control of rivals. In
addition to physical and mental harm, gang violence also
has a deeply detrimental impact on economic and social
rights. Access to education, food, water, sanitation and
health-care services has been severely limited by gang
activity. In areas affected by gang violence, economic
activity is periodically if not permanently paralysed.
At the end of June, the Independent Expert on the
situation of human rights in Haiti completed his first

S/PV.9368

visit to the country. I heard directly from him about
the dire human rights situation. Among his greatest
concerns are the inhumane detention conditions, the
staggering levels of pretrial detentions, widespread
gender-based violence and some countries’ mass
deportations of Haitians. The humanitarian situation is
increasingly grim and likely to deteriorate even further.
Today 5.2 million people, including almost 3 million
children, require urgent humanitarian support and
protection. Haiti has one of the highest levels of food
insecurity in the world, with 4.9 million people suffering
from it. The increased violence in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area has displaced almost 128,000 people
from their homes, leading to further migration. Haiti’s
health-care system is close to collapse. The country
also remains highly vulnerable to climate change and
natural disasters. In early June, deadly floods, followed
by an earthquake, killed 58 people and affected 45,000
households. The situation has been exacerbated by
soaring inflation and the depreciation of the Haitian
gourde, which has eroded people’s purchasing power.
However, despite the difficult security situation and
the related constraints, the United Nations continues to
have access to hard-to-reach areas so that it can serve
the communities most impacted by the crisis, and it
remains fully mobilized to support all Haitians.
The Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution
2653 (2022) concerning Haiti and the Committee’s
Panel of Experts visited Haiti in June. The Executive
Directors of UNICEF and the World Food Programme
have jointly visited the country. Last weekend,
we also had an important visit by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, who had fruitful meetings,
including with Government officials, the Director
General of the Haitian National Police and women and
other civil-society groups. All of those important visits
create momentum for and general international interest
in the complex situation in Haiti.
As the Council is aware, BINUH’s mandate renewal
is upon us. I ask for the Council’s support in ensuring
that BINUH is adequately resourced to effectively and
efficiently deliver on its mandate and help Haiti out of its
crisis, while ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. I want to recognize the courage
and commitment of all the national and international
personnel of the United Nations system in Haiti for
their work and commitment in such a hostile security
environment. This is a critical moment that we cannot

23-196293/23

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.9368

afford to waste. It is a time for international solidarity
and immediate action.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Salvador

for

I now give the floor to Ambassador Biang.
Mr. Biang (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address the members of the Security Council,
in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti, to provide a brief overview
of my most recent visit to Haiti and the Dominican
Republic, from 12 to 16 June. Due to the exceptional
circumstances, I was not accompanied by members of
the Committee during the visit, but that will not create
a precedent for future field visits by Security Council
Sanctions Committees. The visit took place almost
seven months after the adoption on 21 October 2022 of
resolution 2653 (2022), at a moment when Haiti is facing
major political, economic, security and humanitarian
challenges. Its main purpose, as set out in the terms of
reference adopted by the 2653 Sanctions Committee,
was to obtain first-hand accounts of the situation on the
ground following the United Nations-imposed sanctions
on Haiti. I believe the visit helped to reaffirm the 2653
Committee’s engagement and commitment to working
for the restoration of peace and stability in Haiti.
In Port-au-Prince, I met with the Minister for
Justice and Public Security as well as with the Minister
of Economy and Finance and Customs, the Director
General of the Haitian National Police, the Director
General of the General Customs Administration and
the members of the High Transitional Council. I was
also able to meet with Ms. María Isabel Salvador,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti, and her leadership team. I met with the United
Nations country team in Haiti, representatives of the
diplomatic corps based in Port-au-Prince and members
of civil society, including women’s groups. I am deeply
grateful to all of them for their support regarding the
organization and execution of the visit and for the open
and informative exchanges that we had.
In the Dominican Republic, I had the honour of
meeting with President Abinader Corona, the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and Defence and the Deputy
Ministers of the Interior and Police. In Santo Domingo,
I was able to meet with the United Nations country
team led by the Resident Coordinator ad interim. I
4/23

06/07/2023

also met with the diplomatic corps and members of
civil society, including women’s groups. I visited
Elías Piña and Dajabón, two major crossing points
between Haiti and the Dominican Republic, where the
Dominican authorities told me about the main problems
their country faces as a result of the current context of
insecurity and instability in Haiti.
Almost everyone with whom the delegation met
in Port-au-Prince welcomed the adoption of resolution
2653 (2022) and expressed their full support for
the implementation of the United Nations sanctions
regime. Some of the people I met told me that they
hoped other individuals would be designated by the
2653 Sanctions Committee. Some of the people we met
felt that addressing the current designated individuals
was alone not enough to solve the many problems
facing the country. What was needed, they argued, was
an integrated management of the crisis, including an
inclusive political process, restoration of democratic
institutions, institution-building and reform of the
justice and security sectors.
With regard to the last point, the Haitian National
Police told us directly about their lack of capacity and
technology. Along these lines, several of the people we
met asked me about the prospects for a multinational
force to help restore peace and security in Haiti. I
replied that this question did not fall within the scope
of the mandate given to me by the 2653 Sanctions
Committee for the visit.
I believe that the adoption of resolution 2653
(2022) was a welcome initiative and that the Haitian
people agree that the imposition of sanctions was
an encouraging first step with a positive impact on
the security situation. A number of the people I met
expressed their expectation that the United Nations
sanctions list would be expanded. Some of my
interlocutors consider that United Nations sanctions
could have a considerable impact on the behaviour of
individuals who pose a threat to peace and stability.
The President: I thank Ambassador Biang for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gilles.
Ms. Gilles (spoke in French): The Fondasyon Je
Klere (FJKL), which I have the honour of representing
in this Chamber, is pleased to participate in today’s
Security Council meeting on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti and the situation in Haiti.
In responding in the affirmative to the invitation to
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

today’s briefing on the general human rights situation
in Haiti, under the presidency of the United Kingdom, I
am living up to the values defended by the FJKL.
Indeed, the Fondasyon Je Klere is a Haitian
organization committed to the defence of human
rights, which prepares every Haitian man and woman
to become a responsible leader participating in public
life for the renewal of a nation-State founded on the
principles of human rights and sustainable development.
To that end, the FJKL runs a nationwide human rights
training programme in which reflection and debate
are encouraged across the territory on such issues as
State reform, the effectiveness of human rights, the
State’s obligations, the fight against corruption and
the realization of human rights, good governance and
transparency in the management of public affairs.
Human rights are an important issue in public
debates on the rule of law, democracy and even social
justice and equity. In the context of twenty-first century
globalization, it must be admitted that the affirmation
of human rights remains a major challenge for public
authorities. Human rights are defined as prerogatives
that uphold human freedom and dignity and benefit
from institutional guarantees.
What is the current human rights situation in Haiti?
Haiti is facing systematic human rights violations. State
authorities are failing in their duty to protect, respect
and ensure respect for human rights.
Freedom and dignity are the foundations of human
rights. They are the thermometer that measures the
temperature of the reality of human rights. Today this
thermometer indicates that the reality of human rights
in Haiti is 99 per cent degraded, and that no measures
are being taken to avoid the high degree of lawlessness
in Haitian society.
Fundamental freedoms are greatly threatened
by the proliferation of gangs throughout the country.
For more than two years, it has been very difficult to
reach the south of Haiti by land from Port-au-Prince.
Gangs have been kidnapping, raping, holding to ransom
and beating up people travelling along route nationale
2. Nowadays, access to national route 1 is almost
impossible. In some cases, victims are abducted from
their homes, as was the case with journalist Marie
Lucie Bonhomme, and, a few days later, her husband
was also abducted. Over the last 24 months, more than
2,000 cases of kidnapping have been recorded across

S/PV.9368

the country, with the majority of those kidnapped being
released after payment of a ransom.
The number of kidnappings is on the rise. Reality
shows that from July to December 2021, there were 625
reported kidnappings; from January to December 2022,
there were 1,005 reported kidnappings; from January to
June 2023, there were 457 cases if kidnapping.
For the past two years or so, the Haitian population
has been unable to peacefully move from one town to
another or from one department to another. The country
is controlled by gangs. In many parts of the capital,
people are fleeing their homes and taking up residence
in public squares and other places. This is the case for
the population of Martissant, Fontamara, Bel Air, Cité
Soleil, Carrefour Feuilles and Croix-des-Missions, and
residents of Solino, Pernier and Tabarre have suffered
the same misfortune. To date, the State has not taken
any action to return the displaced to their homes.
What about access to justice? The doors of the courts
in Port-au-Prince, the country’s largest jurisdiction,
have been closed since June 2021. It was not until June
2023 that attempts were made to organize correctional
and criminal hearings without the help of juries. This
situation has led to a marked increase in illegal pretrial
detention. Indeed, figures up to 26 June 2023 show
that out of a prison population of 11,802 inmates, only
1,820 have actually been sentenced; some 84.57% are
therefore in extended pretrial detention.
We live in a country where the right to life is
trivialized. Despicable crimes are perpetrated every
day with total impunity. From July 2021 to date, more
than 2,929 people — police officers and civilian
members of the population — have been executed in the
streets, in their homes or in their neighbourhoods, and
this is not an exhaustive number. The State no longer
has a monopoly on legitimate violence. Entire areas are
controlled by armed gangs, some of which are better
armed and equipped than public forces.
More than 155 armed gangs are active throughout
the country. Port-au-Prince alone is home to 26 of
them. The most ferocious are Village-de-Dieu, Grand
Ravine, Tibwa and the G9 an fanmi e Alye coalition.
In Pétion-Ville, there are 30 gang hot spots; the most
fearsome are in the Kraze Baryè and the Laboule 12.
Croix-des-Bouquets has 17 gangs, the most active being
Baz Chen Mechan and 400 Mawozo. In Artibonite, 29
gangs are active, the most powerful being Baz Gran
Grif and Kokorat San Ras. All this is to inform Council

23-196295/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

members that almost a third of the national territory is
controlled by armed gangs.
What is the current state of women’s rights in Haiti?
During armed attacks in 2022 and 2023 in Cité Soleil,
Butte-Boyer, Canaan, Source-Matelas, Carrefour
Feuille and Petite-Rivière de l’Artibonite, more than
130 women and girls were gang-raped. The stories of
women and young girls who have been kidnapped,
beaten and raped are legion. Few kidnapped girls
have not been beaten, abused and raped. Before being
raped, they are humiliated by derogatory remarks.
Reprehensible scenes are sometimes filmed and posted
on social networks by members of armed gangs with
their faces uncovered, as if to defy the forces of law
and order, who watch helplessly as the acts of cruelty
escalate sharply. In Haitian culture, gang rape and anal
rape are the worst crimes a woman can suffer, and at
times leave her infected with HIV/AIDS.
In today’s briefing, the Fondasyon Je Klere
believes that it has provided a broad picture of the
reality of human rights in Haiti, marked by systematic
violations of freedom and dignity. To reduce human
rights violations in Haiti, the Fondasyon Je Klere
proposes strengthening public governance, with an
emphasis on the fight against corruption. The scandal
of the mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds is flagrant
proof of corruption. The managers of those funds have
not yet been brought to trial and are preparing to return
to power to continue their crimes of corruption. Some
89.23 per cent of the 232 public figures subject to the
2008–2018 declaration of assets did not declare their
assets when they left office. According to a survey
report published by the Fondasyon Je Klere in 2019,
some 93 per cent of Haiti’s senators and 93 per cent
of its deputies did not file a declaration of assets upon
leaving office.
With that in mind, the Fondasyon Je Klere
recommends that the Security Council help Haiti
to strengthen its political governance to reform the
State, reform the Constitution and create a safe and
stable climate for the organization of proper and
clean elections. We recommend that it help to create
a specialized unit to combat armed gangs within the
Haitian National Police, while strengthening the
intelligence service and identifying and arresting the
perpetrators of serious human rights violations, with a
view to bringing them to trial in an exemplary manner.
We recommend that the Council help to support the
Haitian State in conducting trials relating mainly to the
6/23

06/07/2023

PetroCaribe funds, the killings in La Saline, CarrefourFeuilles, the Cul-de-Sac plain and Artibonite, and the
cases of rape; effectively assist the State in combating
corruption by strengthening its normative and
institutional framework for the fight against corruption;
and audit the Haitian National Police to make the police
force more credible with the population and better able
to carry out its mission to protect and serve.
As the previous speaker said, I apologize for my
lengthy statement; it could not be short.
The President: I thank Ms. Gilles for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Prime Minister
of Jamaica.
Mr. Holness (Jamaica): It is indeed an honour
for me to address the Security Council on behalf of
the 14 Member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). Let me express our gratitude to those
who have presented before me for their support for the
people of Haiti towards a solution to the ongoing crises.
CARICOM remains gravely concerned about the
rapidly deteriorating situation in Haiti. The Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification report lays bare
the severity of Haiti’s food crisis. Nearly half of the
population is grappling with acute food insecurity,
and approximately 19,000 people fall within the most
severe classification, phase 5 — catastrophe. Each of
those figures represents a face and a name. There can
be no peace among people who are hungry. To provide
immediate relief, it is imperative that the humanitarian
response plan be properly funded. We urge humanitarian
partners to massively scale up financial assistance,
including by investing in Haiti’s agricultural capabilities
for food security and resilience strengthening.
The humanitarian situation is being further
compounded by the security situation, including the
illicit flow of arms and ammunition and gang-related
violence. That perpetual state of insecurity has not
just impeded access to health care, education and
other basic goods and services, but has also resulted
in a rise of vigilante justice, which threatens to worsen
the already alarming surge in violence. The situation
is undermining efforts to find a lasting solution to the
seemingly insurmountable humanitarian, political and
security challenges, all of which are inextricably linked
and must be addressed in tandem.
For any solution to be successful, it must not
only be comprehensive, focusing on both security
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.9368

and socioeconomic challenges, but also Haitian-led,
Haitian-owned and Haitian-focused. To that end, while
we recognize the international community’s shared
concern about the grave situation in Haiti, we emphasize
that all efforts oriented towards contributing positively
to addressing the situation in Haiti must be undertaken
in good faith, prioritize the needs and circumstances
of the Haitian people and be free from the influence of
geopolitics or political expediency.

urged the cooperation of stakeholders. We therefore
anticipate further progress on the political front.
The eminent persons group is now scheduled to visit
Haiti within the coming week. CARICOM will offer
support to Haiti in key priority areas, which will
include humanitarian support, security and election
organization. Additionally, CARICOM will offer
personnel, training and capacity-building to the Haitian
National Police.

During the recent special meeting of the Economic
and Social Council on Haiti’s food security, CARICOM
cautioned against allowing the notion of “Haiti fatigue”
to take root. We once again reiterate that warning. It
is critical that the international community remain
steadfast in its support to the people of Haiti. To that
end, it is important to ensure that the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) is
not just extended for another 12 months, but also that
the Office is sufficiently equipped to provide robust
support to the Haitian National Police so that it can
combat the rising violence and restore order. In that
context, we underscore that BINUH must work closely
with Haiti to ensure that its mandate is responsive to
the needs and priorities of the people of Haiti.

Peace, stability and prosperity are not mere
aspirations for the Haitian people but their inherent
right. The international community must continue to
do its part to assist them as they endeavour to find a
lasting solution. It is imperative that we move beyond
the rhetoric of solidarity with Haiti to implementing
strategic and targeted action that will enable Haiti to
make tangible progress. I have led a CARICOM mission
to Haiti and have seen first-hand the challenges and
heard the cries of the Haitian people. We have taken note
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/492) and
his assessment following his visit to Haiti, and we note
the many offers of support to Haiti. We acknowledge
the imposition of sanctions on gang members as a good
and important step. However, sanctions are inadequate
to addressing the local insecurity and transnational
impact of the gangs. We have noted the Government
of Haiti’s request for security support to address the
urgent and deteriorating security situation. We therefore
underscore the urgency of pursuing multinational
security efforts with an appropriate jurisdictional
mandate aimed at restoring peace and stability in Haiti.
CARICOM calls for a Security Council resolution to
that effect as soon as possible.

CARICOM established the three-member eminent
persons group, which comprises former Prime Ministers
of the Bahamas, Jamaica and Saint Lucia. Through that
mechanism, CARICOM will continue to use its good
offices to work with Haitian national stakeholders, civil
society and all partners to contribute to the achievement
of an inclusive, intra-Haitian dialogue. Our efforts
are intended to form part of a larger framework and,
therefore, be complementary to the ongoing processes
taking place at various levels.
Our aim has been to widen consensus around
a Haitian-determined path to peace, stability and
democracy. In that context, I had the honour, alongside
my colleague, the Prime Minister of the Bahamas, to
welcome to Jamaica more than 50 Haitian stakeholders
for three days of talks in Kingston, during which
they were able to address the core issues of interim
governance and transition. Our engagement with Prime
Minister Henry, during our just-concluded regular
meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of
CARICOM, held in Trinidad and Tobago, was frank
and direct about the need for deliberate and urgent steps
towards political solutions among stakeholders.
CARICOM called on the Government of Haiti to
honour its commitments announced in Kingston and
23-19629

It is our duty to give hope to those suffering in
Haiti. While we all express our solidarity with them,
it is meaningless without urgent action. Let us help
our brothers and sisters in Haiti to finally achieve the
peace, stability and prosperity that they deserve. I thank
Council members for their attention and urgent action.
The President: I thank Mr. Holness for his
briefing. I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I recognize the presence in the Council of the Foreign
Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, as well
as the Permanent Representative of Barbados. I am
grateful for the briefings by Prime Minister Andrew
Michael Holness of Jamaica, speaking on behalf of
the Caribbean Community, Ambassador Michel Biang
7/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

of Gabon, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022)
concerning Haiti and Ms. María Isabel Salvador, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
whom I also commend for advancing the work of
BINUH in three short months. I especially appreciate
the briefing by civil-society leader Ms. Marie-Yolène
Gilles of the Fondasyon Je Klere, which reflects the
precarious situation, the horror in which the Haitian
people are living and their cry for help. It was not her
first time speaking before the Council, but her briefings
are always very informative.
Here in the Chamber in April (see S/PV.9311),
I asked a question. If we on the Security Council
are unable to contribute to overcoming the state of
gang-generated violence and cruelty in Haiti, how
can we hope to resolve the much larger conflicts
around the world? That is why addressing the issue of
Haiti is vital to ensuring trust in the United Nations
and in multilateralism. In that context, I urged the
leaders of the United Nations system to spare no
effort in conveying our message of solidarity and in
transmitting the voices and cries of the people in Haiti.
In that regard, I appreciate Secretary-General António
Guterres’s visit of Saturday, 1 July, in solidarity with
Haiti, as well as the recent working visits to the country
by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
Executive Directors of UNICEF and the World Food
Programme, the Chair of the Sanctions Committee and
Mr. William O’Neill, the Independent Expert on human
rights in Haiti appointed by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Haitian people have indeed received the
message. Now they are waiting for concrete action by
the Council. In that regard, while I acknowledge that
the Council did strengthen BINUH last July with its
adoption of resolution 2645 (2022), the speed with
which Haiti’s security and humanitarian situation is
deteriorating is beyond the institutional capacities of
any special political mission. For that reason, I agree
with the delegation of China’s assertion in the Council
on 15 July last year (see S/PV.9095) that a fundamental
adjustment is imperative.
BINUH, which is responsible for supporting
political stability and good governance and has
assisted and encouraged the expansion of the Haitianled dialogue, needs the capacity to support efforts to
8/23

06/07/2023

strengthen the effective implementation of the political
commitments that have been made. In Ecuador’s view,
the Secretary-General’s visit to Haiti also demonstrated
his support for BINUH, which is a political mission that
plays a key role in supporting anti-corruption efforts and
in fully restoring the judicial system and the rule of law.
Given that Haiti’s transition process has been delayed
by the security situation, we must stop repeating the
self-contradictory notion that in order to take concrete
steps it is first necessary to hold elections, when we
all know that organizing an electoral process requires
significant protection and security efforts, which are
currently impossible to ensure without international
assistance through the provision of a support force for
the Haitian police.
We call on all members of the Council to be guided
by the declaration made in January by the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, in which
my region welcomed the signing of the 21 December
agreement on a national consensus for an inclusive
transition and transparent elections and called on
States to consider the possibility of participating in
a multinational support force for the Haitian police,
whose deployment the Secretary-General recommended
nine months ago at the request of the people and
Government of Haiti. I should point out that in the
context of the implementation of resolution 2645 (2022),
the Secretary-General provided recommendations for
enhanced security support, specifying in his letter
dated 8 October 2022 (S/2022/747) — which for clarity
I will cite it in its original language — that
(spoke in English)
“A return to a more robust United Nations
engagement in the form of peacekeeping remains
a last resort if no decisive action is urgently
taken by the international community, in line
with the options outlined, and if the national law
enforcement capacity proves unable to reverse the
deteriorating security situation.” (S/2022/747, p.8)
(spoke in Spanish)
In the context of the humanitarian note on Haiti
of 23 April by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, based on the Council’s own
request that it be promptly informed when a risk of famine
caused by conflict and widespread food insecurity
arises, the Council’s action is critical. If we fail to act,
the repercussions in Haiti and the Latin American and
Caribbean region could be unprecedented, including
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

in terms of persons displaced and in other precarious
situations. As of May, the number of children suffering
from acute malnutrition has increased by 30 per cent
compared to 2022, and half of Haiti’s children depend on
humanitarian aid to survive. The need for psychosocial
support and mental health care in the context of the
situation in Haiti is self-explanatory. I would like to
once again acknowledge the work of the humanitarian
actors in that regard.
Finally, I would like to thank all the members of the
Council and to acknowledge the commitment of their
delegations in the negotiations we are conducting for
the renewal of BINUH’s mandate, with the confidence
we need to achieve a more robust mission and more
decisive support from our Organization.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank Ms. María Isabel Salvador,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her briefing. I also thank Ambassador Biang for his
briefing in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022), concerning Haiti. I would also like to thank
Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles for her important account
and perspective on behalf of civil society, as someone
who has tirelessly promoted women’s rights, advanced
the cause of human rights and supported victims of
gang violence. I would also like to acknowledge with
gratitude the participation of the Foreign Minister of
Haiti; the Prime Minister of Jamaica, on behalf of the
Caribbean Community,; the Permanent Representative
of Barbados, on behalf of the Economic and Social
Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti; and the
Foreign Minister of the Dominican Republic.
At the outset, let me say the United States would like
to express its solidarity with the people of Haiti. As Vice
President Harris noted at the United States-Caribbean
Leaders Meeting, our hearts go out to those who have
lost loved ones and all who have been impacted by the
flooding and earthquake last month and, of course,
the spiralling violence. The security situation in Haiti
remains a great concern. The Sanctions Committee’s
Panel of Experts reported increased levels of armed
violence and gang encroachment into new territories.
The influence of gangs, as we heard, now extends to
80 per cent of Port-au-Prince and increasingly beyond
the capital. Criminal gangs continue to commit
increasingly flagrant and violent human rights abuses
to exert control and intimidate the public. The deliberate
use of gender-based violence, especially rape and other

S/PV.9368

forms of sexual violence, is just one horrifying tactic
in that regard. The United States strongly condemns
the systematic use of sexual violence and recognizes
the disproportionate impact this crisis has on women
and girls.
As we also heard today, conflict-related sexual
violence in Haiti continues to fuel further violence,
induces displacement and often occurs alongside other
abuses against civilians. Survivors lack access to
support services and risk reprisals for reporting abuses.
The rampant gang violence has also reduced access to
livelihoods and health-care services, kept children out
of school and created a food security emergency.
We welcome the recent visits to Haiti — not only
by Secretary-General Guterres, but also by World
Food Programme Executive Director Cindy McCain,
UNICEF Executive Director Catherine Russell and the
new Independent Expert on Human Rights in Haiti,
William O’Neill, which have brought much needed
attention to the worsening humanitarian crisis. The
United States has provided more than $110 million in
humanitarian aid for Haiti this year, and we continue
to work closely with partner organizations to meet
urgent needs. However, without improved security,
the humanitarian situation in Haiti will continue
to deteriorate.
The illicit flow of firearms enables gangs to carry
out their crimes and to stockpile weapons that can
surpass the firepower of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). We also know that the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons can be linked to conflict-related
sexual violence. The United States determination to
address firearms trafficking led to the creation of a new
position in our Department of Justice — Coordinator
for Caribbean Firearms Prosecutions — which will
maximize information-sharing among countries in the
region in order to support the prosecution of traffickers.
The United States also stood up a Haiti transnational
criminal investigative unit in collaboration with
the Haitian National Police in order to facilitate
investigation and prosecution of crimes with the
United States nexus, particularly firearms and human
trafficking. The Security Council will also need to
do its part in assisting Haiti, including by advancing
additional sanctions against those who finance and
foment violence and instability in the country.
The Haitian Government and its people have asked
for international support — for our help. The United
States continues to work with a growing number of

23-196299/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

international partners to support the urgent security
needs in Haiti. For those reasons and, as SecretaryGeneral Guterres requested most recently during his
trip to Haiti on 1 July and reiterated today, the United
States supports the deployment of a multinational force
to Haiti in order to help its police restore security.
I will close by reiterating the important work of
the special political mission, under the leadership of
Special Representative Salvador. The support of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
for the national political forum, recruitment support
to the HNP and legal assistance to judicial authorities
are examples of its invaluable work. Together with
our co-penholder, Ecuador, we are addressing ways to
strengthen BINUH’s capacities as the Security Council
discusses its mandate renewal.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour of making this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and my country, Gabon. I would
like to thank Special Representative María Isabel
Salvador for her briefing on the situation in Haiti. I
also thank Ms. Gilles for her briefing. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the Prime Minister
of Jamaica, on behalf of Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), as well as that of the Foreign Ministers of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
The alarming situation and the multifaceted crisis
in Haiti are well known to the Council. There is no
need to discuss further the rampant insecurity that
continues to seriously undermine the functioning of
State institutions and the lack of resources available to
the Haitian police to address it.
What the Haitian people need today is urgent,
concerted, targeted action to transform their daily lives,
active international solidarity to break the vicious cycle
of violence, large-scale mobilization of resources to
implement the humanitarian response plan, estimated
at $720 million, to help the 600,000 Haitians in need of
humanitarian aid.
On the political front, we support the efforts of
the High Transitional Council for inclusive dialogue to
reach the broadest and most representative consensus
possible on the 21 December agreement, in particular
through the holding of a national political forum on
23 and 24 May in Port-au-Prince. The participation
of non-signatory groups and civil society, as well as
that of many women, is the best way of paving the
10/23

06/07/2023

way, including through constitutional reform, towards
the restoration of a political climate favourable to
the organization of free and credible elections under
conditions accepted by all. The A3 take note of the
call addressed to the High Transitional Council to
set up a group of experts to revise the Constitution
and to organize popular consultations, as well as to
set up a provisional electoral council with a view to
holding elections.
The people of Haiti must commit with greater
courage and determination to rekindle hope and don
the mantle of their historic resilience in a context of
multiple crises — security, humanitarian, climate,
political and governance.
The role of friendly countries, particularly that of
CARICOM, is crucial. We welcome the good offices and
other solidarity initiatives undertaken by this regional
organization, in particular the establishment of a group
of eminent representatives to facilitate dialogue among
the stakeholders. Those actions must be rooted in the
desire to help Haitians take their destiny into their
own hands.
The worsening violence, particularly in the Ouest
department and the daily indiscriminate attacks on
the population, including women and children, using
snipers and other acts of barbarism, in violation of
human rights, are unbearable. The emergence of
vigilante groups and the ongoing violence in Port-auPrince and beyond are equally worrisome. It is essential
to combat violence in order to restore the authority of
the State, rehabilitate economic conditions, stop human
rights violations, rebuild the school and health-care
systems and revive the economy. It is unacceptable that
the Haitian people, including women and girls, have
become the target of fighting between rival gangs.
The scale of the violence is causing major
population displacements within and outside the
country, with more than 127,977 people displaced last
March, according to the International Organization for
Migration. The appointment of a United Nations expert
on human rights is certainly welcome. The A3 calls for
priority action to assist vulnerable demographic groups
such as women, children, older persons and persons
with disabilities.
Owing to the current critical state of emergency
in terms of security, it is imperative to prioritize
the financing of the joint programme to support the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police.
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

There is a dire need to raise the $28 million required to
guarantee the security of the population. To date, only
$17.7 million have been raised for that fund.
The A3 calls for greater support for the justice
sector, including the certification of judges and the
reforms needed to enable the justice system to function
properly. The conclusion of prominent court cases,
which remain unresolved to date, is essential to regain
the population’s trust and renew the social contract
among Haitians.
The A3 welcomes the holding of a meeting of
the Economic and Social Council on 16 June and the
presentation of the national plan for the recovery of the
Haitian agricultural system, with the aim of bringing
the country out of its critical food crisis. Child food
insecurity must be tackled head-on in order to prevent
it from worsening and to contain any long-term effects
thereof. Every effort must be made to avoid sacrificing
an entire generation of Haitians.
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon support the
initiative by Secretary-General António Guterres to
include Haiti in the 30 countries in which the Early
Warnings for All initiative will be implemented. In
the face of earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, the Ebola
epidemic and other threats, supporting Haiti in a
sustainable manner requires vigorous, resolute and
forward-looking action.
The A3 encourages joint initiatives undertaken
by the country team and other United Nations
stakeholders, including private partners, to implement
the five-year cooperation framework for sustainable
development signed on 19 April by the Haitian
authorities and the United Nations. We are pleased that
this framework is based on the link between peace,
security and development, with a strategy to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse, capacity-building and
risk mitigation. Actions must be aimed at restoring the
country’s productive capacity, providing employment
opportunities for young people so that immigration is
no longer the only way out, and enabling the country
to respond to natural disasters and epidemics that
cyclically imperil its social fabric.
We call on donors to strengthen their commitment
to Haiti through coordinated and sustainable actions.
Haiti needs solidarity and support from all. We support
UNICEF’s international advocacy as lead counsel on
Haiti for the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. The

S/PV.9368

multifaceted crisis raging in Haiti must absolutely not
be forgotten.
To conclude, we reiterate our firm determination
to continue to stand with the fraternal people of Haiti,
and we encourage all political actors to choose dialogue
and consultation in order to overcome their differences,
bring peace to Haiti and build their future while also
honouring the illustrious history that, in centuries past,
made that valiant people proud.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank Ms. Salvador,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ambassador Biang, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Holness,
Prime Minister of Jamaica, and Ms. Gilles for their
valuable briefings. I also welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic and of the representative
of Barbados.
Haiti is entering an unprecedented and escalating
cycle of violence. Gangs are obstructing citizens’ access
to basic services. The country is witnessing soaring
food and water insecurity. There is widespread poverty
and unemployment, and gangs are expanding their
operations. In response, popular groups are addressing
gang violence by mutilating and burning alive people
suspected to be affiliated with those gangs. To make
matters worse, climate-change-related disasters,
including natural disasters, such as earthquakes and
the floods last month, have ravaged the country. They
exacerbated the humanitarian and food crises in Haiti
and further exacerbated instability in the country.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report on
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
(S/2023/492), bold and immediate action is needed to
address the security situation in Haiti. That was a clear
outcome of the visit to Haiti by the Secretary-General
earlier this month.
It is against that backdrop that I shall focus my
comments today on encouraging such action on two
main topics.
First, we must prioritize addressing growing
instability and violence in Haiti. In October last year,
the Council took an important step in that regard by
establishing sanctions that target criminal gangs and
their financiers, who are causing suffering in the
country. The Council should now utilize that important

23-1962911/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

06/07/2023

tool by ensuring that sanctions are implemented fully
and by listing those individuals and entities who meet
the sanctions criteria. Furthermore, this effort must be
complemented by a response from the international
community that strengthens and builds the capacity of
the Haitian National Police, thereby enabling them to
address the growing and harrowing reports of violence,
especially the abhorrent crimes of sexual and genderbased violence, and hold perpetrators accountable.
That response should also include continued discussion
by the Council of how best to respond to the security
situation in Haiti.

Ms. Gilles for their briefings. I would like to welcome
the Prime Minister of Jamaica, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
and the Permanent Representative of Barbados.

For its part, the United Arab Emirates will continue
to engage constructively in those discussions, including
on the renewal of the mandate of BINUH. We reaffirm
our full support for BINUH and its efforts to promote
security and stability in the country.

For that reason, France urges the international
community to mobilize as a matter of absolute urgency.
France echoes the appeal launched by the SecretaryGeneral during his visit to Haiti. We support the
deployment of a force to support the Haitian National
Police, including through more robust engagement on
the part of the United Nations.

Secondly, long-term stability in Haiti can be
achieved only by simultaneously achieving progress
on the political track. That requires the United Nations
and the international community to support the process
that is Haitian-led and -owned. We welcome the
continued efforts of Haiti to broaden inclusive political
dialogue and implement the National Consensus for an
Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections, but we
also stress that those efforts must be complemented
by the constructive engagement of all relevant Haitian
stakeholders. In that regard, we reaffirm the important
role of BINUH in facilitating that dialogue and
welcome the role of the Caribbean Community and the
good offices of its eminent persons group to support
dialogue among the Haitian parties and assist them
in addressing key challenges, including the electoral
process and promoting security. I stress that regional
engagement is essential to the achievement of peace
and stability in Haiti.
In conclusion, I note that, since our meetings last
year on the situation in Haiti, the Council has continued
to hear reports of ever more disturbing developments and
horrific atrocities that need an urgent, comprehensive
and more effective response from the international
community to address those complex challenges and
safeguard the people of Haiti and the region as a whole.
We cannot allow the escalating spiral of violence and
insecurity to continue.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti and
12/23

France stands in solidarity with the Haitian people,
who are suffering on a daily basis. In Port-au-Prince,
gangs sow terror, cut off roads and restrict access to
basic services and humanitarian assistance. Killings,
kidnappings and sexual violence — the list of abuses
in Haiti would stir any human conscience and must be
condemned in the strongest terms.

The Haitian people are calling for the help of the
international community, and collectively we must heed
that call. We need to act now if we do not want future
generations to suffer from the consequences of violence
and social breakdown. Let us face it: without security,
there will be no development, no rule of law and no
justice for victims. There will be no lasting peace in
Haiti without the restoration of institutions.
France will therefore continue to encourage an
inclusive political dialogue. Everyone must set their
personal interests aside and demonstrate a spirit of
responsibility. We hail the efforts undertaken to broaden
participation in the National Consensus for an Inclusive
Transition and Transparent Elections. The goal is still
to convene democratic elections once the necessary
security conditions have been met. France encourages
Haitian political stakeholders to reach an agreement on
the appointment of an inclusive Provisional Electoral
Council in order to make progress towards that goal.
Almost two years to the day since the assassination
of President Jovenel Moïse, it is vital to bolster the
fight against impunity in Haiti. Rebuilding an effective
justice system is a priority if we wish to put an end to
violence once and for all. For its part, the Council must
expeditiously adopt new sanctions against criminals
sowing violence against the Haitian people.
Finally, France will remain committed to facilitating
humanitarian aid, in particular in terms of health and
food assistance. We cannot simply resign ourselves to
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

this vicious cycle, when one out of two Haitian people
do not have enough to eat.
The countries in the region can play a decisive role,
and we commend the engagement of the Caribbean
Community in supporting Haiti, as well as the work of
the International Organization of la Francophonie.
It is high time to take action, and everyone must
mobilize. The renewal of the mandate is an opportunity
to show our determination. France supports the
strengthening of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti, in particular in terms of security and justice.
Let us not allow Haiti to descend into chaos. Let us not
forget the Haitian people.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I have just presented
my credentials to the Secretary-General, António
Guterres, and I am honoured to start today as the new
Permanent Representative of Brazil.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Maria Isabel Salvador Crespo
and the Permanent Representative of Gabon for their
comprehensive briefings. I also recognize the presence
of Their Excellencies the Foreign Ministers of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic and the Permanent
Representative of Barbados. I am grateful for the
important participation of Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles,
civil society representative, and His Excellency
Mr. Andrew Holness, Prime Minister of Jamaica, on
behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The dreadful security situation in Haiti has shown
no signs of improvement since our previous meeting
(see S/PV.9311). Brazil remains extremely concerned
about the ongoing human rights abuses in the country,
the alarming levels of food and nutrition insecurity and
the far-reaching impact of gang violence in nearly all
aspects of life in Port-au-Prince and other cities in Haiti.
The rise of vigilante groups is further aggravating the
situation. It is evident that the Haitian National Police
lacks the necessary expertise and resources to respond
adequately to its many challenges. Recognizing the
multiple appeals from the Haitian Government for the
deployment of an international specialized force to aid
the Haitian National Police in curbing gang violence,
Brazil supports further Council discussions aimed at
identifying tangible actions to achieve that goal.
The Haitian political stalemate exacerbates the
country’s security and humanitarian crises. The
re-establishment of institutional normalcy in Haiti
demands a comprehensive national political consensus.

S/PV.9368

The Secretary-General acknowledged in his latest
report (S/2023/492) that efforts have been made to
broaden the political consensus and further implement
the National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and
Transparent Elections, signed on 21 December 2022.
In that regard, Brazil commends CARICOM’s
support of inter-Haitian dialogue, particularly the
organization of meetings involving key parties. Prime
Minister Ariel Henry’s commitment to put in place a
Government of national unity, appoint a Provisional
Electoral Council and enlarge the High Transitional
Council to include representatives from a broader
political spectrum is a positive sign.
We must ensure that Haitian crises are not fuelled or
exploited for political or economic purposes, either from
inside or outside the country. We remain hopeful that
the Council’s sanctions regime, adopted last October,
can and will play a positive role in facilitating a peaceful
political understanding, especially by helping to sever
the link between political and economic elites and the
Haitian gangs. We take note of the report made by the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti
regarding his recent visit to Haiti and the Dominican
Republic and call upon the Committee to initiate its
deliberations to impose sanctions with the full support
of the international community.
As we intensify our negotiations to renew the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti, it is vital to reinforce the mission in terms of
security, capacity and resources. Those enhancements
are vital for the mission to effectively carry out its
mandate to assist Haiti in the current challenging and
deteriorating circumstances. Brazil hopes that the
Council will shortly reach an agreement, so that the
draft resolution can be adopted by the end of next week.
In the coming days and months, Haiti must remain
at the forefront of our attention. The Council needs to
closely follow new developments on the ground, while
carefully considering new measures. Any security
assistance for Haiti must fully align with Haitian
needs and aspirations and be formulated with the
comprehensive engagement of Haitian stakeholders.
Brazil stands ready to continue working with Haiti and
key international partners in that regard.
Finally, the escalating crises in Haiti are intensifying
the need for humanitarian support. It is imperative that
we respond to the immediate humanitarian requirements

23-1962913/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

outlined in the 2023 humanitarian response plan , which
is currently only 23 per cent funded. At the same time,
we must address Haiti’s chronic food and nutrition
insecurity by increasing investment in the country’s
food systems.
Brazil therefore emphasizes the critical importance
of socioeconomic progress for addressing the crisis
in Haiti in a sustainable manner. We reaffirm our
commitment to place Haiti high in our international
cooperation efforts. We encourage the international
community to intensify its endeavours to promote
economic and social development, preventing Haiti
from descending into further violence and instability,
and thus really helping it to overcome its present
unsustainable situation.
The President: Let me take this opportunity to
welcome the Ambassador of Brazil to the Security
Council. We look forward to working with him.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me also begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salvador Crespo, Ambassador Biang in
his capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti and Ms. Gilles for their
insights. We also appreciate the participation and the
briefing of the Prime Minister of Jamaica on behalf of
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and we commend
CARICOM for its efforts in extending aid to Haiti.
We also welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic and the Permanent
Representative of Barbados to this meeting.
We remain extremely concerned by the dire and
still worsening crisis in Haiti. We are alarmed by
the growing power of gangs, which are spreading
insecurity and violence and producing ever-greater
political instability that hampers the efforts of the
public authorities to respond to extreme poverty and
natural disasters.
As we have heard, Haitians are in desperate need
of help and are asking for it in every way they can.
The Council must answer their pleas for help and act
swiftly. Haitians need all the help they can get, starting
with life-saving humanitarian aid, but the first problem
we must resolve is that of security.
It is for that reason, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for urgent assistance to Haiti after his visit
and participation in the forty-fifth regular meeting of the
Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean
14/23

06/07/2023

Community, held in Trinidad and Tobago, that Albania
supports the deployment of a multinational force to
assist the Haitian National Police in defeating and
dismantling the gangs and in restoring security across
the country. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the conditions are desperate, but solutions are possible
if we act now. That non-United Nations international
force will be crucial to allowing the country to restore
order and the rule of law, revitalize the judicial system,
address impunity and create an environment conducive
to the holding of future elections.
We also welcome the efforts of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2653 (2022) to manage the situation in Haiti and once
again thank its Chair, Ambassador Biang, for sharing
his experience and insights from his recent visit to Haiti
and the Dominican Republic.
The international community must work in synergy
with the Haitian authorities towards their common
goals and aspirations. We can succeed only if we
empower the Haitian people to restore their domestic
sovereignty and govern themselves democratically in
peace and harmony. We acknowledge the commendable
endeavours of the High Transitional Council to
consolidate consensus on navigating the political
transition through its recent national political forum.
We believe that inclusive dialogue and
implementing transitional arrangements are crucial
preconditions to restoring democratic rule and
institutions. We implore all stakeholders to foster unity
and inclusivity and include women and young people
in all relevant deliberations. It is also urgent to address
the violence against girls and women, and we urge for
more sanctions in that regard. Albania remains hopeful
that, in a spirit of national unity, solidarity and urgency,
positive change and sustainable reform can be achieved
in Haiti.
In conclusion, Albania reaffirms its full support for
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and looks
forward to the renewal of its mandate.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Special
Representative Salvador and Ms. Gilles for their
briefings. I also welcome the briefings by Prime
Minister Holness of Jamaica on behalf of the Caribbean
Community and by Ambassador Biang in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022). I further welcome
the participation of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

Généus of Haiti and Álvarez Gil of the Dominican
Republic and of the Permanent Representative of
Barbados in this meeting.
Malta remains gravely concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation in Haiti. The suffering of
the civilian population continues to escalate, with
the situation on the ground having reached levels
comparable to an armed conflict. As detailed in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/492), gang
violence has continued to escalate and spread in Portau-Prince and beyond. Murders and kidnappings rose
for the fifth consecutive year, with well over 2,000
homicides registered by the Haitian National Police
since the beginning of 2023. We are deeply concerned
by the new cycle of violence that began in recent
months between gangs and vigilante justice groups,
and fear further escalation though mobilization, arming
and recruitment.
It is clear that the current situation demands urgent
international attention and support. Local authorities
are overstretched and require assistance in dealing
with the huge security challenges they are facing.
The Council must use all its influence to address
the underlying drivers and root causes of instability
and insecurity. Updating the list of those sanctioned
through the 2653 Committee constitutes an important
step towards achieving concrete results on the ground.
As members of the Council, we must also work to
prevent the illegal flow of arms into Haiti and identify
and prosecute those facilitating and benefiting from the
situation. We recognize the request made by the Haitian
authorities and the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral regarding the need for an international
specialized force to complement and strengthen the
Haitian National Police.
The international community must work together
to find innovative, sustainable and safe solutions for
Haiti’s security crisis. Any such initiative must have a
clear, fully defined mandate and objectives that are both
achievable and measurable. Furthermore, principled
humanitarian programming must remain separate from
any such initiative.
The dire humanitarian situation continues to be
exacerbated by multiple factors. Nearly 5 million
Haitians, or half the population, are acutely food
insecure, and many more than 100,000 children
expected to suffer severe wasting from malnutrition.
Gang control over critical road networks has disrupted

S/PV.9368

the distribution of food, curtailed the population’s
freedom of movement and prevented access to essential
services. Humanitarian actors must be given safe, rapid
and unimpeded access to those in need, and armed gangs
must ensure that basic humanitarian standards are met.
The number of targeted attacks against medical staff
in Haiti over the past number of months is alarming.
We call on Member States to support the scaling-up
of humanitarian organizations on the ground and for
further contributions to Haiti’s 2023 humanitarian
response plan.
Malta is greatly disturbed by the reports of
conflict-related sexual violence. Sexual violence
against women and girls by armed groups is abhorrent
and must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
The international community should also enhance the
capacity of Haitian institutions to prevent and eliminate
sexual and gender-based violence and ensure the
punishment of perpetrators and reparations for victims.
Malta is also deeply concerned by the grave
violations against children, as noted in the most recent
annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363). Children continue to
suffer extreme abuse at the hands of gangs, including
kidnapping, sexual violence, injury, death and forced
recruitment. The international community must work
to build a safe environment for children, removing them
from harm’s way and putting them back into schools.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for efforts
to overcome the multidimensional crisis. We echo
the Secretary-General’s call during his recent visit
to Haiti for new, integrated approaches, combining
various priorities. The Haitian authorities must build an
inclusive and broad road map to strengthen institutions
and the rule of law to allow for a successful democratic
transition and an inclusive electoral framework. We
reiterate our support to Special Representative Salvador
and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, and
we will continue to work with the Security Council for
a timely renewal of the mission’s mandate.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salvador for her insightful
briefing. I also thank Ms. Gilles for her enlightening
statement. I extend a warm welcome to the Prime
Minister of Jamaica, Mr. Holness, speaking on behalf
of the Caribbean Community; the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, Mr. Généus; the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Álvarez Gil;
and the Permanent Representative of Barbados.

23-1962915/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

I also thank Ambassador Michel Biang, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022), for his briefing. Japan takes
note of the desire expressed by many actors for an
expansion of the sanctions list.
Haiti continues to face multifaceted challenges,
including violence, corruption, human rights abuses
and health and economic crises. In that regard, Japan
appreciates the efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) to support Haiti’s endeavour to
restore security, strengthen the rule of law and promote
respect for human rights. We also welcome BINUH’s
collaboration with the relevant stakeholders, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, notably in its recent anti-corruption
efforts. Such a holistic approach is essential to tackling
the interrelated root causes of Haiti’s struggles. As the
role that BINUH plays in ensuring peace and security
in Haiti remains essential, Japan fully supports the
extension of its mandate, which is due to end on
15 July. My delegation will engage constructively in the
mandate negotiations to enable BINUH to continue its
operations effectively.
At the same time, BINUH’s work can only
complement Haitian-led efforts. Japan welcomes the
Haitian Government’s efforts to implement the national
consensus agreement for an inclusive transition and
transparent elections. While acknowledging the
forum organized by the High Transitional Council,
we strongly encourage the Government to take further
action to intensify the forging of a broader consensus
on the agreement through dialogue among all Haitian
actors. Elections must be conducted in a free, fair and
transparent manner, with inclusive participation, for
Haiti’s medium- and long-term stability. Institutional
reform across Haiti, especially in the security and
judicial sectors, is also key. Strong, effective and trusted
institutions are essential to combating corruption and
impunity. Japan reaffirms the call to strengthen and
assist the Haitian National Police, including through
the possible deployment of a non-United Nations
specialized international force. For its part, Japan will
continue its support through bilateral and multilateral
initiatives such as the United Nations basket fund.
The active involvement of regional organizations
is also commendable. The recent meetings of the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community have reaffirmed their significant
engagement for Haiti’s security, democracy, promotion
16/23

06/07/2023

and protection of human rights and for the holding
of free and fair elections as soon as possible. At the
Group of Seven Summit held in Hiroshima in May,
leaders reiterated their commitment to strengthening
their coordination with Latin American and Caribbean
partners and other actors to meet Haiti’s humanitarian
and security needs. That was further emphasized in
May by our State Minister for Foreign Affairs when
he met with Haiti’s Foreign Minister, Jean Victor
Généus, and expressed Japan’s continuing support, in
coordination with international and regional partners,
with a view to stabilizing Haiti.
Let me conclude by reiterating Japan’s unwavering
support for and solidarity with the Government and the
people of Haiti as they pursue Haitian-led solutions.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Biang for their briefings. I welcome
the participation and statement of the Prime Minister
of Jamaica on behalf of the Caribbean Community. I
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic and the representative of Barbados
to this meeting.
The situation in Haiti has continued to deteriorate
since the Council’s previous meeting on the subject (see
S/PV.9311). The political stalemate continues. Gang
violence is rampant. The circumstances surrounding
the assassination of former President Moïse remain
unclear, while at the same time the humanitarian crisis,
including food shortages and a cholera epidemic,
continues to worsen. The tragic plight of the Haitian
people is heartbreaking. China supports United Nations
agencies and regional and international partners
in continuing their coordinated action to provide
humanitarian assistance and support to Haiti. It is
therefore important to make greater efforts to advance
the political process. Without a legitimate, effective
and responsible Government in place, any external
efforts to address the crisis are hardly likely to have
any lasting effect. The real way out of the Haitian crisis
lies in advancing the political transition process, which
in the current circumstances is more urgent than ever.
It is imperative to end the current political stalemate
as soon as possible on a basis of full respect for the
choices of the Haitian people.
The Haitian political parties should act in the true
interests of the people, conduct political consultations
with a sense of urgency, bridge their differences,
reach the broadest consensus possible on transitional
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

arrangements and create the conditions necessary for
holding free, fair, transparent and credible elections
as soon as possible. China expects the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) to play its role
based on its mandate under resolution 2476 (2019) in
promoting inclusive dialogue among all Haitian parties
and factions and supporting the country in finding a
Haitian-owned and -led solution. We also welcome the
continued efforts of the Caribbean Community and
other regional organizations in promoting a political
solution to the crisis in Haiti.
Curbing the rise in gang violence and creating
a security environment that ensures the most basic
level of safety and security are vital prerequisites for
alleviating the humanitarian situation and advancing
the political process. The sanctions regime established
in accordance with resolution 2653 (2022), adopted
last year, provides an important tool for fighting gang
violence and should therefore be fully implemented.
We commend the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti
for his recent visit there. As his briefing indicates, all
the Haitian parties generally believe that the Security
Council’s imposition of sanctions on Haitian gangs
and their supporters has helped improve the security
situation on the ground. We hope that the Sanctions
Committee and the Panel of Experts will step up their
efforts, update and expand the sanctions list as soon
as possible, further develop other sanctions measures
and ensure their monitoring and implementation in
order to create the necessary deterrent to gang violence.
BINUH and the countries concerned should step up
their support for the work of the Sanctions Committee.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
relevant countries of the region have repeatedly pointed
out the strong correlation between the illicit trafficking
of arms and ammunition to Haiti and extreme levels
of gang violence. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/492) stresses that the international community
must support the work of addressing the trafficking
and illicit flows of arms. As the Independent Expert
on the situation of human rights in Haiti appointed by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights also noted after a recent visit to the
country, no weapons are manufactured in Haiti and the
arms embargo must be implemented immediately.
There have long been intensive discussions and
consultations surrounding the Haitian authorities’
request for the deployment of an international security

S/PV.9368

force, and we have listened to many fervent expressions
of support for that initiative, including at this meeting.
Regrettably, however, we have not heard any country
announce any concrete action. For now, it therefore
seems that a more in-depth study is required before a
viable and concrete proposal can be developed. Given
the current circumstances, the Security Council should
prioritize taking further measures based on the arms
embargo. If large quantities of weapons continue to
flow unchecked into the hands of Haitian gangs, the
international community’s efforts to further support
the Haitian police will be futile. China believes the
Council should immediately request that all countries
take all necessary measures to stop arms trafficking at
the source and to work together to cut off Haitian gangs’
access to firearms and ammunition. Any country that
sincerely sympathizes with the suffering of the Haitian
people and is genuinely willing to lend a helping hand to
Haiti should have no difficulty or hesitation in doing so.
Just as Secretary-General Guterres said during his
recent visit to Haiti, it is up to the Haitian people to solve
Haitian problems. Any external support plans should
be based on the wishes and consensus of the Haitian
people and should fully respect the ownership of the
Haitian people. China hopes that the Haitian authorities
will effectively shoulder their responsibilities and,
with the support of the international community, find
a feasible solution to achieve long-term peace, stability
and sustainable development in Haiti.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Prime Minister of Jamaica, Mr. Andrew
Holness, who spoke on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, Mr. Jean Victor Généus, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic,
Roberto Álvarez Gil. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. María
Isabel Salvador, for her briefing, and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2653 (2022), the Permanent Representative of Gabon,
Mr. Michel Xavier Biang. We listened very carefully to
the briefing by Ms. Gilles.
The situation in Haiti continues to deteriorate across
the board. The statistics presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/492) demonstrate a worrisome
trend towards growing numbers of abductions, murders,
sexual violence and other crimes this year. Direct
clashes between gangs and peaceful civilians continue,

23-1962917/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

and these peaceful civilians who, when they lost all
hope of receiving assistance from the Government, are
organizing themselves to protect their lives. Armed to
the teeth and well-organized armed gangs feel at ease in
the areas of the capital that they control, at a time where
the understaffed and unmotivated police is afraid even
to enter. The national institutions of governance show
that they have almost completely lost their capacity to
act, and this is compounded by the long-standing crisis
of legitimacy of the elective bodies.
We note with concern that progress in implementing
the National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and
Transparent Election, signed 21 December 2022, has
de facto been limited to creating a High Transitional
Council and then sponsoring a political forum on the
key issues the country is facing. The main opposition
parties did not participate in this forum.
We are convinced that finding lasting solutions to
the political crisis in Haiti is only possible on the basis of
a genuine and truly broad national consensus. Including
the word “consensus” in the title of a document, forcing
those who disagree with the consensus to agree it and
then believing that consensus has been achieved is far
from being the best strategy.
We expect that the Special Representative will
continue her efforts to broaden a genuine political
dialogue. We can see that there is still a lot that remains
to be done in that regard. We welcome the mediation
efforts by CARICOM as well as the efforts by regional
actors to bring the positions of the Government and the
opposition closer together. It is important to make sure
that the Haitian crisis does not become a challenge to
the stability and security of the Caribbean as a whole.
The systemic crisis in Haiti has been, to a large
degree, fuelled by many years of destructive external
interference in the form of direct interventions and
manipulations in the form of political engineering. The
nefarious practice of imposing political models that are
removed from local realities on the Haitians does not
take into account their national interests, undermines
the fragile foundations of Haitian Statehood and exposes
the political elite’s loss of a culture of conducting
a dialogue.
We are concerned by the fact that the killing of
President Moïse, which was committed with foreign
interference, remains uninvestigated. Tomorrow will
be the second anniversary of that crime, which has
unquestionably become the starting point for a spiral
18/23

06/07/2023

of lawlessness and violence and the creation of a power
vacuum in the country. We call on the national authorities
and all States that can exert influence in this regard to
ensure that this crime is investigated in a transparent
manner and that the outcome of the investigation is
shared with the international community so as to make
sure that all real perpetrators are brought to justice.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia has traditionally advocated establishing
responsible international assistance for Haiti, with
emphasis on a political settlement based on the
objective internal needs of the Haitians themselves
and finding solutions that are acceptable to the parties
in conflict. We note the appeal by Port-au-Prince for
providing assistance to respond to the range of security
challenges faced by the country. In this regard, we
support the proposal to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
to help assist and train the national police. At the
same time, the objectives of the mission should be
commensurate with its capacity, and priority needs to
be given to looking for political solutions.
Sustainable models for a political settlement need
to be accompanied by what we have in resolution
2653 (2022), namely, studying the sources and routes
of smuggling firearms, including through the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as cutting
off the channels of funding and supplies to local
criminal gangs. So far, we have not seen practical steps
taken in this area on the part of those States from which
most of the illegal weapons, drugs and money flow
into Haiti.
We advocate a responsible and well-founded
selection of candidates for the inclusion in the sanctions
list established by the 2653 Sanctions Committee, with
the understanding that this is the kind of work that
needs to be conducted in the interest of stabilizing the
situation in the country and not so as to situationally
clean up the political landscape in Haiti in the interest
of some actors.
We have outlined a number of areas where the
international community can and should already today
focus as it extends assistance to the long-suffering
people of Haiti. We do not entirely understand why,
given that political dialogue is stalled in the country,
that there is a legitimacy crisis and a lack of control of
weapons trafficking, and that the humanitarian plan is
underfinanced, some circles consider that the panacea
for all Haitian issues would be to send a multinational
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

armed force to the island. The history of foreign
interventions in Haiti proves that templates imposed
from outside do not take root in Haitian society, that
they bring more harm than good and that they are only
used as a cover under which to promote the interests
of other States. It is therefore not a coincidence that,
even now, despite all of the problems, there are voices
in Haiti against any kind of foreign interference, and it
is our duty to heed these voices and not try to play them
down or ignore them.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Andrew Holness and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. María Isabel Salvador, for their briefings. My thanks
also go to Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles, Executive Director
of the Fondasyon Je Klere, for her briefing, and to the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic,
whose presence in the Chamber today I welcome.
I thank Ambassador Biang for his briefing on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022). We call on all States Members
of the United Nations to respect and implement the
sanctions set out by the Committee. All measures must
be taken to prevent the illicit proliferation and diversion
of arms and munitions.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/492)
bears witness to the extent of the deterioration in the
security and human rights situation in Haiti. As he
stressed during his visit to the country, “every day
counts”. Switzerland is ready to work with the other
members of the Council towards a support force for the
Haitian National Police. In this respect, I would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, Switzerland strongly condemns sexual and
gender-based violence against Haitian women and
men. It is essential to strengthen the capacities of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) so
as to combat this scourge, notably through additional
specialized human resources in the renewal of its
mandate. Victims and survivors of such violence must
have access to care, and those responsible must be
brought to justice.
Secondly, given the number of serious violations
of children’s rights, Haiti is on the list of situations
of concern in the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363).
Children are particularly vulnerable, as they are
victims of recruitment, abduction, murder, rape and

S/PV.9368

other forms of sexual violence, as well as of attacks
on schools and hospitals and the denial of access to
humanitarian aid. Switzerland therefore supports the
inclusion of child protection measures in the renewal of
BINUH’s mandate.
Thirdly, safe, rapid and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance remains essential for the
population in need. The international community must
stand by the Haitian people. Basic services are still
inaccessible and almost half the population is food
insecure, while thousands of hectares of arable land
have been abandoned as a result of gang violence and
crops destroyed by natural disasters. In that regard,
early-warning mechanisms and resilient agricultural
systems are essential to mitigating the impact of climate
change on food security.
A response to the complex crises affecting the
country can be found only through an intra-Haitian
dialogue. We encourage the quest for compromise on the
part of all parties with a view to proposing a collective
and inclusive political response and the continuation
of regional dialogue, in particular dialogue led by the
countries of the Caribbean Community. Switzerland
also calls for restoring the rule of law, especially
through reform of the judicial and penitentiary systems,
which would effectively combat impunity and lay the
foundations for lasting peace. The Council must show
unity in renewing BINUH’s mandate so that it can
fulfil its mission effectively.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salvador, Ambassador Biang,
Ms. Gilles and Prime Minister Holness for their briefings
and statements. I also welcome the participation of
Foreign Minister Généus, Foreign Minister Álvarez
and the Permanent Representative of Barbados in
today’s meeting.
As we have heard today, the people of Haiti are
facing a dire humanitarian, security and political
crisis. Gangs have taken over entire neighbourhoods.
There is killing, burning, kidnapping and severe
restrictions of movement. We hear chilling accounts of
the widespread use by armed gangs of sexual violence,
including collective rape, as a weapon to instil fear in
communities. Nearly half the population are in need
of humanitarian assistance. We need to look seriously
at what the Council can do to address the cycle of

23-1962919/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

violence. The United Kingdom recognizes the Haitian
Government’s calls for urgent international security
assistance, and today’s meeting is an important part of
our discussion on the way forward, following the recent
visit of the Secretary-General.
In addition to addressing the security crisis, the
people of Haiti need political stability. We welcome
the recent Caribbean Community-hosted stakeholder
meeting held in Jamaica. We hope that regional support
will encourage the ongoing domestic efforts. We call
on all actors to engage constructively to prepare for
the holding of inclusive, free and fair legislative and
presidential elections as soon as the local security
situation permits. To complement the regional and
national action, we should ensure that the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) has the
right capabilities to deliver on its mandate. Ms. Salvador
and her team are doing vital work in incredibly difficult
circumstances. We look forward to concluding our
discussions on BINUH’s mandate renewal in the
coming days. The United Kingdom will continue to
support the efforts of the Government of Haiti and the
international community to address this pressing crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting to discuss
the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in Haiti
(S/2023/492). I congratulate the United Kingdom on
its presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and express my warm greetings to the members of
the Council, as I do to Prime Minister Andrew Holness
of Jamaica, whose participation in today’s meeting
attests to its importance and to the leaders of the
region’s renewed interest in Haiti and their clear desire
to contribute positively to finding a rapid and lasting
solution to my country’s multidimensional crisis. I
also welcome the presence at today’s meeting of my
Dominican Republic colleague and fellow Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Roberto Álvarez, as well as Ms. María
Isabel Salvador, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), who has spared
no effort in carrying out her mandate since her arrival
in the country. We are very grateful to her. I welcome
the participation of Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles and thank
her for her statement on the deterioration of the human
20/23

06/07/2023

rights situation in Haiti, as I do Ambassador Biang of
Gabon for his briefing.
Secretary-General António Guterres came to Haiti
last weekend to show his solidarity with the Haitian
people and to call for the rapid deployment of a robust
force to combat gangs. We are very pleased that he
repeated that call on 4 July in Trinidad and Tobago, at
the forty-fifth Regular Meeting of the Conference of
Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community,
which coincided with the fiftieth anniversary of the
Community’s creation. He urged the Security Council
to authorize the deployment of that force and asked
contributing countries to be ready. In the same vein,
it is worth highlighting the visit to the country a week
earlier by the United Nations Independent Expert on
the human rights situation in Haiti, who painted a
very bleak picture of the security and humanitarian
situation and called for the formation of a specialized
international force.
The Secretary-General’s report being considered
by the Council today has been submitted at a very
critical moment in the life of Haiti, marked by an
unprecedentedly complex crisis — an acute security,
political, humanitarian and food crisis, which has been
described to the members of the Council many times. It
cannot fail to shock our universal conscience through
the violence it has engendered and by the suffering and
the terrible consequences it is inflicting on the Haitian
people. The humanitarian crisis is affecting almost
half the population, suffering as they are from hunger
and a resurgence of cholera. The recent flooding
and earthquakes in Grand’Anse and the south of the
country have exacerbated the already precarious living
conditions of a majority of my compatriots, who are
enduring immense hardship.
As BINUH’s mandate is coming to an end and
will soon be renewed, the Council’s expectations for
the mission entrusted to it have not been fulfilled. The
Government hopes that BINUH’s new mandate will be
adapted and will make it possible, in agreement with
the competent national authorities, to find concrete
responses to promote and strengthen political stability
in order to move towards an intra-Haitian political
process that will enable the organization of inclusive,
peaceful, free, fair and transparent elections as soon as
the security conditions and logistical preparations allow.
For his part, Prime Minister Ariel Henry has set
to work and intends to make major political advances
to break the deadlock. He continues to engage in
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

dialogue with all the important forces of the country,
urging them to overcome the impasse and to unite for
the benefit of our collective welfare. In that regard,
following the establishment of the High Transitional
Council and the reopening of the Court of Cassation,
the country’s highest judicial body, the Prime Minister
intends to continue the political dialogue, move towards
the establishment of a provisional electoral council,
enlarge the High Transitional Council and form a
Government of national unity as soon as possible with
a new political governance process aimed at addressing
the major challenges facing the State.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Haiti, I would like to thank our international partners
who have committed to supporting Haiti in these
difficult times. They have always believed that finding
a lasting solution to the crisis is non-negotiable. I
would especially like to express our gratitude to our
brother countries in CARICOM and to the Dominican
Republic, as well as to the Secretary-General, for their
unfailing commitment alongside us.
Haiti is once again calling for urgent action for
the country’s sake. The greater United Nations family
cannot continue to ignore the requests of one of its
Member States, which is beset by serious security,
political, socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges.
In that regard, the Government is flexible and open
to any options that the Council deems appropriate in
order to address and find a lasting solution to this grave
crisis, which has gone on for far too long and is plunging
the families of Haiti into mourning on a daily basis.
We hope that the Security Council will reach a broad
consensus on a draft resolution on Haiti. The Council
fully understands the unprecedented and catastrophic
situation in the country, and now all it needs to do is act.
The Haitian people are eagerly awaiting the Council’s
adoption of a consensus text in that regard. The Charter
of the United Nations, the fundamental document of our
global Organization, contains appropriate provisions
for accompanying Haiti on the road to peace, security
and socioeconomic progress.
The United Nations, through the Security Council,
has a moral responsibility to prevent Haiti from
collapsing. The Council’s action is critical to restoring
hope in Haiti and enabling its people, especially the
suffering silent majority, to hope for a better tomorrow.
The Government is committed to its renewed request
for robust international assistance to support the efforts

S/PV.9368

of the Haitian National Police in its fight against
armed gangs.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank Ms. María Isabel
Salvador, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, and Ambassador Michel Xavier
Biang, Permanent Representative of Gabon and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti, for
their briefings. I also welcome the presence of and the
briefings by Prime Minister Andrew Holness of Jamaica,
on behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti; and Ambassador François
Jackman, Permanent Representative of Barbados.
Finally, I want to recognize Ms. Marie-Yolène Gilles,
the representative of civil society, for her important and
brave contribution.
I would like to begin by acknowledging SecretaryGeneral António Guterres’ important and long-awaited
visit to Haiti on 1 July, as well as his statement today in
which he called attention to the urgent need to respond
to the humanitarian, insecurity and political crisis that
the Haitian people are going through. The SecretaryGeneral’s visit underscores the importance that the
Organization attaches to the situation in Haiti and the
Secretariat’s commitment to resolutions 2645 (2022)
and 2653 (2022). We look forward to the next steps to be
taken in the context of the situation.
We have repeatedly and clearly stated before the
Security Council — and as was emphasized today by the
Special Representative, Mr. Holness and others — that
finding a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis in
Haiti is the primary responsibility of the Haitian people.
However, without international support, it is impossible
to envision the possibility that the necessary security
conditions can be created so as to bring about a feasible
solution for resolving the crisis.
Today’s meeting is taking place on the eve of
the second anniversary of President Jovenel Moïse’s
assassination. We express our solidarity with his family
and the Government and the people of Haiti. However, it
is not enough to pay respectful homage to the departed
President or to mourn the thousands of lives lost. We
need to see a positive response to the continuing request
by Prime Minister Ariel Henry and his Government for

23-1962921/23

S/PV.9368

The question concerning Haiti

a multinational force to support the Haitian National
Police. That is the only measure that will make it
possible to restore security and ensure the environment
needed to stabilize the country and make it possible to
hold democratic elections.
I want to put on record our strong support for
maintaining a solid and strengthened United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). That presence
guarantees that a certain level of attention will be paid
to this situation, which has reached the limit of what
can be endured. It is well known that BINUH alone is
not a response to the current crisis in Haiti — because
even the security of the Mission itself has been affected,
which is weakening its effectiveness and the image of
the United Nations itself. It is the responsibility of
the Secretary-General to continue strengthening his
leadership role with a view to establishing the kind of
force I mentioned, which has not been achieved so far.
For its part, my country is contributing actively in terms
of trade, the supply of fuel and many other logistical and
humanitarian aspects.
Based on the recommendations of resolution 2645
(2022), several countries and institutions have taken
concrete action. In that regard, we note the timely
efforts of Prime Minister Holness, whom we commend
for promoting an inclusive dialogue among Haiti’s
representative organizations. With the support of
CARICOM and its recently appointed Eminent Persons
Group, made up of three former Prime Ministers, we
are hopeful that the necessary consensus can be reached
among Haiti’s political class in order to move steadily
towards stability and democracy. We also recognize the
importance of the various initiatives announced by other
Governments, such as El Salvador, Trinidad and Tobago,
Canada and the United States. In that regard, we welcome
the recent statements by United States Secretary of State
Antony Blinken supporting sending an international
force to help to stabilize Haiti. All of those initiatives
aimed at restoring security and democratic governance
in Haiti are essential and must continue to be developed.
I would also like to highlight the significant impact
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti, whose
Chair, Ambassador Michel Biang, of Gabon, we recently
received in our country. The Committee is responsible
for establishing sanctions to be enforced by all Member
States against persons or entities that, in one way or
another, encourage and make use of the activities of
criminal organizations. Ambassador Biang was able to
22/23

06/07/2023

experience first-hand the Haitian reality and its impact
on our country. He was also able to observe the cost to
the Dominican Republic of maintaining security in the
border area.
The levels of insecurity in Haiti have led many
important companies to close permanently or limit their
operations, thus reducing the rate of formal employment
and affecting the daily life of its inhabitants. One example
is the case of the CODEVI industrial park, in the town
of Juana Méndez, located right on the border with our
country. This industrial park provides direct employment
to some 20,000 Haitians, indirectly impacting another
100,000 people. This important company has had to
close its doors several times due to violence and lack of
security. A few days ago, it had to close for two weeks.
This situation of insecurity, which was recently
highlighted by the heads of UNICEF and the World
Food Programme after their visit to Haiti, is having
grave consequences, as is the case of the almost
3 million children in need of humanitarian support.
The state of calamity affecting the people of Haiti is
also reflected — as noted by the Economic and Social
Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti — in the
fact that it is one of the most food insecure countries.
That is an alarming fact, and it is deplorable that, as the
Group points out, only 23 per cent of the funds needed to
respond to this tragedy have been disbursed.
We are at a turning point for a solution to the crisis
in Haiti. It is the inescapable duty of Haiti’s elites to rise
to the occasion; they must seize the historic moment and
act in the Haitian national interest and for the common
good of the entire nation. We hope that in the next 90
days, when we meet again in the Chamber, we will have
begun to take the necessary measures, mentioned time
and again in the Council, to overcome the severe crisis
that the Haitian people are experiencing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados.
Mr. Jackman (Barbados): I am honoured to
speak on behalf of the Economic and Social Council’s
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. The Advisory
Group is composed of 22 member States committed
to accompanying Haiti’s long-term socioeconomic
development. We are friends, neighbours and partners
of Haiti. Over the past year, our Group has expanded to
include Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Kenya, Saint
Kitts and Nevis and my own country, Barbados. We hope
to welcome Jamaica to the Group very soon.
23-19629

06/07/2023

The question concerning Haiti

On behalf of the Advisory Group, I wish to express
my appreciation to today’s briefers and to acknowledge
the participation of the Prime Minister of Jamaica
and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic.
On behalf of the Group, I wish to underscore
four points.
First, the international community must move,
without further delay, to support Haiti in restoring
security. Haitians require security to safely leave their
homes without fear of being killed, kidnapped or raped;
to enable children to safely get to school; to ensure that
the most vulnerable can access essential services; to
allow businesses to resume commerce; and to create the
space for free and fair elections. That requires curbing
the flow of arms and ammunition; strengthening the
Haitian National Police, the justice system and the rule
of law; protecting human rights; addressing sexual and
gender-based violence; working at the community level
to reduce violence; and putting direct pressure, through
the implementation of sanctions, on those who foment
violence and instability.
Secondly, adopting a comprehensive approach
that includes urgent measures regarding security,
humanitarian aid and development is critical for Haiti.
Immediate actions to assist Haiti in restoring security
must be accompanied by efforts to address the root
causes of violence in the country — extreme poverty,
corruption, impunity and collusion between the political
and economic spheres.
We heard from Haitian youth who described their
daily struggle to eat. A 17-year-old living in Cité Soleil
told us that it is easier to get a gun than it is to find a
meal. Humanitarian needs have doubled in the past year.
Despite its considerable agricultural potential and the
fact that, until recently, it was able to produce most of
the rice it consumed, Haiti is now among the countries
with the highest levels of food insecurity.

S/PV.9368

We need to urgently address the immediate
humanitarian needs of Haitians, as set out in the 2023
humanitarian response plan — less than 23 per cent of
which is funded. At the same time, we must invest in
Haiti’s sustainable development in order to strengthen its
resilience, including the resilience of its food systems.
Thirdly, the 21 December political accord and the
establishment of the High Transitional Council are steps
to build a national consensus for an inclusive transition
and transparent elections. We continue to encourage
intensified efforts among Haitian stakeholders to ensure
a broad and inclusive national political dialogue that
includes women and youth in order to chart a way
forward to re-establish democracy and accelerate the
country’s sustainable development.
Fourthly, at this critical time, the active support
and expertise of the United Nations across these areas
is essential. We strongly urge the Council to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH) for the next 12 months. Given the
severity and deterioration of the situation in Haiti, we
urge the Council to ensure that BINUH is adequately
equipped, in terms of personnel and resources, to engage
with Haitian stakeholders and to effectively assist Haiti
through this crisis.
Haiti is experiencing a complex, multidimensional
and extremely serious crisis — one that continues to
deteriorate at an alarming rate. The significant impact it
is having on the young people of Haiti, in particular, is
compromising the country’s future. Let us not therefore
only speak of solidarity with Haiti; we must also urgently
step up our coordinated support.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

23-1962923/23
