A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/202
12 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 30
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/L.73)]
53/202. The Millennium Assembly of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997 and decision 52/477 D of 6 May 1998,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on renewing the United Nations: a programme
for reform,1 and the note by the Secretary-General on a Millennium Assembly, the United Nations system
(Special Commission) and a Millennium Forum,2
Convinced that the year 2000 constitutes a unique and symbolically compelling moment to articulate
and affirm an animating vision for the United Nations in the new era,
Also convinced that a Millennium Assembly would provide an opportunity to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in meeting the challenges of the twenty-first century,
1. Decides to designate the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly “The Millennium Assembly
of the United Nations”;

1

A/51/950 and Add.1-7.

2

A/52/850.

99-76513

/...

A/RES/53/202
Page 2

2. Also decides to convene, as an integral part of the Millennium Assembly of the United Nations,
a Millennium Summit of the United Nations for a limited number of days on dates to be decided by the
General Assembly at its resumed fifty-third session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States, members of the specialized
agencies and observers and to propose, after a process of intergovernmental consultation, a number of
forward-looking and widely relevant topics that could help to focus the Millennium Summit within the
context of an overall theme, for consideration by the General Assembly at its resumed fifty-third session;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to consult with non-governmental organizations, as
appropriate, before the submission of his proposals;
5. Decides to continue its consideration of the item entitled “United Nations reform: measures and
proposals”, and agrees that a decision on the intergovernmental preparatory process, in particular its format
and terms of reference, ensuring the full and effective participation of all Member States, members of the
specialized agencies and observers in preparing for the Millennium Assembly, should be taken at the
earliest opportunity by the General Assembly at its resumed fifty-third session;
6. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session a sub-item entitled
“The Millennium Assembly of the United Nations” under the item entitled “United Nations reform:
measures and proposals”.
92nd plenary meeting
17 December 1998
