i

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
til
MEETING:

PANAMA

16 MARCH 1973

CITY

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 698) . , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . s . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

. . . . . , , . . . , . , . . . . . , , . , . . , , . . . . . . . . , , :.

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . . . . . . , , , . . . , . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1698J

‘I
;

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-EIGHTH

Palace, Panama City, on Friday,

Mr. Juan Antonio TACK (Panama)
later: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).

Resident:

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first name on the list of speakers is that of Mr. Dudley
Thompson, Minister of State of Jamaica. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 698)

4. Mr. THOMPSON (Jamaica): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to appear before you and to participate in
today’s proceedings in the name of the Government of
Jamaica. I wish personally to congratulate you.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.

5. It seems that I have waited all my life to see just this
thing happen in Panama. My country lies a mere SO0 miles
to the north of Panama, At the turn of this century
Jamaicans in large numbers, along with people from the
other Caribbean islands and other Latin American countries, joined in the great task of building the Panama Canal.
One result of this is that there has remained in Panama a
large community of Jamaican descent-and in addition very
many of our people at home were born in Panama or have
close relatives in this country. The Panama episode is an
important part of the history and the development of
Jamaica and has been recorded as such in song and story.
This has, given the people of Jamaica an opportunity to
appreciate the friendliness, charm and hospitality of the
Panamanian people. We have also been able to appreciate
the beauty of the country and the steady growth and
development of its social, cultural and economic life.

3% meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Consideration
of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security. in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisions previously taken by the
Security Council [1696th and 1697th meetings] and with
its consent, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guyana, Haiti., Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico,
Uruguay, Venezuela and Zaire to take the places reserved
for them in the Council chamber and to participate without
the right to vote in the consideration of the question on the
agenda.

$

16 March 1973, at 3 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives of
Honduras, Guatemala, Trinidad and Tobago, and Zambia
took the places reserved for them.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Adoption

MEETING

6. Jamaica joins the other countries of Latin America in
extending to the members of the Security Council a very
warm welcome on the occasion of their first series of
meetings in this region, and my country wishes to pay a
deserved tribute to all the members of the Council for the
decision which made such a series of meetings possible. It is
our earnest hope that the result of this series of meetings
will be a better understanding by the world at large of the
preoccupations and the serious problems which confront
Latin America, and the factors which will contribute to the
maintenance of a secure and lastingpeacein this part of the

2. I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Honduras, Guatemala,
Trinidad and Tobago, and Zambia in which they ask to be
allowed to participate without the right to vote in our
deliberations, in accordance with Article 3 1 of the Charter.
In conformity with the practice of the Council, and with its
consent, I intend to invite these representatives to participate, without the right to vote, in the debate on the
question on our agenda and to take the places reserved
for them in the Council chamber, it being understood
that they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when they wish to make a statement.

globe.

7. The Jamaican people notes with particular pleasure the
choice of one of the smaller territories of the American
region as the place in which this series of meetings should
be held. Our friendly neighbouring country of Panama is
happily chosen for this purpose, for it is a country of great
strategic importance in this hemisphere, lying as it does at
1

founded on substantial grounds for the security arpd
territorial integrity of their own country. I invite *
Council to take note of this fear for its security v&;h
threatens this small nation and to consider what steps cs.rr
be taken to safeguard the right of these people m
self-determination.

the bridge which connectes the land masses of North and
South America and at the cross-roads of the ocean path
along which the merchant vessels of all nations carry their
rich cargoes.
8. As always, the Security Council is concerned with the
problem of the maintenance of world peace and security. In
this respect the countries of this region can regard with
satisfaction, even with pride, the contribution they have
made over the years to the evolution of the concepts and
institutions which have gained general acceptance in the
sphere of international peace and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.

12. Another source of tension which threatens peace in
this hemisphere is interference in the domestic sffa$s oi
States by other States. That is true wherever and from
whatever source it comes and however we may try to m&
the ruthlessness of personal motive behind the rhetoric cf
good intention. It is essential to the maintenance of ~3~75
in this region that the third of the principles I mentinnd
earlier, which would prohibit the use of economic, political
and other pressures to coerce another State in order 19
inhibit the exercise of its sovereign right, should be stri;tIq
observed.

9. It is proper to remind the Council that the Member
States of the United Nations adopted without dissent, at the
session of the General Assembly commemorating its twenty-fifth anniversary, a Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV)/, First, that Declaration called upon Member States, among other things, to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State; secondly, it called upon them to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security and justice are
not endangered; thirdly, it reminded them of their duty not
to intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State, in accordance with the Charter. The cause of
international peace would be well served indeed if all
Member States-great and small-would
strictly observe
those principles.

13. Large arsenals of armaments constitute a constant
threat to the peace and security of the world and are a
menace to defenceless countries striving to utilize tieit
meagre resources for economic and social development. .%r
a representative of a small nation which spends less thy?
3 per cent of its annual budget on defence, I call tfz
attention of the great Powers to the disproportions!:
amount of their own resources which they devote to
armaments. It has been a source of great concern ts t’?+
country that at a time when there is so much poverty ia
developing countries, and even in some sections of the mert
affluent countries, many are still deprived of the haG<
necessities of life,
14. It has to be acknowledged that the world $19
maintains expenditure on armaments of the order ci
$200,000 million annually, while the total resources de*
voted to development aid, both bilateral and mullilatcr~,
have been stagnant and in some cases reduced. Nor is it
possible in the context of these figures to discern ;trrr;
meaningful effort on the part of the heavily armed Pow%
to direct their social and economic programmes to~s:d
reducing the disparity of income between the very ~edfi;.y ;
nations and the very poor. This co-operation which ti.e :
principles I mentioned earlier have called uksn ~5 tl? J
provide, this co-operation of one State with another, is I
significantly inadequate in economic relations. Nations ZR i
left to struggle with the problems of poverty and under- i
development, are required to provide the higher stand& c!” i
living which their peoples are demanding, but to provtic it /
within a system of international economic relations ++&:A
effectively ensures that the lion’s share of the gains fry
production will continue to accrue to the wealthy ea~~~~r
of this world. There is no long-term cause of tension, n3
long-term threat to international peace more gravely rmo*
acing than the conditions at present governing econ’omk
relations between the nations.

10. Let us not delude ourselves that because there are no
actual hostilities between States of the Latin American
world the moment is not propitious to pursue the paths of
constructive diplomacy. In my country’s judgement we
who are gathered today can best serve the cause of peace by
inviting the Security Council to focus its attention not on
international conflicts but on the root causes of international tension and the circumstances which unless relieved will produce armed conflicts and will continue to
threaten the maintenance of peace in this part of the world.
11. First among those causes of tension is the effective
denial of the right of self-determination
to peoples.
Colonialism has virtually disappeared from this part of the
globe but it has not totally disappeared. I am encouraged to
see that further progress is being made and that shortly, on
10 July of this year, we shall be able to welcome one more
territory, the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, into the fold
of independent countries of the Americas. There is,
however, one small country not abundantly endowed with
resources but having a proud and progressive people that
yearns to throw off the yoke of colonialism and take its
place in our family of nations. Yet because of a dispute
alien to the people of the territory, having its origin in
circumstances which are centuries old, our brothers in
Belize have been unable to reach out for that sovereignty
and independence that is rightly theirs. As I have said
elsewhere, there is no doubt that the only remaining
deterrent, the single lingering obstacle to the achievement
of this goal of independence by these people is fear-a fear

15. At the twenty-seventh session of the General .&
sembly, the Prime Minister of Jamaica expressed 1Gn~lf
thus:
“The time has come to reconstruct the basis on w&81
the gains arising from the exploitation of these FCSoum
are shared between those, on the one hand, Who PrhlliCe
2

effective is the undertaking that they will not introduce
nuclear weapons into our nuclear-free zone, and that they
will resist all claims by any country situated within the
zone to be supplied with nuclear arms. It is for that reason
that I must again appeal to the great Powers which have not
yet done so speedily to proceed to sign and ratify the
Additional Protocol II to the Treaty of ‘Ilatelolco.

the capital and know-how, and those, on the other, who
own the resources and provide the essential infrastructure
and the labour force. Let the resources continue in our
ownership from the point of extraction to the final sale
of the processed product. Let the agreements of the
future cover not the sale of our resources to developed
countries, but the reasonable payments which shall be
made to those who supply capital and know-how for their
services in the process of conversion.“’

20. I must also reiterate the desire of my country that all
impediments be removed, to enable every independent
country in this region to become a party to this Treaty, so
that all of Latin America can become potential beneficiaries
of the protection that we have sought for ourselves. It does
seem tragic that while some great Powers, by not signing
the Treaty and its Protocol, have refused to support this
umbrella of peace for millions in this region, there are
within our midst young nations which are ready and willing
to give it their support but which are not yet qualified to
do so, as some of us have not yet made up our mind to give
them full membership in this brotherhood of peace. I refer
to the noble Republic of Guyana, whose indisputable case
for recognition has been put with his customary clarity by
Mr. Ramphal /1696th meetingJ. His reference to the
decisions taken by the Prime Ministers of Barbados,
Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago at the meeting
of the Commonwealth Caribbean Prime Ministers at Chaguaramas illustrates that we speak on these matters with
one single voice.

16. Insecurity opens the door to international anarchy. It
is only by mutual recognition of national sovereignty, with
its ingredients of rights and duties-such as non-intervention-that
international security becomes meaningful;
otherwise, inequality of power is destructive of the independence of small nations.
17. In the interests of ‘the peace and security of the
hemisphere my delegation cannot turn a blind eye to a
major issue which affects two countries with which we
enjoy particularly close and friendly relations-and here I
refer to the United States of America and the Republic of
Panama. We cannot but be aware of the strong views held
by the two parties principally concerned with the. Canal
Zone. Nevertheless, since this meeting of the Security
Council is concerned with the maintenance of peace and
security in Latin America, I experience no reticence in
making reference to the subject.
18. The issues involved relate, on the one hand, to the
solemnity of treaties, and, on the other, to the question of
sovereignty. Since the original Convention was executed
there have been substantial developments in relation to the
attitudes displayed by countries in dealing with such
problems. Such attitudes are reflected in the willingness on
the part of both parties to follow the spirit rather than the
letter in which such conventions were originally drafted. It
is also recognized that in the instant case the original
Convention, made in 1903, has on two occasions come
under review, and on both occasions, in recognition of the
changing patterns of relations between the parties concerned, substantial readjustments in favour of the Republic
of Panama were agreed upon. Both parties should therefore
be encouraged to continue this process of peaceful negotiation, based on the principle of the sovereign equality of
States. Accordingly, we hope that as a result of the
discussions at this series of meetings-the atmosphere of
which is not one of crisis but of dispassionate deliberation-a new climate will be created which will enable
these negotiations to be resumed with a senseof urgency
leading to a satisfactory solution between the parties.

21. Finally, I take this opportunity of stating on my
Government’s behalf our firm belief that the ultimate
responsibility for the peace and security of Latin America,
as for the rest of the world, lies in the hands of the Security
Council. It is important, therefore, that the Council should
actively concern itself not merely with direct and imminent
threats to peace which might arise in this part of the world,
but with the causesof tension, the economic inequities and
the failures to observe the principles of non-intervention in
the internal affairs of other States which must lead
eventually to the breaking of international peace and
security.
22. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the Minister for
External Relations of Venezuela, Mr. Aristides Calvani. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
23. Mr. CALVANI (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): I am particularly pleased to address the Security
Council on this unique occasion when for the first time it is
meeting in a Latin American country and in one which has
such close and brotherly ties with Venezuela.

19. To return to the subject of disarmament, the Latin
American nations, with commendable self-denial, have
entered into their own disarmament treaty: the Treaty of
Tlatelolco.2 We have aimed at making this little corner of
the globe a nuclear-free one. All that we have required on
the part of nuclear Powers in order to make our effort

24. We feel that Latin America should increasingly reaffirm its international significance in accord with its
historical and cultural heritage and with the vast potential
of its human and natural resources. We consider that it is a
positive step towards that end that the Security Council,
the organ to which the Charter confers the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, should hold a series of meetings in a Latin American
country.

1 OfficioI
Records
of the General Assembly,
Twenty-seventh
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2049th meeting, para. 62.
2 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear weaponsin Latin America

(United Nations, Treaty

Series, vol. 634,

p. 326).

3

::’
_I’

25, On 26 January of this year the Council decided that at
this series of meetings the agenda would be the following:
“Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles of
the Charter.” [resolution 325 (1973)].

co-operation cannot be a fierce struggle to buy more
cheaply for ourselves and to skll ourselves at 8 &&er
price. The idea that more trade will make aid less
necessary is true but only so long as trade becomesfairer
and justice for the peoples of the developing countries
takes the form of a greater chance to bring about the
urgent changes they need. I believe in international social
justice. As Aristotle Sawit, justice demands that one should
@v& everybody that which is his. As his thought hasbeen
developed in Christian pllilosophy, that which is his as a
concept does not apply merely to individual mea but &O
to society for the common good. There is no difficulty at
all in applying this concept to the international corn.
munity .

26. I shall make some general remarks on this very
important item which is of interest to all the Latin
American countries equally, and I should like to avail
myself of this opportunity to express my gratitude to the
Security Council for the invitation extended to my country, under rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the debate on this subject. I also wish to
express my gratitude for the initiative of the Government
of Panama which has enabled the delegation of Venezuela
to be presided over by the Minister for Foreign Relations. I
also wish to place on record our sincere gratitude to the
Government and people of Panama for the generous and
praverbial hospitality they have shown.

,’

i

“Just as society at the national level has a right to
impose various relationships upon its members, so the
international community requires of the various peoples
participation in accordance with their capacity so that
everybody may live a human life. The obligations sad
rights of the various peoples have to be gauged, therefore,
according to the capacity and needs of each people, in
order to make peace, harmony and progress feasible so
that we shall all advance in real friendship.”

27. It can be asserted that Latin America has very
fortunately not suffered the scourge of wars-in its classical
definition, of course-to the extent it has been suffered by
other continents. But can it really be affirmed that in Latin
America all the conditions for peace exist? The reply must
needs be negative. Peace cannot be reduced to the absence
of wars. On tliat we are agreed; it had been stated by all or
almost all the speakers who have preceded me. The absence
of warlike conflicts is a negative aspect of peace; it is not its
true essence. That leads us to ask ourselves what the
conditions are for the existence of complete and genuine
peace among nations.

Therefore, if we believe that the development of all of man
and of all men is the new name of peace, what is required is
a fundamental turn-about in the principles which nowmove
the international order. Otherwise the programmes of
assistance will establish new forms of colonialism and
strengthen existing injustices and there will be an endless
broadening of the difference between the rich and the poor
countries.
30. At the present time in the evolution of mankind, it is
impossible to. accept that a developed country should
impose on an under-developed country to which it gives
“its assistance” a counterpart which is equal to-although
usually it is rather more than-the value of the service
rendered. How is it possible to emerge from underdevelopment in these conditions? We rightly stated at the
General Assembly that the riches of the developed coun*
tries have their roots in the poverty of the developing
countries. Accordingly, it is necessary for relations between
nations to be ordered in accord with the principles Of
international social justice.

28. The first condition is real equality among national
commutlitics. To this end what is needed is a radical
conversion which implies profound change in existing
structures. No country on earth, however powerful and
developed, has more dignity than another. Every people has
its own personality, its own way of life, which must be
respected. We must accept ourselves as we are, with our
qualities and our shortcomings. A frank and loyal dialogue
must be established among nations as the best means to
reach understanding. Mutual respect between national
communities-a primary condition for peace-excludes relations of domination and subjection between the developed
and the developing countries and even among the industrialized countries themselves. What is needed is genuine
participation on a more social and democratic basis of the
community of peoples. Further, to be genuine, peace must
be shared in the obligations and in the rights it entails. It is
in this way that international authority will not be viewed
as an instrument of universal domination. Equality and
dignity between States presupposes, finally, the elimination
of racism.

31. The third condition for peace is the establishment of
an active solidarity which will really bring together the
different peoples of the earth. This solidarity can be
dynamic only to the extent that it is directed towards s
universal common good and is inspired in international
social justice. In the world of tomorrow, if we wish to
arrive at a shared peace and not an imposed one, active
solidarity between nations will compel us to successive
processes of integration so as to move from national
autarchies towards the creation of a supranational secletY,
This is what might be called a pluralist integration, which is
far more appropriate than the system of defensive-nffensive
alliances which is typical of bloc policy. Active solidarity
between nations requires the liquidation of the machinery
of political and economic subjection which has in fact been
imposed by the developed countries of the East and the
West to the detriment of the under-developed countries.

29. The second condition for the establishment of peace
between nations is the regulation of relations between
peoples inspired by international
social justice. At this
point I should like to endorse the statement made by the
head of State whom I represent, Mr. Rafael Caldera:
“The formula for bringing about happy relations which
will take the form of friendship and international
4

1

Council is going to undertake on the item on its agenda. We
also believe that Chapter VIII of the Charter on regional
agreements should at all times be taken particularly into
account.

32. Active solidarity between nations imposes on us,
fmally, the obligation to give a new ideological content to
the new civilization, to the new international order which
we can already begin to perceive. This new ideology must
start from the historical reality that we live in and the
profound aspirations of peoples. It will be a social and
revolutionary humanism based on the recognition of the
unity and indivisibility of the destiny of mankind and the
eminent dignity of the human person. The goal will be the
development of all of man and of every man, of the whole
of a people and of every people. It will consider it to be a
fundamental right for every tiational community to participate actively in decisions which affect it internationally.
At all times it will be directed towards the attainment of
that universal common good inspired in an ideal of
international social justice. It will in this way endeavour to
build a lasting peace. It will not be peace that has been
imposed but peace voluntarily sought, accepted and shared.

38. I could not end this statement without referring to a
case which is closely linked to the item on the agenda and
in regard to which no Latin American can feel indifferent. I
am referring to the case of the Panama Canal.
39. I shall not go into the historical background, which is
known to all, on this subject. We already know that the
so-called Hay-Bun au Varflla Convention of 18 November
19033 was the result of the policy which prevailed in those
times when the largest Powers imposed on the weaker
States conditions violating the principles of international
law, even the most elementary ones. Thus, the history of
that era is ftil of examples of treaties, even of arbitral
awards, which, although maintaining the external forms and
appearances of legality, are intrinsically vitiated by the
circumstances and the manner in which so many peoples of
our hemisphere were compelled to subscribe to them,
although they never accepted them morally.

33. All that we have said in regard to peace does not of
course exclude the right of peoples to rebel against tyranny,
colonialism, racism or any other form of oppression. In
such a case, indeed, it is the oppressors who are practising
violence, and the right to rebel, legitimately exercised,
represents the effort of the people to restore legal order.

40. Not only was the 1903 Convention and its interpretation by the United States rejected by the peoples of
Latin America, but subsequent generations in the United
States, too, recognized the injustices of that Convention
and showed a willingness to change them. Yet the claims of
the Panamanian people were not achieved with the revisions
of 1936 and 1955.

34. There is in Latin America a united desire for peace,
justice and progress. The President of Venezuela in February this year held talks with seven heads of Latin
American States. In ail the countries he Qsited and in the
conversations he held with the highest leaders of those
brother countries he found the deep conviction that the
common progress of mankind requires the effective right
for alI countries to participate in taking decisions which
affect their economies and conditions of development,
internally and externally.

41. We face a situation which is potentially dangerous.
The events of November 1959 and of January 1964 are
proof of the risks one runs unless adequate solutions to a
problem are reached.

35. The policy of my country is guided by a sound,
democratic nationalism, and we find a growing nationalism
in all of Latin America which, in our opinion, should not be
limited to a Venezuelan nationalism, a Panamanian nationalism, a Brazilian nationalism, an Ecuadorian nationalism or
an Argentine nationalism but must be a genuine Iatin
American nationalism. Only with that view, and with the
conviction that it is necessary for the Latin American
peoples to constitute political societies committed to a
quest for a just social transformation, independently of the
great power centres and free from economic exploitation,
whether internal or external, will it be possible to achieve
the integral development of our countries.

42. On 3 April 1964 the General Committee of the
Council of the Organization of American States, acting as
an Organ of Consultation, in accordance with article 12 of
the Enter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, announced that the Governments of Panama and the United
States had agreed on a Joint Declaration, paragraph3 of
which stated:
“That therefore, the Ambassadors designated will begin
immediately the necessary procedures with the objective
of reaching a just and fair agreement which would be
subject to the constitutional processesof each country.“4
Those negotiations did not live up to the expectations, but
it is our hope that the two States, with which Venezuela
maintains cordial relations, will be able to arrive at a just
and equitable solution by way of direct negotiations, which
is the best means for the peaceful settlement of disputes, in
conformity with the respect required in a relationship
between sovereign States.

36. There is also a clear awareness that it is a sovereign
right of all States, particularly the developing ones, to
explore, conserve, exploit and make use of or dispose of
their natural resources, and frm support for the principle
that any attempt to prevent or bar, directly or indirectly,
the exercise of that legitimate right-as was stated by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmentjeopardizes the principle of self-determination and nonintervention and might become a threat to international
peace and security.

3 Isthmian Canal Convention, For the text, see Treaties and Other
International Agreements of the United St&es of America, 177~5
1949, vol. 10, Department of State publication 8642 (Washington,
DC., U.S. Government Printing Off&, 1972), p, 663.
4 See The Department of Stare Bulletin, vol. I, No. 1296 (Washington, DC., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 656.

37. AU these principles which I have enunciated are, we
believe, fundamental for the analysis which the Security
5

49. It is for that reason that Uruguay offers its wh+&~
hearted support for any measure which, like that submlrw:
by the sister Republic of Panama, may be addre& : .;
drawing out the Security Council to fulfil its duties as &!
forth in the Charter and ensure the adoption of prevens:w
measures that might give fruitful results now in ~a::&
America, the continent that lies at the very heart of ,;,.r
main concerns and aspirations.

43. At this time I wish to reaffirm the complete, deeply
felt and sincere solidarity of the people and Government of
Venezuela with the people of Panama in their just claims.
This solidarity is not new. It has always existed in the
hearts of all Venezuelans. I am particularly happy to recall
the decision adopted by the Chamber of Deputies of
Venezuela on 22 February 1960, when the present President of the Republic presided over that body. In his
statements made to the press yesterday he reaffirmed that
idea and that solidarity.

50. In this specific case raised by Panama, that is ($1w!
the question of the Canal, my country considers that tk;.~ :j
a bilateral matter even though it does affect genr-:~
principles and interests. This matter is the sub@5 .::f
negotiations under way between the Republic of Par&??6
and the United States and it must be solved in a map:&
satisfactory to both parties in accordance with the p;;:’
ciples of justice, equity and the sovereign equality of Surti..
principles recognized by international law and m(ts$ e?*
phatically reaffirmed by the existing law of nrarle~&
Uruguay expresses its whole-hearted hopes that the r&v*
tiations at present under way will be satisbss~~&
concluded.

44. I end this statement by expressing my Government’s
earnest hope that this session of the Security COU~C~ will
be a constructive step in the quest for peace, justice and
progress and will help to lay the foundation for a solution
of this important problem.
45. The PRESIDENT {interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Uruguay, Mr. Jorge Suarez Carballo. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
46. Mr. SUAREZ CARBALLO (Uruguay) (interpretation
On this first occasion when the Security
Council is meeting in Latin America pursuant to the
possibilities set forth in Article 28, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, I should like on behalf of Uruguay to express our
pleasure at the holding of this series of meetings and,
furthermore, at the fact that it is being held in the Republic
of Panama, the true geographical heart of the continent.
This is a land which was described by the Uruguayan writer
Jose Enrique Rod6 as one that unites two continents and
brings together two mighty oceans. It is now a nation where
the United Nations is to undertake an over-all study of the
problems of international peace and security in the light of
the tenets and principles of the Charter. When the Latin
American Group met in New York and supported the
suggestion of Panama that these meetings of the Council be
held here, my country gave full support to the initiative.

S1. To echo what was said by a number of represenia?s&
of Latin American States yesterday and today, IJrug~~, it
member State of the Agency for the Prohibition of !&+x&@
Weapons in Latin America, wishes to stress the impo%~,s%
that it attaches to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, wllich e&
serve as an instrument for peace and security oo ::x
continent. We would also urge the Security Courlcil lo %e$
in ensuring the signature and ratification of heath ~*:*2
instrument and its two Additional Protocols.

from Spanish):

52. My country has adopted an unshakable stand a~#ing the affirmation of the principle of its ri#.z: 3:
sovereignty over its natural resources. Uruguay wi:&:$ ::
reiterate its full right to the utilization of the rcscmmt :f
our territorial sea, whose outer limit we have iegi~iaru”~!-A
set at 200 maritime miles, as well as the exploitalicn a>$t”a
resources of our continental shelf.

47. Uruguay is not a member of the Security Council, but
we speak here today because of the provisions of Article 31
of the Charter and also pursuant to the decision adopted
yesterday in this main organ of the United Nations; and in
so doing we wish to express our appreciation for being
allowed to give our views on the item on the agenda.

53. Uruguay has pinned great hopes on these meet&$+ :I’
the Security Council. We would hope that its delibegr?3-&::t
would be reflected in specific decisions, decisions ih&a FT+
be inscribed in the history of the United Nations ati %%gr:,
as a valuable precedent and example in the achic%!n~! :i
the Organization’s aims and the reaffirmation ,C .X
principles. All this will be a positive contribution ~~~‘~4
understanding and harmony among the Latin
States.

48. I must first of all reiterate the constant concern of the
Government of Uruguay over the need to strengthen
international peace and security, as well as our continuing
support of any measures conducive to achieving that end
within the framework of the system of the Charter and the
principles contained therein. Thus, in order to ensure the
unshakable maintenance of international peace and security, Uruguay has at #l times set forth as a main principle
of its foreign pplicy the imperative requirements for the
peaceful settlement of any and all international situations
or disputes. All problems-be they actual or potential,
carrying within them the seeds of conflicts-which arise in
America and might endanger peace and security in the
region, as interpreted in a broad and modem sense, thus
including all types of conflict, can and must be solved in
accordance with the rules and the principles set forth in the
Charter.

54. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from $MR@*’ ;
invite the Minister for External Relations of Cculr +%Q
Mr. Gonzalo J. Facie to take a place at the Cound %&K
and to make his statement.
55. Mr. FACJO (Costa Rica) {interpretulihm
?P:q
Spanish): My Latin American colleagues who ha* %ppti.cr,

before me have eloquently justified the holding ~4 l:br
series of meetings of the Security Council in Panarrar%
Cry+
They have rightly considered the measures Whk% d ;:l
necessary to take “for the maintenance and strengtberQ@ :B
international peace and security in Latin Ame%;& 3%
conformity with the provisions and principles S@ Q&
6

Charter.” They have also stressed the exceptional historical
and legal contribution of the nations of our region to the
formulation of several of the basic principles of the United
Nations, such as the legal equality of States, non-intervention, the selfdetermination of peoples and the prohibition of the use of force in international relations.
Accordingly, I do not deem it necessary to reiterate ideas
which have been so perfectly stated by the Latin American
representatives to whom we have been listening.

Granada. After being subjected once again to New Granada’s domination it became temporarily independent in
183 1. In 1840 for the third time Panama was separated
from New Granada and took the name of the State of the
Isthmus, remaining such until 1842. In 1855, by an
additional act to the constitution of Granada, the Federal
State of the Isthmus was created, with its own local
government. In 1861 there wasa new separatist movement.
In 1863 the sovereign State of Panama was constituted, in
accordance with the Federal Constitution which created the
United States of Colombia, and this situation lasted until
1886, when, on the adoption of the centralist Constitution
which created the Republic of Colombia, the Isthmus
became the Department of Panama.

56. In my statement today I wish to refer specifically to a
question which, although not explicitly inscribed on the
agenda, has been given a place of priority in the interest of
all those participating in this meeting. I am referring of
course to the question of the Panama Canal,

Mr. Boyd (Panama) took the Chair.

57. I am well aware that this is a bilateral matter which
has to be solved directly by the parties concerned, Panama
and the United States. I express the hope that bilateral
negotiations will be resumed in a spirit of harmony and a
striving for justice which will do honour to the high moral
qualities of both the Panamanian people and the people of
the United States. But while it is the responsibility of
these parties to conduct the negotiations, their results are
not a matter of indifference to us. I believe that the
situation created by the Convention of 1903 has profound
repercussions in hemispheric relations as well as in world
relations. That is why I consider that it is not unsuitable for
the Security Council to hear the reasons which the present
Government of Costa Rica has been citing for more than
two years to explain its firm support for the aspirations of
the Revolutionary Government of Panama in its patriotic
endeavours to renegotiate completely the Isthmian Canal
Convention so as to recognize absolute Panamanian sovereignty over the Canal Zone and so that it may be given
greater benefits because of its geographical contribution to
this great endeavour.

62. All these facts bear witness to the spirit of autonomy
of the people of Panama and serve as a genuine historical
background to the emancipation movement of 1903. As
was written by the illustrious ex-President of Panama,
Mr. Ricardo J. Alfaro:
“It was logical that in 1903 there should once again be
a separatist movement and that the movements of 1821,
1830, 1840 and 1861 should reappear. Separation was
consummated because it had deep roots in history,
geography, economics and the interests and feelings of
the people of Panama. Therefore it is absurd and craven
to maintain, as poorly informed historians and writers
have done-or perhaps they were badly inspired-that the
independence of Panama in 1903 was the work of the
arbitrariness of Theodore Roosevelt.”
63. What has given some credence to that black legend is
the fact that the independence of Panama was linked to the
Convention with the United States for the opening of the
interoceanic canal and to the special historical circumstances which forced the nascent republic to accept that
Convention.

58, We take this position with no hostility towards the
Government of the United States, with whom we have
excellent relations and whose diplomats we know are today
determined to arrive at a just solution of the problem.

64. At the beginning of the twentieth century the Panamanians, sunk in poverty, realized that their geographic
position constituted their best natural resource. Therefore
they saw in the opening up of an inter-oceanic canal
possibilities for employment, investment, development and
progress which they had not been able to achieve by the
exploitation of other resources. The Herrin-Hay Canal
Treaty, which was negotiated between the plenipotentiaries
of Colombia and the United States of America in January
1903, aroused the naive hopes of the inhabitants of the
isthmus. That is why the refusal of the Senate of Colombia
to ratify it in the month of August of that year was the
spark that set aflame the revolutionary movement which
culminated on 3 November of that year in the proclamation
of the independence of Panama. Once the new Republic was
recognized by the principal world Powers, the Provisional
Government Junta decided to negotiate with the United
States a canal treaty which was substantially the same as
the Her&n-Hay Treaty. To start negotiations it designated
as Minister Plenipotentiary to the White House a Frenchman, Philippe Bun au Varilla, a former director of the
Inter-Oceanic Canal Company and owner of most of the
shares.

59. Regarding Panama, a black legend has been woven
according to which the independence of that country was
promoted and brought about by President Theodore
Roosevelt, with the assistance of a French intriguer,
Philippe Bun au Varilla, with the exclusive purpose of
guaranteeing to the United States the construction and
absolute control of the interoceanic canal.
60. Only a lack of knowledge of the history of this people
during its independent life has permitted that black legend
to picture Panama as an indolent protectorate of the
administrators of the canal, ignoring the long and solitary
struggle it waged, in order to claim its complete sovereignty, from the day after the Convention of 1903 was
imposed on them.
61. The people of the Isthmus of Panama declared itself
independent from Spain in 1821 and by its own decision
annexed itself to Greater Colombia, as was recognized by
Simon Bolivar. On the disintegration of Greater Colombia
in 1830, Panama seceded for a short time from New
7

*

65. Today it would be reprehensible for the basic diplomatic representation of a country to be given to a
foreigner who was linked to important private business
interests, but at that time it was considered understandable
that the Government Junta should have recourse to
someone who appeared to represent the best interests of
the Panamanians with regard to the Canal. A lack of
experience natural in persons who were just starting out as
an independent government led them to confuse that
interest with the interest in ensuring the survival of the
Republic.
66. But the Junta-and this is very important-did
not
entrust Bun au Varilla alone with the negotiation of the
new canal treaty. It also appointed an advisory committee
made up of the head of the revolution, Dr. Manuel
Ambador Guerrero, Mr. Federico Boyd, a member of the
Government Junta, and the jurist Pablo Arosemena.

to the disloyal plenipotentiary and Secretary Hay, who had
taken advantage of the unscrupulousness of Bun au Varills.
70. On the announcement that General Reyes offered to
ratify the Herran-Hay Treaty on the condition that the
isthmus would return to Colombian domination, and gjveu
the veiled threats against the independence of Panama ifit
dared to repudiate the signature of its plenipotentiary on
the first convention entered into by the new Republic, snd
taking into account the policy of duress pursued by the
great Powers at that time, the Provisional Government
Junta had no choice but to accept the fait accompli and
ratify the Convention which had been negotiated and
signed behind the backs of the Panamanians..
71. Thus the plenipotentiary’s powers had been exceeded
and violence or intimidation had been employed to obtain
consent-improper practices which are sufficient to decfan
null and void any treaty concluded in such circumstances.

67. However, Bun au Varilla betrayed the confidence
placed in him by the members of the provisional government, Disregarding the dignity of the young Republic and
the future fate of the people of Panama, he sought only to
protect his financial interests and concluded a treaty which
was so advantageous to the United States that there was not
the slightest risk that the United States Senate would refuse
to ratify it. Those governing that great country took
advantage of that anomalous situation to reach the expansionist goals which were then sought by the United States.

72. When the Convention was submitted to the United
States Senate for ratification, Secretary of State Hay, in
order to justify his opposition to any change that anyone
might seek, told Senator Spooner, in a letter dated 20
January 1904, the following, which revealed the abusethat
had been committed:
“As it now stands, as soon as the Senate votes for a
treaty, we shall have one which is broadly advantageoti
for the United States, and we must confess that, whatever
face we may put on it, it is not so advantageous for
Panama. If we alter the treaty, the period of entbsiasti;
unanimity which, as I said to Cullon, only occurs ouce in
the life of a revolution, will have passed, and a new field
will be opened up in politics and polemics. YOU and 1
know how many points there are in the treaty to whiih
any Panamanian patriot would object .”

68. On 15 November 1903 the Secretary of State, John
Hay, sent to Minister Bun au Varilla a draft treaty which
was similar to the Herr&-Hay Treaty but with much more
severe clauses for Panama, such as enlargement of the Canal
Zone by 60 per cent and the suppression of the clauses
which recognized that the canal works did not represent a
diminution of Colombian sovereignty. But this seemed
immaterial to Bun au Varilla, who was going to gain $40
million from the building of the canal. On 17 November he
presented a counter-draft which went much further than
Hay himself had wanted, including the fatal formulation of
article III, by virtue of which Panama recognized that the
United States would have over the Canal Zone “the rights,
power and authority . . , which [it] would possess and
exercise if it were the sovereign of the territory , . . to the
entire exclusion of the exercise by the Republic of Panama
of any such sovereign rights, power or authority”. Of
course, Secretary Hay welcomed Bun au Varilla’s counterdraft.

The United States Senate ratified the Convention ifi
February 1904, and having rapidly obtained the ralifications the Convention came into force on the 26th of th31
same month.
73. As a result of that Convention imposed by force ci
circumstances on the Panamanian nation, and, even more.
as a result of the unilateral interpretations given bl; the
United States Government, and particularly by the authfir.
ities and inhabitants of the Canal Zone, who, like rh*
French “@e& noirs” in Algeria, are much more radical Thor
those of the metropolis in defence of colonial privileges.
what has occurred is that a territory has been created which
is separate from Panamanian sovereignty. In fact, iu the
Canal Zone-which covers 1,432 square kilometns of
Panamanian territory in the very heart of the Republic,
there exists, as was pointed out by the Foreign Minister d
Panama, Mr. Tack, in a letter addressed to the SecrerlryGeneral5

69. When Mr. Hay learned that the members of the
Panamanian Advisory Committee were arriving in New
York on 18 November on the way to Washington, being
convinced that they would not approve what had been
proposed by the Frenchman, on the afternoon of that same
day he invited Bun au Varilla to his private residence and
requested him to transform the counter-draft into a treaty.
On the night of 18 November, in an almost clandestine
manner, the Isthmian Canal Convention was signed in the
private home of Secretary Hay. When a few hours later the
Panamanian Advisory Committee arrived, Bun au Varilla
received it with the fait accompli of the signature of the
Convention. In vain were the protests of the commissioners

“a ‘Government’ distinct from the Panamanian Goi’cmment, headed by a ‘Governor’ appointed by the United
States Government; there are United States courts whi’ih
5 This letter was sent to all Member States by a note verb&- d&d
7 October 1971.

8

the confIict, With the frankness with which a foreign
diplomat can speak in a country as free as the United
States, I always stated my position as being in favour of
Panama, based on the reasons which I have tried to
summarize today. And on every occasion I received the
approval and support of my listeners. That confirmed once
again my respect for the moral qualities and spirit of equity
of the common man in the United States of America.

are functioning; the United States flag is displayed; the
laws governing the area are enacted by the United States
Congress; the United States police operates in the zone;
commercial and industrial activities are carried on in
competition with Panamanian enterprises; and the United
States deploys a military force whose presence and
activity goes far beyond the mere right to ‘protect’ the
Canal and all this, under the terms of the 1903 Treaty, is
to continue in perpetuity. In other words, the Republic
of Panama is faced with the awkward situation in which
there exists in its territory ‘a government within a
government’ .”

Mr. Tack (Panama)resumedthe Chair.

77. In September 1971, Senator Alan Cranston of California stated the following before the Subcommittee on
Inter-American Affairs of the House of Representatives:

What is more, during the first years of life of the Republic
of Panama, and until the partiat reform of the Convention
in 1936, the United States made frequent use of the right
given it under the Convention to intervene in Panamanian
political life in order to “maintain order and peace”-an
order and peace which seemed to be identified always with
the obligation of the Panamanians to allow the United
States quiet enjoyment of the important privileges obtained
through a convention which, I repeat, never represented the
free will of the Panamanians because it was negotiated
behind the back of their Government by a foreign
plenipotentiary who abused his powers, and becauseit was
ratified by means of threats and pressures which would
today be rejected by the international legal conscience.

“For the past 68 years we have exercised that power
and authority-causing hard feelings, bitterness and scorn
between Panamanians and other Latins on the one hand,
and the Americans on the other . , . 1 believe it is time to
acknowledge that it is no longer to our advantage to
maintain this supposedly sovereign position.
‘6. . . I question the need for any continued American
control over the affairs of civilian Americans in the
Republic of Panama. Does the United States exercise
control of this nature in any other area of the world
where Americans choose to work and reside? . . . Why
should Americans living in the Canal Zone and working
on the Panama Canal be treated any differently? If an
American chooses to work abroad elsewhere, he does SO
knowing that he must abide by the laws and live
according to the rules of the host country.“a

74. Panama has refused to recognize that the Convention
grants the United States sovereignty over the Canal Zone.
From the , brilliant statements made by Minister Jose
Domingo de Obaldia in 1904, to the solid reasoning of
Foreign Minister Juan Antonio Tack in 1970, and also in
legal judgements given, inter alia, by Messrs. Eusebio
Morales, Narciso Garay, Ricardo J. Alfaro, Harmodio Arias,
Octavia Fabrega, Eioy Benedetti, Felipe Juan Escobar,
Jorge Illueca, Carlos Ivan Zutiiga and Aquiline Boyd, there
has existed an uninterrupted unity of opinion on this
fundamental aspect.

78. Only two days ago, on 14 March, The Miami Herald
published an important article on the problem of the
Panama Canal by a great North American, Jack Hood
Vaughn, former United States Ambassador to Panama and
ex-Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs.
He writes, inter alia:

75. In the patriotic struggle to obtain their legitimate
rights, the Panamanians-who in many other matters are
passionately divided-have always maintained a most exemplary unity. During the 69 years that this ignominious
Convention has been in force, governors and governed, old
and young, men and women, intellectuals, workers and
peasants have always defended Panama’s right to the
integrity of its territory and have incessantly called for
fairer treatment in their relations with the United States
concerning the Canal.

the United States has operated the Canal Zone
much as if it were a military base in the Deep South.
Teaming up with groups of congressional leaders the army
has managed to postpone progressive change and ignore
the Panamanian point of view for nearly half a century.
I‘

.

.

.

“
.

.

1

“The State Department has moved away from the
Pentagon’s position [since the 1964 incidents] . . .

76. To this clamour from Panama, not a few authoritative
voices have been added from the United States. I know,
from my own experience, that when ordinary North
American citizens become aware of the arbitrary manner in
which their country acquired and has exercised its rights
over the Canal, they react in favour of Panama. After the
bloody episodes of January 1964, when Panama broke off
diplomatic relations with the United States-at that time I
was Ambassador of Costa Rica in Washington and a
member of the Mediating Committee of the Organization of
American States-I received many requests to give lectures
on the subject. In universities, civic centres and private
clubs I explained what I knew of the origins and causesof

I‘
.

.

.

“The premise upon which the State Department negotiators have been operating is that there should be an
‘orderly and deliberate’ transfer of sovereignty over the
Canal Zone from the United States to Panama. At the
same time the United States would retain responsibility
6 See Hearings before the Subcommittee on Inter-American
Affairs of the Commktee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives. Ninetdecond
Conwess, First Session, September 22 and
23, 1671 (washington, II.?., G.S. Government mPrinting Office,
1971), pp. 95 and 97.

9

to the desire for complete sovereignty of the nation of
Panama and which will do honour to the greatness of the
people of the United States. AS Foreign Minister Tack
stated so eloquently in the communication already mentioned (see para. 73 above] :

for the operation and defence of the Canal but only for a
limited time and on an increasingly shared basis with
Panama.
“The State Department’s position on sovereignty was
recently summarized by a senior official, who said: ‘In a
modern world we can no longer look upon a sovereign
enclave in the territory of another country in perpetuity
as a secure environment in which to operate a canal’. . . .

“The fundamental issue, in the view of my Government, is the need to terminate the Convention of 1903,
which has been and still is the permanent cause of
conflict between the two countries. It prevents the free
exercise by Panama of its sovereignty over the whole of
its territory, it makes our political independence no more
than nominal and deprives us of our economic independence. The existence of this alien authority, which has
entrenched itself in the middle of our territory, disrupts
our integrity and impedes our efforts to achieve optinrum
development .”

“.. .
“ . . . Now, after nine years of negotiation and public
debate, the issues have never been clearer. The Panamanians have never been more united in their aspirations
than they are today. The United States Government, on
the other hand, has seldom been as openly divided on
how it should proceed.

82. Costa Rica expects that these just claims of the people
of Panama, as presented by its Revolutionary Government,
will be met. Little Panama has the moral support of Latin
America and of the rest of the wor1d in its relations with the
powerful nation to the North. The United States, which has
given so much proof of the fact that it has abandoned the
policy which prevailed in 1903, should renounce the
privileges which its leaders know were not granted through
the self-determination of the people of Panama and which,
at this stage of hemispheric coexistence are a source of
resentment and a bar to the harmony and co-operation
which we hope will grow among al1 the peoples of tlds
continent.

“As President Nixon’s second term begins, nothing
comes to mind that would do quite so much for the
United States image and leadership in Latin America as
the modernization of our relationships with Panama.
. . . It is . . , obvious that if push again comes to shove,
every nation in Latin America will be on the side of
Panama.
‘L. . .
“Panama looms as another test of Pentagon supremacy
in setting foreign policy. Will the United States continue
to allow its military planners, with their proven insensitivity to the power of nationalistic drives, to call the
shots? ”

83. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spank/l): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of the Republic of Bolivia, Mr. Julio de Zavala
Urriolagoitia. I invite him to take a place at the COUIMA
table and to make his statement.

79. In 1936 and in 1955 the Panamanians succeeded in
having the United States accede to a reform of the
Convention of 1903. But the concessions were on1y
secondary. As long as the Convention remains in force there
can be no just treatment for the nation of Panama. What
the United States must do in a gesture of grandeur which
would be in accord with its democratic and peaceful
tradition is to grant Panama the abrogation of the Convention of 1903, and replace it by another or other treaties
which would equitably regulate the operation and defence
of the Panama Canal, with Panamanian participation in its
administration, without claiming sovereignty over the zone,
without privileges for its nationals living there, without
depriving the Panamanians of the legitimate benefits which
their geographical position gives them, and eliminating for
ever the irritating situation of maintaining “a government
within another government”.

84. Mr. DE ZAVALA URRIOLAGOITIA

(Bolivia) /k!c+

pretation from Spanish): First of all, I wish to express to

the people and Government of Panama our appreciation for
their warm and generous hospitality, and also to state the
satisfaction of the delegation of Bolivia at being allowed to
be present at the series of meetings which the Security
Council is holding in this American land to study “measures
for the maintenance and strengthening of intemationa1
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the
provisions and principles of the Charter”.
8.5. Panama, a name that is very close to the hearts of
Boliviaas, spells the tradition of joint destiny, unshakable
solidarity, and ties of affection and brotherliness which ‘pro
unique to the peoples of Latin America.

80. The Government of President Nixon agreed recently
with that of Nicaragua to abrogate the Bryan-Chamorro
Treaty, which gave the United States exaggerated privileges
to build and exploit in perpetuity an inter-oceanic canal
through the route of the San Juan river. Why not proceed
likewise in the case of Panama?

86. I wish to reiterate my Government’s faith in this world
Organization, which we consider to be the best means of
ensuring the rule of peace, progress and justice.
87. But my Government understands international peace
and security to mean not only the absence of armed
confrontations among nations or of the threat that they
might break out; Bolivia considers it its duty to Say that the
problems of underdevelopment, injustice and COJII@~~W’
on the part of the international community are elements

81. On the initiative of the Revolutionary Government of
this Republic, negotiations have been reopened between the
United States and Panama. We trust that these negotiations
will result in a just and equitable treaty which will respond
10

that increase world tension. We also believe that to
postpone the achievement of the aspirations and rights of
the weak peoples constitutes a threat to civilized coexistence. That is why we are extremely satisfied to see that we
are now trying to find a solution to both old and new
problems that occur in our continent. My country is
convinced that dialogue, when carried out in good faith and
with noble purposes in mind, constitutes the best instrument for the settlement of disputes.

from the truth. Bolivia has again and again stated in many
parts of the world its unshakable political doctrine. Thus it
was extremely happy to hear the Chilean definition of the
situation in 1950 concerning the opening of direct talks. At
different times, through personal contacts between high
Bolivian and Chilean authorities the necessary steps have
been taken to do away with the differences that separate us
from clear, simple and definitive solutions, but no practical
result of any significance has been achieved in these talks
despite the goodwill shown by my country.

88. The Bolivian people would be betraying its traditions
and its doctrine if it did not speak out to all the peoples of
the world regarding an isolation which has existed for
almost a hundred years. While all over the world immediate
solutions are sought and applied to problems that may arise
in various places, the dramatic problem of Bolivia is still
unsolved despite the firm will of its people.

93. It has been suggested that the lack of communication
caused by the breaking off of diplomatic relations conspires
against any such direct understanding, but that has no
grounds in truth. During these long years we have, as far as
informal contacts are concerned, earnestly sought a rapprochement. The diplomatic history of Bolivia is marked by
many such contacts. If nothing has been accomplished thus
far, we in Bolivia cannot be blamed.

Mr. Boyd (Panama) took the Chair.

89. The integration that is growing in America has
suffered a cleavage. Bolivia has been placed in a very
inferior position. Furthermore, integration cannot serve as
an instrument to establish and maintain injustice. In fact,
the process being experienced so vividly in Latin America
not only is of an economic nature but also tests the
solidarity of a continent-this continent which is endeavouring to become a harmonious whole, in order to obtain
from international society a status which will give us a voice
in decisions which will affect mankind. But this cannot be
achieved if there are injustices and distressing differences.

94. There is much talk of non-intervention in the domestic
affairs of other States and of the full implementation of the
right to self-determination of peoples, and statements are
constantly made regarding the exercise of sovereignty over
the exploitation of natural resources. There are reaffirmations of respect for national independence and unity,
and emphasis is placed on respect for the right of territorial
integrity. On the other hand, nothing is said concerning the
perpetuation of injustice regarding the right of all peoples
to enjoy access to the sea or about peoples isolated behind
mountain barriers. Their economic, social and political
progress and improvement are indefinitely postponed because of the indifference of others and no one protests. No
one expresses solidarity save on rare occasions, as when the
Panamanian Assembly has expressed concern in the past. It
would appear that the word “understanding” has been
deleted from the language of America.

90. No programme of development and integration in
America can be truly effective while the prolonged isolation
of Bolivia remains. The fact that we are landlocked is well
known to all, and therefore at this time I do not need to
repeat the background. Bolivia can no longer be cut off
from the ocean. While the limits of the territorial sea have
been discussed to the point where 200 miles has been
decided upon, and while the due utilization of the wealth
of the seas a.ll over the world is discussed, my country is
kept farther and farther away from the maritime lanes that
are the vital arteries of all nations. If America wants to
retain the title of the continent of peace and of law it
cannot continue willingly or unwillingly to turn a blind eye
to the unjust situation of Bolivia.

95. But my country will never forget that our return to
the sea is imperative. It is a right we shall never renounce.
We have very often stated that we must have accessto the
sea without any limitations and unhampered by conditions.
To achieve that vital objective, which calls for sacrifices
from none, we must press for the two basic principles
underlying our international relations: dialogue as the
effective means of ensuring human understanding and
non-recognition of territorial acquisition by armed conquest.

91. NO international forum can be satisfied with its
conclusions if it does not endeavour to find a solution to
the Bolivian-Chilean problem. We want to tackle it through
conversations based on an understanding of our common
needs. We do not seek or ask for pressure or for absurd
requirements to be implemented. We advocate direct
dialogue as a way of achieving final solutions without
curtailing the sovereignty of anyone. In Bolivia we envisage
a new stage where reason will prevail and thus allow us to
return to the great southern seas discovered by Balboa.
Doors that are ajar must be opened wider and more
generously. The words spoken and the offers made must be
more frank and must be imbued with the determination to
arrive at the goals set.

96. Once again, the Nationalist Government of Bolivia
presided over by General Hugo Banzer Zuirez and the
people of Bolivia, united in the same ideal, in this forum
reiterate the firm will of our country to return to the sea,
and that unchallenged and permanent right cannot be
denied by anyone unless one wishes to perpetuate an
injustice and seeks to condemn to final strangulation a
nation that has proved its sincere solidarity with freedomloving peoples.
97. But we must add something. At present civilized
peoples are becoming increasingly aware that treaties
cannot be regarded as immutable if they can create obvious
international injustices or deprive nations of any attribute
of their sovereignty. Therefore, today Bolivia wishes to

92. Sometimes the Bolivian people is unjustly reproached
for not specifically stating its views, but that is very far
11

reiterate its solidarity with the aspirations of the Panamanian people.

of Guatemala and therefore I feel that were I not to answer
I would be remiss in my duties.

98. It is for that reason that both the people of Bolivia
105. The Foreign Minister of Guyana was speaking of
constructive relationships between our peoples, conand its Government, which I represent, must come to the
Security Council and before this enlightened and august
structive relationships between the overdeveloped and the
underdeveloped. He said that we should wipe out hatred
audience state that the Treaty of 1904, which deprived my
and transform it into understanding. But I do not seehow
country of its long coastline on the Pacific Ocean, cannot
last forever, We therefore fulfil the duties imposed upon US this can be achieved with allusions of the kind that we
by the Bolivians when we confront the Council with this
heard, since they only distort the vital problems that exist.
major problem.
Therefore, much against my will, although I did not intend
to come to the subject of Belize, I am forced to do so.I am
99. To conclude, may I recall what was said so accurately
not quite sure how this may contribute to the normal
at the first of this series of meetings by the illustrious
functioning of this meeting, one that is already beset by
Panamanian leader General Omar Torrijos Herrera: it is
problems.
more noble to redress an injustice than to perpetuate an
error.
106. For more than 100 years Guatemala, its people and
its Government, have had a thorn in the side of their
100, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
nationality. This is neither the time nor the occasion to
next name on the list of speakers is that of the represen- speak of the clear and obvious rights of Guatemala over the
tative of Guatemala, Mr. Luis Aycinena. I invite him to take
territory of Belize-besides which, the subject is not up for
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
discussion.
101, Mr. AYCINENA (Guatemala) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, may I thank the Security Council for
permitting
meetings.

me to address it at this important

107. Now Guatemala has been attacked. Rut Guatemala
has waged a tenacious struggle to regain part of its territory.
We know Guatemala is but a small nation. References have
even been made here to colonialism in Latin America, But
this is unbelievable; let me say nothing of the damagethat
this colonial enclave has done to Guatemala. Nor will I
speak of this constant affront against our sovereignty. I
shall merely say that the northern department of Guatemala, El Peten, has found its development hindered by a
wall in the form of a British colony, which, in particular,
stands in our way as far as accessto the sea is concerned. Is
Guatemala to be strangled? But I will say that El Peten attd
Belize, geo-politically one, are indispensable one to the
other, in order for development to be enjoyed by both. The
sister republics of Central America are united with Guatemala in its struggle. Spanish-speaking Latin America, and
‘Portuguese and French-speaking Latin America, too, have
made many statements supporting us in our just cause.
Finally, not to bring up too many documents, may I cite
paragraph 6 of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in General
Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV), which was read out
before. It states:

series of

102. Guatemala has come to these meetings of the Council
held for the first time in a Latin American city, with a
frank and sincere desire for co-operation. In a message of
12 January 1973 the Minister for External Relations of
Guatemala infarmed the Foreign Minister of Panama that
Guatemala whole-heartedly supported his Government’s
initiative in seeking a series of meetings of the Council in
Panama, and offered to be present. A message of 14 March
from the Minister for External Relations of Guatemala
informed the distinguished Government and noble people
of Panama of our fervent hope that successwould crown
the meetings of the Council. However, the Minister for
External Relations of Guatemala is unable to be present at
these meetings since he is at this time obliged to meet his
colleagues of El Salvador and Honduras to continue dealing
with the important matters affecting peace in our region.
My presence at these meetings, representing the Minister for
External Relations of Guatemala, therefore signifies the
embodiment of the hopes of Guatemala that the problems
being dealt with here, particutarly those directly affecting
Panama, will meet with a solution in keeping with justice,
equity and the aspirations of its people and also assist us in
achieving peace,

“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of
the national unity and the territorial integrity of a
country is incompatible with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.”

103. That is the position of Guatemala-one of fraternal
encouragement and sympathy within the Council. Unfortunately, I must now speak pursuant to the terms of Article
31 of the Charter of the United Nations and exercise the
right of reply.

108. But let us understand one another. I shall not llere
and now attack Great Britain, although that might appear
paradoxical. The Foreign Ministers of Guyana and Jamaica
themselves have refrained from doing so. We held arid,
tiresome conversations with Great Britain to find an
equitable solution to the problem. And a number of times
these conversations were joined by our colleagues in Belize.
Surely this is proof of goodwill on the part of Guatemala in
our efforts to find an equitable solution to the problem.
The talks with Great Britain I must say, have been
suspended, for the moment. And this was so since, at the
end of 1971, on the territory of Belize, in an effort to

104. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana yesterday
meeting], and today the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Jamaica, both made sombre allusions to the
intentions of-to use the words of the first of those two
gentlemen- “a neighbouring country” of Belize. The Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and Guyana were clearly speaking

[169&h

12

intimidate us, excessive numbers of British troops were
landed, troops that are still there. We were even threatened
with Gurkha soldiers being brought in on the pretext of
preventing presumed armed action by Guatemala. What a
way of distorting concepts, ideas and realities! For the past
century Guatemala has always exhausted peaceful means of
settling international disputes. Neogtiations, proposals to
submit the case to the International Court of Justice, good
offices from the Government of the United States, mediation and new negotiations of a direct nature have been
offered,

conformity with the principles of justice and inter.
national law, adjustment or settiement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the
peace,
“Having heard the statements made before it by the
representatives of the Republic of Panama and the United
States of America,

“1. Takes note that both Governments, in the Joint
Declaration signed before the Council of the Organization
of American States on 3 April 1964, agreed to reach a
just and fair agreement;

Mr. Tack (Panama) resumed the Chair.

“2. Takes note also of the disposition shown by the
Governments of Panama and the United’ States of
America to conclude the following agreements:

109. This is a bilateral problem and a tripartite tragedy:
the United Kingdom, the colonizing Power carrying the
original sin, should we say, Guatemala, with its territorial
rights, and the friendly people of Belize. Guatemala has at
all times sought an equitable solution for all, trying to
safeguard law, justice and the balanced, peaceful development of the region. As far as the people of Belize are
concerned, Guatemala has offered them fraternal assistance
to allow it to develop integrally with Guatemala in an
atmosphere of peace and security.

“(a) To abrogate the Isthmian Canal Convention of
1903 and its amendments;
“(b) To conclude an entirely new treaty regarding the
present Panama Canal;

‘(c) To respect Panama’s sovereignty in all its territory;

110. I do not believe that the allusions to this deep
tragedy of America can have any advantageous fruits for a
meeting of the Security Council, nor do I believe that it can
help in solving the problem itself. But in the meantime, and
forced as I have been by circumstances, I state on behalf of
my country that our rights to the territory of Belize are
inalienable and imprescriptible. I shall not, Sir, become
arrogant. Quite the contrary, I should like to wear a humble
garb and tell you that the rights of Guatemala are
inalienable and imprescriptible because they belong to our
people. And our people is the one that defines our
traditions, our laws, our constitution and our struggles. It
well may be that one day the lack of understanding of the
problem may force us to turn to the Council. We wish to
inform the Council that the subject of Belize, as far as we
are concerned, has not been submitted to the Council. But
if a delegation wishes to place it on the agenda, we are
ready to discuss the matter fully, with all the consequences
to be derived from it.

“(d), To ensure the reintegration of the territory known
as the Canal Zone with the Republic of Panama, putting
an end to said Zone as an area under the jurisdiction of
the United States of America;

“(e) To give back to Panama the jurisdictional prerogatives assumed by the United States of America in the
so-called Panama Canal Zone, on dates subject to negotiation;
“(fl To lay the groundwork for the assumption by the
Republic of Panama of full responsibility for the operation of the Canal;
“3. Culls upon the parties directly concerned to
execute promptly a new treaty including the agreements
mentioned above for the purpose of eliminating the
causesof conflict between the two countries;
“4. Urges the Governments of the United States of
America and the Republic of Panama to COnthE
negotiations in a high spirit of friendship, mutual respect
and co-operation;

111. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fi-om Spanish): 1
shall tlow speak as representative of PANAMA.
112. I have the honour to submit to the Security Council
a draft resolution sponsored by Panama and Peru, which
was circulated a few moments ago to all the members of
this body in document S/10931. I take the liberty of
reading out the text of this draft resolution:

“5. Declares that the effective neutralization of the
Panama Canal will foster international peace and security
and the maintenance of the peaceful use of the Canal by
the international community;

“The Security Council,

“6. Decides to propose the inclusion of the item on
the question of the neutralization of inter-oceanic canals
ti the agenda of the next regular session of the General
Assembly;

“‘Having considered the question of the Panama Canal
Zone under the item entitled ‘Consideration of measures
for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin American in conformity with
the provisions and principles of the Charter’,

“7. Decides
eration.”

“Bearing in mind that it is a purpose of the United
Nations to bring about by peaceful means, and in

113. We have been encouraged to take this step by the
statements that have been made in the course of the debate
13

to keep the question under consid-

Canal itself, as well as by the fact that this Councii has the

to make a statement. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to address the Council.

power to adopt effective measures to prevent and eliminate
threats to the peace in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations as set forth in Article 1,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, on which the preventive
diplomacy of our day rests.

120. Mr. ROA (Cuba) (interpretation from spanis/~):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you for calling on me in
order that I may exercise the right of reply. I sayin advance
that I will be extremely brief.

regarding the situation of the Panama Canal Zone and the

314. The Republic of Panama and the United States of
America have committed themselves to agree upon a just
and equitable settlement in order to eliminate the causes of
the conflict arising from the functioning of the Panama
Canal, administered by a foreign Power on Panamanian soil.
Arrangements between the two countries must, in the eyes
of the Panamanian Government, be based upon respect for
their sovereignty and independence as well as the unity and
integrity of the territory and the right to self-determination
of the people of Panama, which aspires to utilize its natural
wealth and resources without foreign interference and for
its own benefit.
115, Thus far no satisfactory agreement between the
parties has been achieved. The United States has expressed
its willingness to abrogate the 1903 Isthmian Canal Convention and to conclude a completely new treaty that will
not only respect Panamanian sovereignty but also ensure
the reversion of the territory known as the Canal Zone to
the Republic of Panama and put an end to the jurisdiction
which the United States has exercised over the Zone. On
the other hand, the United States has submitted claims
which are extremely burdensome to the national existence
of the sovereign territory of Panama and which bear no
relation to the causesof the conflict which it is proposed to
eliminate.

121. The representative of the United States may claim or
waive his right of reply to the alleged falsehoods and
calumnies which, as he affirmed without reference to the
record, I levelled against his country in page after page,
They are not calumnies or falsehoods, but truths like
daggers which are already recorded in history.
122. Evangelically, the representative of the United States
permitted himself to appeal for compassion for the present
situation of my country.‘ Ironies of life. Compassion,
infinite compassion-yes, that is what the North American
people inspires in us today. It deserves a better fate in every
respect than the tragic morass in which it has been sunk by
its self-appointed leaders. What the people of Cuba, on the
contrary, has inspired and continues to inspire, since it
acquired the full exercise of its independence, sovereignty
and self-determination, is respect, admiration and the
solidarity of all the peoples of the world who aspire to
build a free, decent and prosperous life which colonialism,
imperialism and neocolonialism have tried to obstruct
down to our time.
123. I do not know whether or not the representative of
the United States is aware that important sectors of the
North American people-the best, doubtless-support and
endorse the legitimate and noble aspirations of my people. I
ask him not to perpetrate the injustice of confusing them
with the runaway criminals and lackeys which his Government shelters and hires.

116. The Government and the people of Panama are
deeply concerned about the contents and the substance of
the new treaty, and also the justice which we seek from
that new instrument in order to perfect our independence
and, through peaceful means, put an end to the existence of
an enclave under a foreign Government’s jurisdiction in the
heart of Panama, which is unjustified in this day and age.

124. This is certainly not a copy of the Communist
Manifesto that I am going to quote from. It is a copy of the
Bible. I would wish that this book, which is at every
bedside and in every home, hotel and office of the United
States, including the Department of State, the Pentagon
and the Central Intelligence Agency, might have its century-old voice heard in the Security Council. My quotation
is:

117. The controversy that exists between Panama and the
United States over the question of the Panama Canal Zone
has become an explosive situation likely to endanger
international peace and security, as has occurred in numerous cases, the most dramatic that of 9 January 1964.

“Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.
“For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known.

118. Therefore, bearing in mind the time that has elapsed
since the two countries assumed the solemn commitment
peacefully and by common agreement to eliminate the
causes of the friction in their relations, it is obvious that the
Security Council has the power to study the matter. Since
the United States, through its most authorized spokesmen,
has expressed its readiness to conclude formal and specific
agreements on the Canal Zone and the inter-oceanic canal,
the draft resolution offers a constructive formula which
might allow the Council, in exercise of the powers vested in
it by Article 37, paragraph 2, of the Charter, to indicate
ways by which the two parties can solve the problem.

“Therefore, whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken
in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the
housetopsyy7
125. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from SPani~fd’ 1
now call on the representative of the United Kingdom who
wishes to exercise his right of reply.
126. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): The representative of Guatemala has just made certain remarks about

119. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I would say that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Rati Roa, wishes

7 Luke

14

12:1-3.

127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of the United States, who
wishes to exercise his right of reply.

prolong a useless debate with the representative of Cuba.
His past accusations and the invective and bitterness which
he has dressed them with are outdated as well as false. A
new more peaceful world is dawning, a world of promise
where co-operation and friendly discussion are the order of
the day. My President, with a series of important diplomatic initiatives, has played a major role in creating this
new atmosphere of understanding and hope. It is in this
spirit that my delegation has come to participate in the
discussions of this great body. So I would suggest that there
be an end to the outmoded, tiresome language of the cold
war. I suggest that he lift his sights from the dark
subterranean world of plot and counterplot. Let us reason
together in this Council as responsible men and women who
are worthy of this new search for peace and harmony in
every part of the world.

128. Mr. SCALI’(United States of America): In exercising
my right of reply I will say only this. I have no desire to

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

British Honduras (Belize) which I fear I cannot let pass
without comment, nor can I accept his account of the
events of last year. My delegation did not raise this matter
in the Security Council and I agree with him that it is not
on the agenda of the Council, nor do we wish it to be. In
reply to his remarks, I must, however, state that my
Government has no doubt about its sovereignty in British
Honduras (Belize). At the same time, I welcome and
reciprocate what the representative of Guatemala had to
say about the importance of a peaceful settlement. I fully
share his hope that it will be reached in discussion between
our two Governments.

1.5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLlCATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Las publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les sgences
dbpositaires
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
ICAIC

IIOJWUNTb

IKSAAHHJI

OPI’AHM

BAlU+iH

OWbE&UHEHHbIX

HAUHH

?inAaHun
Opra~u3a~un
06m?nunensblx
HaquR
MOXHO K~~HTL. s KHWUHLIX MaraDuxax
a areHTcTa&x
so Bcex
pai%OHaX
mipa. I-hU3OAHTe
cnpaem
06 ~3pMiHsX
B
BarneM KHWXKHOM MarasHHe
nnu nmmiTe no anpecy:
Oprami3aqaa
06’be$WreaHblX
Hauati,
C~KLVM
no “pollaxe
uzAaHwfi, Hbm-Hopx
mu XeHesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PWBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas est.&n en venta en librerfs
~ -asas distribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82071-April

I976-t.925
