S/PV.8910

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8910th meeting

Tuesday, 23 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Bhattacharyya
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Eckersley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-second report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2021/930)
Report of the Secretary-General on electoral process in Iraq (S/2021/932)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2576 (2021) (S/2021/946)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-35147 (E)
*2135147*

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

well as the political and security developments since,
today’s briefing will focus primarily on the electoral
and post-electoral environment.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-second report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2021/930)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
electoral process in Iraq (S/2021/932)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2576 (2021) (S/2021/946)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, and Ms. Amal Kabashi,
Coordinator of the Iraqi Women’s Network, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/930, which contains the thirtysecond report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013),
document S/2021/932, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the electoral process in Iraq, and
document S/2021/946, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2576 (2021).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: As much as I would have
liked to be with everyone in the Chamber today, with
the 10 October elections just behind us, we judged it
more efficient to address the Security Council from
Baghdad. It goes without saying that I very much look
forward to participating in person early next year. Given
the importance of the recent parliamentary elections, as
2/21

23/11/2021

At the outset, I wish to make a resolutely positive
observation — these were the fifth national elections
held under Iraq’s 2005 Constitution, and there is much
for Iraqis to be proud of in these elections. As we have
noted before, the elections were assessed as generally
peaceful and well run, featuring significant technical
and procedural improvements. All in all, they were
a substantial achievement that Iraq’s authorities and
parties would do well to publicly acknowledge.
Moreover — and I cannot overstate this — the
elections were hard-earned. Let us not forget that the
October elections emerged from an unprecedented wave
of country-wide demonstrations in 2019, which were
marked by violence, excessive use of force, abductions
and targeted killings and resulted in hundreds of deaths
and thousands of injuries.
There is no denying it — elections and their
outcomes can provoke strong feelings. That goes for any
democracy across the globe, and Iraq is no different.
Depending on where one stands, emotions can run
high. Most of the time, those strong feelings will spark
intense debate — for instance, on the direction the
country should go in. There is absolutely nothing wrong
with that. Such debates are the bedrock of pluralism
and demonstrate political engagement.
However, if such feelings and debates give way
to undemocratic impulses, such as disinformation,
baseless accusations, intimidation, threats of violence
or worse, then — sooner or later — the door is opened to
acts that are simply intolerable. On 17 October, parties
rejecting the electoral results began demonstrations and
sit-ins, which escalated on 5 November, with casualties
reported in Baghdad. In the early hours of 7 November,
an assassination attempt on the Prime Minister took
place. That was a heinous act and a direct attack on the
State that can only be condemned in the strongest of
terms. Let me be clear — under no circumstances must
terrorism, violence and/or any other unlawful acts be
allowed to derail Iraq’s democratic process. If we are to
ease tensions, calm, restraint and dialogue are the only
way forward.
The fact is that citizens in democracies often must
recognize that, even if the results are not what one
hoped for, the process itself could still be sound. In fact,
one of the clearest signs of a strengthening democracy
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

is the ability for parties and electors to recognize
outcomes — regardless of desired results.
In the case of Iraq, the aggregated votes at the
national level do not necessarily translate into the
number of seats some parties might have expected.
Too many candidates in one constituency, for example,
could have led to a fragmentation of votes. Interesting
in Iraq’s case is that women candidates seem to have
been very successful — meeting and likely exceeding
the 25 per cent women quota, which is a floor, not
a ceiling.
What I am saying is that, while losing seats can
be difficult to digest, it is important for any party in
any democracy to examine the reasons for that loss
and to draw lessons for future elections. If there are
concerns of foul play, including manipulation, the
established legal channels are open and, in the case of
Iraq, widely used. But so far, and as stated by the Iraqi
judiciary, there has been no evidence of systemic fraud.
In recent weeks, we have observed a severe lack
of trust among parties, between parties and institutions
and between parties and the authorities, not to mention
the long-standing lack of public trust in both politicians
and institutions. That is not without risk, as mistrust
often leads to escalation. Hence our consistent calls for
political dialogue to prevail. Again, any outstanding
electoral concerns must be dealt with only through
established legal channels, in accordance with the law.
There is no point in using others as a scapegoat for
electoral grievances.
Where do things stand as we speak? The results
will be final only after ratification by the Federal
Supreme Court, which will take place once the Electoral
Judicial Panel has adjudicated on those appeals brought
before it. Today I can only say that further patience
will have to be exercised. The Electoral Judicial
Panel is finalizing its work, and the Independent High
Electoral Commission (IHEC) is conducting a further
examination of more than 800 polling stations based
on the decisions issued by the Electoral Judicial Panel.
Once that has been completed, IHEC is expected to
send the final results to the Federal Supreme Court.
While it would be preferable to have the final results
ratified sooner rather than later, it should be noted that
there are no constitutional time limits for ratification
by the Federal Supreme Court.
Having said that, let me emphasize that any
unlawful attempts to prolong or discredit the electoral

S/PV. 8910

results process, or worse — alter the electoral results
through intimidation and pressure, for example — can
only backfire. I call on all stakeholders not to go down
that path.
In the midst of this post-electoral turmoil, it is
clear that Iraq cannot allow its national interest to be
neglected. As I noted before, elections are never an end,
but rather a means. While the risk of continued political
deadlock is real, Iraq desperately needs a Government
that is able to swiftly and effectively tackle the long list
of unfinished domestic business. That is the primary
responsibility of all political stakeholders. In other
words, it is important for the current situation not to
drag on. Statesmanship, leadership and sound judgment
are all needed, as is a broad commitment to political
dialogue, with factual information as a basis for
deliberations and decision-making.
Clearly, time is of the essence. As I stated in August
(see S/PV.8842), it is high time for Iraq to emerge from
a prolonged political standstill and establish dynamic,
responsive governance mechanisms. The current postelectoral phase is the moment for all political actors to
demonstrate their determination, in service of all Iraqis.
Yet again, I can only refer to the events that led
to the October elections in the first place. A lack of
political, economic and social prospects made many
Iraqis take to the streets. Their demands and grievances
remain as relevant as ever. As we all know, simmering
anger easily swells.
Plainly speaking, Iraq’s current outlook is
precarious, to say the least. In the absence of genuine
reforms, the situation will not improve, on the contrary.
I would like to provide some final notes on the issue
of missing Kuwaiti, third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. On
18 November, Kuwait announced the identification
of another 19 Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing
persons, bringing the total number of Kuwaiti missing
persons and third-country nationals identified to date
to 59 people — 57 Kuwaitis and two Saudis.
That breakthrough was possible thanks to the
concerted, persistent efforts over the past couple of
years, combining two elements — witness information
and satellite imagery. I would like to emphasize the
importance that the Government of Iraq not lose that
momentum and use those elements to locate the more
than 300 remaining missing Kuwaitis and third-country

21-351473/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

nationals. I am confident that the strong commitment
of all actors could expedite the resolution of that
humanitarian file.
I am also pleased to report that, after considerable
delays due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, on
18 November, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq successfully completed the training of 20
Iraqi staff of the Ministry of Defence on the use of
ground penetrating radar, which, in addition to witness
information and satellite imagery, could further
contribute to locating human remains.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the
October elections were hard-earned and, importantly,
technically well managed — a process for which IHEC
and others deserve credit. The recent parliamentary
elections can serve as an important steppingstone on a
longer path towards regaining public trust. As we await
the ratification of the results by the Federal Supreme
Court, I can only underline that what happens in the
coming days and weeks will prove to be even more
significant for Iraq’s immediate future. The importance
of a sound and inclusive process for the formation of the
Government cannot be overstated.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for the valuable
information she provided and for her assessment of the
situation in Iraq.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kabashi.
Ms. Kabashi (spoke in Arabic): My name is Amal
Kabashi, I am a representative of the Iraqi Women’s
Network, which was established in 2004 as a civil
society feminist alliance. The Network includes more
than 100 local organizations from all over Iraq. I played
a prominent role in drafting the first national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and in preparing the second plan, which focuses on the
role of Iraqi women in achieving stability, security and
peace, as well as combating terrorism and extremism.
As a feminist activist and a defender of women’s
rights, I would like to share with the Security Council
my growing concerns over the assassinations,
kidnappings, assaults, threats of assassination against,
and defamation of, feminist activists and human rights
defenders that women have faced, particularly during
the popular protests in 2019 and 2020, all of which
occurred with impunity. Over the past two years, Iraqi
women have faced daily challenges in realizing their
4/21

23/11/2021

full, equal and meaningful participation in establishing
peace and ensuring protection from violence in Iraq.
In my statement, I will focus on three key issues that
must be addressed to end this cycle of discrimination
and exclusion against Iraqi women.
First, the elections and the present negotiations to
form a new Government are critical both to ensuring
women’s meaningful participation and to promoting
democracy in Iraq.
The early elections in Iraq last month were organized
in response to the demands of the peaceful protests that
shook the country from October 2019 to 2020. Women
played a key role in those protests and defied social
norms in order to do so. Protesters were confronted
with the excessive use of force, which left more than
100 people dead and thousands wounded. Despite the
announced boycott of the elections, they proceeded
under the monitoring of the United Nations and the
European Union. A total of 3,240 candidates, including
951 women, participated in the elections, competing
for the 329 seats in the Council of Representatives.
The elections resulted in the emergence of new and
independent political movements.
Moreover, many women candidates received
thousands of votes, indicating the general electorate’s
support for women’s political participation. The
results of the election are expected to raise the
percentage of women’s representation in the Council of
Representatives to more than 30 per cent.
I would like to emphasize the critical role of, and
need for, women as active participants in Parliament
and in negotiations to form the new Government.
Their meaningful representation must also be reflected
through an increase in the number of women in
ministerial positions in order to ensure gender equality
and equal opportunity, as set out in the Constitution.
Secondly, while women’s engagement and increased
participation in the electoral process is encouraging,
an enabling environment for their participation is also
critical, as they still face serious barriers in that regard.
During the 2014 to 2021 parliamentary sessions,
we advocated for Parliament to pass a law against
domestic violence. Despite the existence of a law in the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, we did not succeed in adopting
such a law in the Iraqi Parliament. That is due to the
tyrannical mentality of many Iraqi legislators who
reject such efforts because they claim such laws unduly
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

regulate family relations, despite the fact that the Iraqi
Constitution guarantees protection from all forms of
violence and abuse in the family, school and society.
Those fundamental principles, as well as
Iraq’s international legal obligations, require the
establishment of national laws and regulations that
protect women and girls from gender-based violence
in all spheres of society. This year has witnessed the
adoption of some encouraging legislation, such as
the Yazidi female survivors law in April. That law is
part of the transitional justice framework adopted by
the Iraqi Government to address the consequences of
terrorism and violent extremism and is in line with the
content of the joint communiqué signed in September
2016 between the Iraqi Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
The law focuses on providing material compensation
to women survivors; however, it does not take the
necessary measures to institutionalize psychological
health and social services for the survivors and their
children. The law also fails to address access to justice
for survivors of gender-based violence and their children
born to fathers affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS), particularly in terms of registering
their birth and obtaining civil documentation.
There are also gaps in Government programmes
to ensure rehabilitation and provide support for
the reintegration of ISIS families into their local
communities, especially women and girls forced to join
ISIS or marry their fighters. The delay in resolving the
situation of those families makes them into ticking time
bombs that threaten peace and social security.
Stability in my country requires strengthened
and gender-sensitive law enforcement and justice
institutions, which are essential for fighting impunity,
corruption and militarism, all of which negatively affect
women’s rights and their participation in promoting
social cohesion, reconciliation and peacebuilding.
Thirdly, a national mechanism to support the
inclusion of women is critical to ensure oversight of
adequate resources for implementing Iraq’s national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The absence of
such a mechanism has contributed to the weakening of
women’s participation in decision-making bodies and
development programmes.

S/PV. 8910

As a national feminist movement, we have called
on the Iraqi Government to form a national council
for women’s empowerment, with the participation of
representatives from the Government, Parliament,
the Supreme Judicial Council and women-focused
civil society organizations, as well as the media. It
is necessary to implement the women and peace and
security agenda and to invest in Iraqi women’s potential
to reform the political process and build a State of equal
citizenship and social justice.
In conclusion, I urge the Security Council to call
on the Government of Iraq to fulfil its duty to provide
a legal framework and the necessary mechanisms to
protect women and girls and to support victims and
ensure their access to justice in line with resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women
and peace and security. That includes enacting the
anti-domestic violence law, amending the Iraqi penal
code and preventing attempts to legislate laws based on
sectarian grounds to regulate personal affairs.
Secondly, I urge the Security Council to call upon
the Government of Iraq to create a national council
for women’s empowerment and allocate the necessary
budget to implement the national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000).
Thirdly, I urge the Council to ensure that the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq prioritizes
protection for women’s rights as it supports the
Government of Iraq in its judicial and legal reforms in
order to protect the rights of women and prevent genderbased violence in line with resolution 2576 (2021).
Fourthly, I urge the Council to call on the
Government of Iraq to ensure accountability for the
killing of human rights defenders and civil society
activists during the 2019 and 2020 protests and
to protect the rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly.
Fifthly, I urge the Council to call on the
international community to fund women human rights
defenders, their organizations and all civil society
representatives and non-governmental organizations
that are working to promote human rights, gender
justice and the inclusion of women in peacebuilding
and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Kabashi for her briefing.

21-351475/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

23/11/2021

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

together, in this spirit of cooperation, on this file and
across the Council’s agenda.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert and Ms. Kabashi for their briefings. I also
thank the Special Representative for her steadfast
leadership throughout Iraq’s election process.

Looking forward, we are eager for the publication
of UNAMI’s detailed analysis of all data collected from
its monitoring activity, as previewed in paragraph 65
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/932). With
continued international and domestic investments
in Iraq’s electoral system, future elections can be
informed by that valuable data, build on the momentum
and provide even greater opportunities for voters to
peacefully chart their country’s desires.

In October 2019, the people of Iraq took to the
streets and demanded change through peaceful protest.
Since then, the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) team has been essential in facilitating
sound and credible elections designed to reflect the will
of the Iraqi people.
In May, the Security Council decided that UNAMI
should provide a team to monitor Iraq’s parliamentary
elections. Thanks to the many States that gave financial
support, UNAMI provided five times more United
Nations officials to assist the Independent High Electoral
Commission than during the 2018 election. The report
of the Secretary-General on the election process, issued
on 8 November (S/2021/932), like the interim report of
the European Union Election Observation Mission to
Iraq, concluded that the polling was well managed and
that voters cast their ballots in an orderly manner in a
peaceful environment.
The Independent High Electoral Commission
promptly resolved the minor issues that arose and,
crucially, its partial manual recount matched the results,
further demonstrating the integrity of the voting and
counting systems. That is a remarkable achievement.
It was a genuine opportunity for the Iraqi people to
choose their leaders, and they did. Congratulations to
all Iraqis on the election. And a special congratulations
to the Iraqi women and members of the religious and
ethnic minority groups who voted and won a historic
number of seats in Parliament.
In a world with far too much democratic backsliding,
the Independent High Electoral Commission, the
Government of Iraq and the Iraqi people should be
proud of that election. The Council, too, should be
proud of those results and seek to support replicating
them in the future. After all, the Security Council
spoke in unison, authorizing UNAMI to provide
electoral technical assistance and election monitors.
The Council came together and provided the resources
the Government of Iraq needed to meet the legitimate
demands of its people. The Council helped strengthen
democratic institutions. Let us continue to work
6/21

As the electoral process laid out in Iraqi law
proceeds, we call on all countries to respect the process
and allow the judiciary to carry out its constitutional
duty independently and expeditiously. Iraq’s leaders
must engage in constructive dialogue to form a
Government upon the certification of the election
results, one focused on transparent governance to
support the aspirations of all the Iraqi people.
The process of forming a Government should
be done without fear, intimidation or the threat of
violence. We therefore condemn in the strongest
terms the attempted assassination of Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi, as well as any other efforts to influence
the electoral process through violence, intimidation or
coercion. Any threat against personnel of the United
Nations or the Independent High Electoral Commission
must be met with full condemnation by the Council.
As Iraq looks to complete the final stages of this
successful election process and build on it for elections
to come, it has a strong partner in the United States. We
are committed to deepening our bilateral relationship
and supporting Iraq’s democracy. We continue to
implement the outcomes of our strategic dialogue with
Iraq and are laser-focused on economic development,
climate adaptation, public health and human rights for
all. We support a sovereign and stable Iraq. And this
election takes us one step closer to that objective.
Mr. Bhattacharyya (India): I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and Ms. Amal
Kabashi, Coordinator of the Iraqi Women’s Network,
for their briefings.
Let me begin by commending the people and the
Government of Iraq for the successful and peaceful
conduct of the parliamentary elections. We hope that
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

the successful completion of the elections marks the
beginning of a new phase towards a stable Iraq. The
people of Iraq, despite the difficult economic and
security situation and the continued threat of terrorism,
have expressed their will for a safer, inclusive and
prosperous Iraq. We look forward to the early formation
of the Government, which would fulfil their aspirations.
We also appreciate the Independent High
Electoral Commission (IHEC) for its diligent and
independent work towards holding the elections.
We share the observations of the United Nations and
other international election monitors that the elections
were technically sound and conducted in a free and
fair manner. We also acknowledge the important role
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in
supporting IHEC and the Government of Iraq, as per
the mandate provided by the Council, and contributing
to a genuinely free and fair electoral process.
Women candidates running for parliamentary
elections secured 97 seats out of 329, an increase of 14
seats over and above the seats reserved for women. That
represents a significant development towards ensuring
greater political participation by women in Iraq. We
appreciate the steps taken by the Iraqi Government and
IHEC to promote women’s political participation in the
electoral process and to prevent and address violence
against women candidates.
India has strongly condemned the assassination
attempt on the Prime Minister of Iraq and expressed
its concerns for the casualties caused by the attack.
Terrorism and violence have no place in any civilized
society. They cannot be allowed to undermine peace
and stability in Iraq.
We reiterate our support for the democratic process
in Iraq and encourage all political parties to respect the
results of the elections. We note the concerns raised by
some parties on the electoral process. Any concerns
regarding the elections or its results should be addressed
through legal and peaceful means within Iraq’s
constitutional framework. Violence and intimidation
should not be the tools for redressing those grievances.
We urge the parties to reject violence and resolve
differences through a peaceful and inclusive dialogue.
The menace of terrorism continues to pose a
major threat to the security, stability, governance and
social and economic development of Iraq. We strongly
condemn all terrorist attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) against the people of Iraq and

S/PV. 8910

extend our sincere and deep condolences to the families
of victims. We wish the injured a speedy recovery.
The recent attack in Diyala, for instance, is yet
another reminder that, despite the successes of the Iraqi
security forces in combating this group, ISIL remains
active in the country and the region, with its affiliates
functioning independently at many places in the world.
It is critical that the international community and Iraq’s
partners continue their support and training to enable
the Iraqi security forces in the fight against terrorism
and build their capacity to address future threats. Such
support and assistance should respect Iraq’s sovereignty
and laws, while helping it preserve its territorial
integrity and ensure the irreversible defeat of ISIL.
India welcomes the outcomes of the Baghdad
Conference for Cooperation and Partnership held in
August. The conference was an expression of Iraq’s
desire to develop friendly relations with its neighbours
and give priority to the language of dialogue and
non-interference in the affairs of other countries. I also
commend Iraq’s proactive role in promoting greater
regional security and stability and its efforts in bridging
differences among the countries of the region through
diplomacy and dialogue.
We welcome the continuing cooperation between
the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to achieve an
amicable solution to the pending issues. We also
appreciate the efforts made by the members of the
tripartite mechanism and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. We hope that the parties will continue
to strengthen their cooperation until the matter is
resolved to the mutual satisfaction of Iraq and Kuwait.
India’s friendship with Iraq is steeped in history.
Our people-to-people ties and our multifaceted bilateral
relations are very strong. India has always responded to
the urgent needs of Iraq. Our Technical and Economic
Cooperation programme has grown from strength to
strength over the years and has continued even during
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
As a steadfast supporter of a democratic, pluralistic,
federal, unified and prosperous Iraq, India will remain
a willing partner of the new Government in its efforts
to achieve economic recovery, peace and stability,
national reconciliation and reconstruction.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I should like to thank
our briefers this morning, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
and Amal Kabashi, for their critical and very frank

21-351477/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

assessments of the recent legislative elections. I am also
delighted to see our colleague Mr. Mohammed Bahr
Aluloom, Permanent Representative of Iraq, among
us in the Chamber this morning. In particular, I would
like to take this opportunity to applaud Ms. HennisPlasschaert and her team for the vital role they have
played in assisting and monitoring the elections. We
are fully aware of the considerable challenges they have
faced over time, and they can be sure of our recognition
and continued support.
Ms. Kabashi’s remarks this morning with regard to
what she called the daily challenges facing Iraqi women
and what she described as discrimination and exclusion
were not lost on us. I was also struck by her determined
message with respect to Iraqi women’s aspiration to
help shape and participate in the new Government. Her
messages were very clear, and we thank her for them.
Ireland welcomes the holding of early legislative
elections in Iraq on 10 October. Through its enhanced
role in monitoring these elections, the United Nations
has found that the electoral process was largely
peaceful, as we heard this morning, and orderly. We
commend the extensive efforts of the Government of
Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission
(IHEC) in preparing and conducting the elections.
The importance of the contributions of all who
provided support towards strengthening Iraq’s
democracy, including regional and international
observers, cannot be understated. We look forward to the
European Union electoral observer mission publishing
its own comprehensive report early next year.
Most important, we salute the courage and
determination the people of Iraq showed in exercising
their democratic right in a very challenging environment.
I want to pay particular tribute to women, minorities
and the internally displaced for their participation. The
predicted record number of parliamentary seats won
by women, as we heard, is very encouraging. Ireland
looks forward to the peaceful formation of an inclusive
Government that responds to the needs and aspirations
of all Iraqis.
Against the backdrop of these positive developments,
Ireland deeply regrets the recent shocking assassination
attempt on Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi and hopes that
those who were injured make swift recoveries. We
strongly condemn this and all other incidents or threats
of violence, including those targeting members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, IHEC and
8/21

23/11/2021

those who have worked tirelessly to ensure that the
electoral process was free and fair.
Iraq’s stability is already being threatened by what
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert described this morning as
a precarious situation at best. We remain concerned
at ongoing attacks across the country, including by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, that have
claimed lives in recent months. We reject all attempts
to destabilize Iraq, as well as, of course, all forms
of terrorism.
The Iraqi people gathered in a popular protest
movement just over two years ago to call for systemwide reform. While their determination has borne fruit
in the holding of early elections, hundreds of Iraqis
tragically paid the ultimate price for this progress.
Regrettably, violence and threats against political and
civic activists and human rights defenders continue,
in particular against women candidates. We know
this happened during the recent electoral campaign
period. We can and must do more to break down the
barriers to women’s full participation in political life
and to foster a political and civic space that welcomes
and protects all members of Iraqi society. We call on
the Iraqi authorities to urgently deliver accountability
and redress for the crimes committed and to implement
much-needed and urgent reforms.
Turning briefly to the humanitarian situation,
Ireland was encouraged by the second round of voluntary
returns from the Al-Hol camp in Syria in September,
combined with the first returns of families from the
Jeddah 1 camp to their areas of origin. We reiterate that
all returns must be safe, voluntary, and dignified.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge recent progress
made in the identification of Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, as well as on reparations. These are vital steps
towards full reconciliation, and we commend the spirit
of cooperation demonstrated between the two countries.
Indeed, Iraq’s exemplary commitment to enhanced
engagement with its neighbours more generally has, in
our view, the potential to greatly improve the region’s
stability. In that regard, we welcome the trilateral
partnership among Iraq, Jordan and Egypt and Iraq’s
successful hosting of the regional conference held in
Baghdad on 28 August.
Ms. Gonsalves: (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, we would like to express our appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her comprehensive
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8910

remarks this morning, as well as her and her team’s
continued support for the people of Iraq, particularly
during the recent electoral period. We also welcome
Ms. Amal Kabashi, whose work towards safeguarding
women’s rights and strengthening gender equality must
be not only commended, but also supported. In this
vein, we thank Mexico, as President of the Security
Council, for its commitment to including women civil
society briefers in Council discussions and creating the
space for this important exchange with Ms. Kabashi.

and much-needed reforms. In that regard, we underscore
the need for all actors within Iraq to contribute to an
atmosphere of peace that facilitates a stable, secure
and prosperous future. We condemn the attempted
assassination against the Prime Minister, as well as the
ongoing threats against UNAMI and others, which risk
eroding the political progress that has been made so far.
We also express our concern over the continued attacks
carried out by Da’esh, which undermine all ongoing
efforts towards peace and security.

Despite the myriad complex challenges that exist
in Iraq, it is encouraging to witness the Iraqi people’s
commitment to the national peace and security
agenda and the democratic and inclusive framework
within which this could be achieved. The milestone
parliamentary elections that were held on 10 October, in
advance of the constitutional deadline, exemplified the
commitment of the Government and the Independent
High Electoral Commission to the political, economic,
social and democratic progress of Iraq. In this regard,
we recognize the critical role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) since
well before the holding of elections. In addition to
UNAMI’s provision of technical electoral assistance
and advice, and the provision of a strengthened, robust
and visible United Nations team, in accordance with
its mandate, UNAMI’s sustained efforts to build trust
and keep voters informed about the electoral process,
including through public outreach campaigns, are
all indeed commendable. The slogan “Your country.
Your future. Your vote” is one that we wholeheartedly
support, as it advocated a people-centred approach to
a process inherently inclusive of all voices, including,
yes, women and minorities.

We welcome that, amid the preparations for
elections, the Government continued its efforts to
achieve such national priorities as the strengthening of
regional and international relations, an approach that
is indispensable to successfully tackling challenges,
including those that are common to the region. The
coronavirus disease pandemic remains an issue with
far-reaching consequences, and we welcome the joint
efforts, including by the World Health Organization
and UNICEF, aimed at supporting the Government of
Iraq in its rollout of vaccines. On the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, we take note of the pandemic’s
impact on efforts to move forward in this area, yet we
remain encouraged by the commitment of UNAMI, as
well as the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Government of Iraq, to making progress and
ultimately resolving this important matter.

The holding of elections was a much-welcomed
step in the right direction; however, it was also the
start of a long road to recovery, which must begin
with the peaceful formation of a new Government.
We are hopeful that the newly formed and inclusive
Government will prioritize the creation of a space for
dialogue with the Iraqi people, so that their needs and
aspirations can be met. Emphasis should be placed on
the most vulnerable and marginalized, so that they may
meaningfully participate in discussions about their
future and the direction of their country.

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and dedication. I
also thank Ms. Amal Kabashi for her very timely and
concrete briefing to the Security Council. We thank her
for her important work and for speaking up on behalf
of women, girls and human rights defenders. I also
recognize and welcome the representative of Iraq to
this meeting.

Regional and international stakeholders and
partners of Iraq must also contribute to a constructive
post-electoral environment. The right political will and
momentum could open the door to effective governance

In conclusion, we reiterate our unwavering support
for the work of UNAMI, and all efforts aimed at
achieving peace, security and prosperity in Iraq, in line
with the country’s sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity.

Norway commends the Iraqi Government for the
10 October elections. Free, fair and transparent elections
are a pillar of democratic governance and are indeed
vital for transparency and fostering confidence and
dialogue, as well as for ensuring effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions.

21-351479/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

We commend the Independent High Electoral
Commission for their significant technical and
procedural improvements to the election process. And
we also commend the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to advise, support
and assist the Government of Iraq and the Independent
High Electoral Commission, including with monitoring
on election day. While the final election results are not
yet ratified, we urge those with complaints and concerns
to address them through the established legal channels.
Last week, the Council came together to condemn
the assassination attempt against Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi (see SC/14692). It is regrettable that
spoilers seek to destabilize Iraq at this crucial juncture.
We now look forward to the formation of a new
Government that will meet the needs and aspirations
of the Iraqi people, in particular those of women,
youth and marginalized communities. As we heard
this morning, an inclusive Government, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, is
needed to address the underlying causes of conflict
and instability, as well as to usher in much-needed
economic, social and political reforms. We are happy
to note that the elections may have led to an increase
in women’s participation in Parliament. We hope that
will enhance their role in political decision-making and
participation in the upcoming parliamentary period.
We also welcome UNAMI’s efforts to promote
human rights and build capacity on issues of
accountability, justice and the rule of law. We are
concerned about the reported lack of progress on
accountability and redress for crimes perpetrated
against demonstrators, in particular attacks against
political and civic activists by unidentified armed
elements, as well as a concerning pattern of intimidation
against those publicly advocating for accountability in
such cases. We encourage the Government to increase
its efforts in that regard.
We remain concerned about conflict-related sexual
violence in Iraq. Momentum should be maintained on
the Yazidi Female Survivor Law, and we encourage an
update to the 2016 joint communiqué by the Republic of
Iraq and the United Nations on prevention and response
to conflict-related sexual violence.
Finally, we also commend Iraq’s participation
during the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. The effects of climate change
10/21

23/11/2021

are a significant issue in Iraq and the region, and we
encourage sustained diplomacy, with support from
UNAMI, in order to advance regional dialogue and
cooperation, particularly on the use and distribution of
water resources.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert for her comprehensive briefing.
I also thank Ms. Kabashi for sharing her perspective,
and I welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
today’s meeting.
Let me begin by congratulating the Government of
Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission
on conducting a technically well-managed and
generally peaceful election on 10 October. We are
encouraged by the improvements resulting from the
application of technical and procedural measures. We
welcome the positive assessment of the international
election monitors from the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard. The efforts
made by the Government of Iraq and relevant national
authorities in preparing for the elections and preventing
violence on election day are commendable.
We appreciate UNAMI and international actors for
assisting the Government of Iraq and the Independent
High Electoral Commission’s efforts in the lead-up to
the elections. UNAMI’s objectivity in that endeavour
has been well recognized. We reiterate our strong
support for the role of UNAMI and United Nations
staff in assisting Iraq in the face of multiple challenges,
including the coronavirus disease pandemic and violent
threats from various sources.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the
security situation in the country. In addition to hundreds
of terrorist attacks over the past few months, we also
witnessed a failed assassination attempt against the
Prime Minister, which the Security Council condemned
in its 8 November press statement (SC/14692). Those
who publicly advocate accountability continue to face
intimidation or even assassination attempts.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of all forms of
terrorism and the use of violence or threats for political
purposes. We echo the Secretary-General’s call on all
parties, candidates and other stakeholders in Iraq to be
patient and address their concerns through established
legal channels while creating an environment that
promotes national unity through peaceful and
constructive dialogue. All stakeholders should respect
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8910

existing legal processes and facilitate a peaceful and
independent judicial review of electoral appeals.

the Iraqi Women’s Network, for their briefings and
welcomes the representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.

We are delighted at the diplomatic efforts by the
Iraqi Government to gain international support for the
country and play a stronger role in regional affairs. The
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership,
held in August, is a great example of those efforts. We
welcome the strengthened cooperation between Iraq
and countries of the region in dealing with common
challenges. At the same time, the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq must
be respected.

China applauds the successful holding of
parliamentary elections in Iraq last month. We
appreciate the great efforts made by the Government
and the people of Iraq and fully recognize the electoral
support provided by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

On the humanitarian front, we remain concerned
about the internally displaced persons (IDPs) issue.
Nearly five years have passed since the defeat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, but the return of
IDPs continues to be delayed. Nearly 1.2 million IDPs
have not yet returned to their homes, while thousands
of others have been displaced again after attempting
to return. We call upon the relevant Iraqi authorities
and international partners to redouble their efforts to
ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return or settlement of IDPs, as well as their access to
basic services, particularly food and water.
We commend the strengthened cooperation between
the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in the search for
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and the
return of Kuwaiti property. We welcome the efforts of
each country’s relevant authorities to shed light on the
identity of missing persons. It is also encouraging to
witness the collaboration among the members of the
Tripartite Commission, as well as the efforts of the
Technical Subcommittee. The assistance and leadership
of UNAMI and the International Committee of the Red
Cross in the implementation of resolution 2107 (2013)
are invaluable.
Today is Viet Nam’s last meeting in the Security
Council on the situation in Iraq. While challenges
remain, we have seen progress on the ground and in
UNAMI’s work. I would like to take this opportunity
to encourage one and all to intensify their efforts and
hope for continued success in future. I pledge Viet
Nam’s unwavering support for Iraq’s unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, as well as for
UNAMI and the Government and the people of Iraq.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Representative HennisPlasschaert and Ms. Amal Kabashi, Coordinator of

China condemns the 7 November attack on the
residence of Iraqi Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi, and we
express our concern over the recent threats of violence
against the Independent High Electoral Commission
and UNAMI. We hope that all parties in Iraq will remain
calm, exercise restraint, express their demands and
resolve their differences and disputes through peaceful
means within the framework of the Constitution and
the law. China encourages all factions in Iraq to use the
opportunity of the elections to further build consensus,
strengthen solidarity and form a new Government in an
orderly manner so as to lay a solid political foundation
for further progress in nation-building and achieving
development and prosperity.
The security situation in Iraq remains grim, with
frequent attacks launched by the remnants of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The international
community should continue its unwavering support
for Iraq’s counter-terrorism efforts. The countries
concerned should shoulder their responsibilities by
facilitating the early identification and repatriation of
foreign terrorist fighters and their families in Iraq.
On 4 November, the Permanent Representative of
Iraq wrote to the rotating presidency of the Security
Council, listing Turkey’s violations of Iraqi territory and
airspace between June and September. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/946) also documents Iraqi
civilian casualties caused by air strikes and shelling.
China hopes that Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity will be respected by all countries. Iraq’s longterm peace and stability will not be possible without
a conducive environment. The Baghdad Conference
for Cooperation and Partnership, held in August,
achieved important consensus on supporting Iraq’s
peaceful development and a joint response to regional
challenges and established a follow-up implementation
mechanism, which China welcomes. We hope that
Iraq and major regional countries will fully leverage
that mechanism, strengthen communication, enhance
mutual trust and work together to safeguard regional

21-3514711/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

stability. We appreciate and support the ongoing close
cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of
missing persons and property.
The United Nations and the Iraqi Government
signed the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework in September. We hope that
the United Nations development system will take
this opportunity to focus on the development-related
governance priorities of the Iraqi Government, while
stepping up resource mobilization with concrete
actions so as to help Iraq achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as soon as possible.
China has always been a sincere friend of the Iraqi
people. Last week, the fourth shipment of assistance from
the Chinese Government, containing 1 million doses
of coronavirus disease vaccines, arrived in Baghdad.
China stands ready to continue working with the rest
of the international community to support the Iraqi
Government in fighting the pandemic, strengthening
the economy and improving people’s livelihoods.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing. I wish to reiterate
France’s full support for her work. I would also like to
thank Ms. Amal Kabashi for her testimony. I welcome
the presence of the representative of Iraq here among
us today.
I would first like to thank the United Nations for its
mobilization alongside the Iraqi authorities throughout
the electoral process, in accordance with the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. The electoral
assistance provided by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq significantly strengthened the capacities
of the Independent High Electoral Commission, which
was able to organize the elections under satisfactory
conditions despite the many challenges posed by the
current political and security context.
France shares the conclusions of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/946) regarding the October
elections, which overall proceeded well, without any
major security incidents. In that regard, I would like to
commend the efforts of the various observer missions
present on the ground. I would note in particular that
of the United Nations, but also those of the European
Union and the League of Arab States.
12/21

23/11/2021

France has followed with the utmost attention the
evolving security and political situation in recent weeks.
We condemned in the strongest terms the assassination
attempt against Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa
Al-Kadhimi on 7 November. That is an extremely
worrisome development, and we reject any form of
destabilization of Iraq, violence and intimidation. Iraq
must not fall back into the cycle of violence that it
unfortunately experienced in recent years.
The Security Council has made it clear that any
challenge to the election results must be made properly
through legal channels. All political parties that
wished to contest the results were able to do so with
the Independent High Electoral Commission, which
carried out recounts where it deemed it necessary.
France calls for calm and political dialogue among all
sectors of Iraqi society.
The Iraqi men and women who went to the polls
expressed legitimate aspirations, which must be
heard and implemented in order to meet the desire
for reform and democracy voiced by the population in
2019. That first requires the formation of an inclusive,
representative Government and that women, who were
elected in large numbers to the Parliament, be fully
involved in the next Government.
In terms of security, the threat posed by Da’esh
is not diminishing, and it is essential to continue the
fight against terrorism. The international coalition,
present at the invitation of the Iraqi authorities, will
continue to support them in the fight against Da’esh.
In that regard, we recall the importance of ensuring
the protection of diplomatic compounds, as well as
the bases that accommodate the coalition forces.
We have seen that Iraq can play a positive role in the
region. We welcome the balanced diplomacy that has
been promoted by the Iraqi Government, which made
it possible to launch a dialogue among the countries of
the region. The Baghdad Conference for Cooperation
and Partnership, in which the President of the Republic
participated, was a great diplomatic success for Iraq at
the regional level. We encourage the Iraqi Government
and its successor to build on that success and continue
to foster dialogue among its neighbours. That will
contribute to the stability of Iraq and the region as
a whole.
Finally, I would like to commend the ongoing
cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and the
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

recent progress made on the return of missing Kuwaiti
property. We encourage both States to continue
their cooperation.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): It is
always a pleasure to hear the briefings of Ms. HennisPlasschaert on the situation in Iraq. The picture that
she just painted for us was very usefully complemented
by Ms. Kabashi through her perspective as a civil
society representative. I welcome the participation of
the Ambassador of Iraq at our meeting today.
As was clearly made evident in the briefings, the
quest for stability in Iraq must involve the inclusive
participation of all sectors of society in a democratic
framework that respects human rights, particularly
those of minorities. By returning to peace and stability,
the country will regain its former glory and again take
up its rightful place in the Persian Gulf region.
In that regard, the Niger welcomes the holding
of the Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and
Partnership, organized by Iraq on 28 August, which
sought to ease tensions among the countries of the
Middle East. After more than nearly two decades of
war and a period of insecurity and suffering of all kinds
in the fate of the Iraqis, today they deserve to live in
peace and prosperity.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Iraqi Government to tackle the numerous crises
that the country continues to face, particularly the
socioeconomic and security challenges, as well as the
effects of climate change.
It always bears repeating that political violence
can lead only to more division and increasing
tensions among the political class, at a time when
the electoral contests have just been held. The Niger
strongly condemns the assassination attempt against
the Iraqi Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi,
on 7 November and the continuing threats of violence
against the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
and the other international groups present in Iraq.
In that regard, the Iraqi Government must redouble
its efforts to protect and guarantee the fundamental
rights of all peaceful demonstrators, civil society
activists and human rights defenders. The systematic
attempts to threaten and prevent the people from
exercising their fundamental rights to peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression are contrary to the
democratic values to which the Iraqi people aspire.

S/PV. 8910

The Niger welcomes the holding of largely peaceful
legislative elections in Iraq, which made it possible for
the Iraqi people to make their voices heard at the polls
in favour of reform. We call upon all political actors
to respect the rules of democracy and to resort only
to legal means should there be any complaints with
regard to the results as announced. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq for the invaluable support it provided
to the Government and its institutions throughout the
electoral process.
With regard to the missing persons, property and
archives of Kuwait and third countries, my delegation
congratulates the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait
for the notable progress achieved in that process. We
take note of the agreement proposed by the State of
Kuwait and the Republic of Iraq to exchange technical
laboratory capabilities between the two countries. My
delegation encourages the Iraqi Foreign Minister to
pursue his efforts with a view to locating the remaining
Kuwaiti property and archives that have not yet
been recovered.
In conclusion, the gains made thus far could be
called into question without a resolute commitment
to fight the Da’esh terrorists attacking Iraqi forces.
More than ever before, Iraq needs our solidarity and
our decisive action throughout the post-electoral
period in order to help it turn the page on its recent
tumultuous history.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her informative briefing on the situation in Iraq. We
also listened carefully to Ms. Kabashi’s remarks.
We welcome the early elections to the Council of
Representatives of Iraq on 10 October. We trust that
the members of Parliament will soon be able to reach
an agreement on the formation of a new and capable
Government that will have the support of all major
political parties and ethno-confessional groups in the
country. We understand that the Iraqi people are going
through a difficult period and urge the leading political
forces to demonstrate restraint and seek out mutually
acceptable solutions to the internal political differences
that have worsened since the elections.
It is clear that a vast range of issues that have
accumulated over the years due to objective causes
cannot be eliminated overnight. We fully appreciate

21-3514713/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

how difficult it will be for the future Iraqi leadership
to take into account the views of the country’s entire
political, social and ethno-confessional spectrum in
order to improve the state of affairs in Iraq, as well as
to ensure security and law and order.
The situation is complicated by the challenging
socioeconomic situation and the spread of the
coronavirus disease. In that context, we underscore the
need to provide international assistance to Baghdad
in rebuilding the economic and humanitarian sectors
of the country destroyed by the long-term war with
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. At the same time,
we must acknowledge that terrorists are continuing to
carry out regular subversive actions in various regions
of the country.
We strongly condemn the attack on the residence of
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Mustafa
Al-Kadhimi, using unmanned aerial vehicles rigged
with explosives, which we regard as an attempt to
undermine the security and stability of the country.
We reaffirm our readiness to strengthen practical
interaction with our Iraqi partners in the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We note
the importance of stepping up collective international
efforts with the aim of relentlessly countering that
global threat. We would like to highlight that such a
challenge can be effectively overcome only through
the broadest possible coordination of counter-terrorism
efforts. In that regard, we highly commend the activities
of the Quadripartite Information Centre in Baghdad
with the participation of the Russian, Iraqi, Iranian and
Syrian militaries. We believe that mechanism plays an
important role in terms of coordinating efforts in the
fight against terrorism in Iraq and Syria.
We welcome the efforts of the authorities of
Iraq and the Kurdish Autonomous Region to settle
their differences. We are convinced that the further
improvement of relations between Baghdad and Erbil
will contribute to strengthening security and solving
the accumulated issues to the benefit of both the Kurds
and the entire Iraqi people.
We consider any illegal military presence in Iraq
unacceptable. It is our view that the presence of foreign
military units in the country must be based only on
the consent of the local authorities or an appropriate
decision by the Security Council. We call on all external
players interested in stabilizing the internal situation in
Iraq to refrain from taking destructive unilateral action
14/21

23/11/2021

that will negatively affect the situation in the country
and beyond its borders.
In that regard, we trust that the countries of the
region will tap into the existing diplomatic potential
for the collective advancement of peace and stability
throughout the Middle East, including within the
framework of Russia’s updated collective security
concept in the Persian Gulf
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and
Ms. Kabashi for her insightful statement.
The parliamentary elections on 10 October marked
an important commitment by the people of Iraq to
democratic principles and a significant step on the
path towards Iraq’s stability. We commend the Iraqi
people for that commitment, regardless of the various
challenges facing the country. We also commend the
Iraqi Government and the Independent High Electoral
Commission for holding technically well-managed,
largely peaceful and orderly elections and welcome
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq in supporting the Iraqi authorities throughout
that process.
Estonia welcomes the historic development of
having the highest percentage of women elected to the
Iraqi Parliament. That is an especially noteworthy feat
when taking into consideration the election-related
incidents of violence and defamatory rhetoric that
female candidates, among others, were subjected to.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
assassination attempt against Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi on 7 November. We call on the Iraqi
authorities to bring to justice the perpetrators of
that attack.
It is essential that all political parties and other
actors accept the election results and address any
possible claims for irregularities through the relevant
legal procedures. We look forward to a peaceful
and constructive dialogue and the timely formation
of an inclusive Government, while addressing the
needs and aspirations of all Iraqis. We hope that the
next Government will continue along the path of
implementing economic reforms, fighting corruption
and ensuring State control over all armed forces in order
to respond to the legitimate calls of the Iraqi people
for improving the socioeconomic situation, governance
and the long-term stability of the country.
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

With regard to the reports of continued attacks
against demonstrators, political activists and journalists,
we once again call on the Iraqi authorities for increased
efforts to ensure accountability for those responsible
for the violations and to safeguard the rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly.
Concerning relations between Baghdad and Erbil,
we encourage both Governments to fully implement the
federal budget law and to intensify efforts to reach an
agreement on other outstanding issues, as that would
contribute to the stability of the whole country.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our appreciation to
the Iraqi Government for its constructive engagement
on the issue of the irregular crossing of migrants
from Belarus to the European Union. Estonia strongly
condemns the instrumentalization of migration
and using vulnerable human beings to advance
political goals.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative and Ms. Kabashi for their
excellent briefings. The United Kingdom offers full
support to the continued work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I would like to make four quick points supporting
what others have said.
First, I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
condemnation of the 7 November assassination
attempt against Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi. The
United Kingdom deplores the use of violence to settle
election-related grievances. I echo what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has said on
this. We also condemn the repeated and coordinated
efforts to discredit both the election results and the
efforts of UNAMI, as well as threats of violence
against the Mission and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Such threats are unacceptable.
We stand with the Iraqi Government, security forces
and people in their rejection of political violence and
strongly support the Prime Minister’s call for calm
and restraint.
Secondly, we remain strongly committed to the
democratic process of Iraq. The United Kingdom
welcomes the positive assessment of the international
UNAMI election monitors and congratulates the
Government of Iraq and the Independent High
Electoral Commission on the notable improvements in

S/PV. 8910

transparency, electoral process and procedure. Early,
credible elections were a key demand of the protest
movement in 2019, and we welcome the fact that the
Government of Iraq has been able to deliver a technically
well-managed election. We also welcome and strongly
support the focus of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Ms. Kabashi and of the
Iraqi Women’s Network on progressing women’s
participation in the political process.
Thirdly, we welcome the continued work to ensure
that electoral appeals are fairly heard. We urge respect
for the legally defined processes and the rule of law
after the Federal Supreme Court has ratified the
electoral results. The Security Council will continue
to monitor any attempts to undermine the election
process, and we call on all political parties, candidates
and others to exercise patience and understanding in
the post-electoral environment.
Finally, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
update on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property. We welcome the
commitment of Iraq and Kuwait to making progress on
this important file.
The United Kingdom stands alongside the people
of Iraq and looks forward to the peaceful formation of
a Government that will deliver meaningful reforms to
address the needs and concerns of all Iraqis.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
and Ms. Amal Kabashi for their briefings.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s reports on
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2021/946) and on the Iraqi elections
(S/2021/932).
In the world over, including in established
democracies, national election processes often
heighten political tension and acrimony, uncertainty
and even lead to violent confrontations. These can be
more pronounced in newer democracies and countries
emerging from conflict, such as Iraq. Kenya therefore
applauds the people and the Government of Iraq for the
successful holding of the parliamentary elections, which
reaffirmed their strong commitment to the fundamental
democratic principle that vests the authority of the
Government in the will of the people as the best hope
for political, economic and social progress.

21-3514715/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

We commend the Independent High Electoral
Commission (IHEC) for conducting the parliamentary
elections on 10 October and laud UNAMI for its critical
constructive advice and technical assistance. We
further acknowledge the essential role played by the
Iraqi security agencies, noting that the elections were
held in a challenging security environment.
Kenya notes with satisfaction the significant rise
in and promotion of the participation of women in the
election process, exceeding the targeted 25 per cent
quota. That is a demonstration of the appreciation by
the Iraqi electorate of the paramount role that women
play in the pursuit of security, political stability and the
well-being of all.
We urge all political parties, candidates and other
stakeholders to demonstrate political maturity by
submitting any electoral grievances, including claims
of electoral fraud, to the established legal frameworks,
in accordance with the electoral code of conduct,
for redress.
We further call on the parties to accept the
election results once legal processes are completed
and engage in constructive dialogue in order to build
an inclusive governance system that delivers for all
Iraqis regardless of their religious, ethnic, cultural or
social backgrounds. The Government should remain
conscious of the imperative to pay special attention to
vulnerable groups, especially women, children, youth
and marginalized groups, including minority ethnic
and religious communities.
We urge the newly elected parliamentarians to be
aware of the critical importance of ensuring that the
laws that they now go on to pass and that shape the State
embrace all Iraqis regardless of their ethnicity, religion
or origin. A major test of whether the democratic
culture that Iraq is nurturing will lead to peace or feed
future violence is the extent to which it is inclusive of
all Iraqis.
We believe that, in particular, its treatment of
the Yazidi people will show the world the strength
and quality of Iraq’s democracy. In that regard, laws
should create an administrative apparatus in Iraq that
is inclusive of all minorities, including in the issuing
of national identity cards and other administrative
mechanisms of the State, in particular as they relate to
the Yazidi minority and its female population, including
the survivors of the atrocities of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
16/21

23/11/2021

On the security situation, Kenya condemns the
continued attacks by ISIL in several governorates and
against the Iraqi security forces. It is deeply alarming
that there were 157 attacks carried out by that group
between August and October. We call for coordinated
regional and international support in a manner that
promotes the security and stability of Iraq through
cooperative bilateral and multilateral approaches.
We condemn in the strongest terms the assassination
attempt on the Iraqi Prime Minister Mustafa
Al-Kadhimi, as well as the targeting of UNAMI and
Independent High Electoral Commission officials.
On the positive regional developments, Kenya
commends Iraq for successfully convening the
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership
in addressing common challenges faced by the region.
It is our experience that the active, positive engagement
of neighbouring and nearby countries, particularly
acting in a coordinated manner, is key to resolving
difficult political and security crises.
Kenya takes note of the commendable progress
made in the further identification of Kuwaitis and two
third-country nationals from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, whose families can now have closure. We
encourage continued, dedicated cooperation and look
forward to further progress on that file.
This leads me, finally, to the humanitarian
situation. The facilitation of returns to areas of origin
is a welcome development. We continue to encourage
the continued repatriation of refugees from the Al-Hol
camp to enable their return to normalcy.
In closing, Kenya reiterates its call for all actors
to uphold the political independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Iraq and for all actions to be
motivated by the interests of the Iraqi people. We further
reaffirm our support for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq in its assistance to the Government and
the people of Iraq.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) for her briefing. I would also like to thank
Ms. Kabashi for her statement. I am delighted that the
Iraqi Ambassador is participating in this meeting.
My delegation commends the people and the
Government of Iraq for the successful convening
of early legislative elections on 10 October. Those
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

were commended by all observers, despite the
difficulties encountered. We also commend the
role of the Independent High Electoral Commission
and UNAMI throughout these historic and credible
elections, which were conducted in a climate of integrity
and transparency. We also commend the participation
of women which went above and beyond the 25 per cent
quota initially set.
These elections enabled the Iraqi people to exercise
their constitutional right to make their voices heard.
It is crucial that all parties respect the will expressed
by the men and women of Iraq in order to strengthen
and preserve democracy and ensure that Iraq finds
its stability and security once again and as well as its
economic well-being.
At a time when we are commending the smooth
running of the elections, we hope that the next step
of this process will be carried out pursuant to the
country’s laws and Constitution. We would call upon all
parties to show restraint and form a new Government
that meets the needs and aspirations of the Iraqi
people and establishes the rule of law and the principle
of citizenship.
Tunisia welcomes the efforts by the Iraqi security
forces to target terrorist groups that seek to undermine
the security, stability and development of Iraq. We
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
including the attempted assassination of Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi. We therefore underscore Iraq’s important
role of Iraq in strengthening regional security and in
using the peaceful settlement of differences to settle
various regional disputes.
We urge respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Iraq in line with the United Nations
Charter and relevant international instruments.
Accordingly, Iraq must not be the theatre for
regional conflicts.
The Iraqi Government has conducted economic
reforms and undertaken brave measures to combat
corruption and poor management. It is taking a
holistic approach to achieving a developed, prosperous
economy. We hope that these efforts will continue.
With regard to relations between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and the Iraqi Government,
reconciliation efforts are praiseworthy, and parties are
called upon to tackle pending issues, thereby paving

S/PV. 8910

the way for peaceful relations that would benefit
the country.
With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaitis, we
welcome the progress made in identifying 19 missing
persons this month thanks to cooperation between the
two Governments and the assistance of the tripartite and
bilateral subcommittees, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and UNAMI. We hope that this
cooperation will continue until this issue is concluded
once and for all.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the people of
Iraq and urges the international community to do the
same in order to ensure that the country strengthens its
national sovereignty and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
Just as other members of the Council have done,
I thank the Special Representative and Ms. Kabashi,
for the information they have given us and for their
assessment of the situation in Iraq. I also welcome the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative
of Iraq.
I begin by echoing the recent Security Council press
statement (SC/14692) that unequivocally condemned
the attack against Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi. We also
condemn the constant threats being made against the
staffs of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the Independent High Electoral
Commission (IHEC).
At the same time, Mexico warmly congratulates
the Government of Iraq for organizing the recent
parliamentary elections. In this regard, we recognize
the efforts of IHEC and the security forces, as well
as the follow-up and technical assistance provided by
UNAMI, among other actors, which were crucial in
the organization and unfolding of election day. I would
like to recall that one of Mexico’s first international
cooperation actions in electoral matters was actually in
Iraq, in 2005, with the training of the first members of
the Independent Election Commission of Iraq.
Unfortunately, and this is something we sincerely
regret, we observed that the participation of the
electorate on election day was limited. Accordingly,
one of the challenges that the new Government must
address will be to restore confidence in the country’s

21-3514717/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

institutions, for which, as we have already said, it will
be necessary to undertake a series of reforms.
We would like to highlight the participation of
women candidates and women who went to the polls.
It is now essential that the Iraqi political forces give
them their rightful place in the formation of the next
Government and at all levels of decision-making.
Likewise, this new Government must include members
of the various minorities that make up Iraq.
The holding of free and transparent elections is
certainly one of the elements for the construction of a
democratic State, but it is not the only one. In this regard,
Mexico notes with concern the little progress that has
been made in terms of accountability for human rights
violations, especially those related to the repression
of demonstrators and the mistreatment of detainees.
Furthermore, we deplore the seven executions that
took place in August, which brings the total number of
executions in Iraq in 2021 to 19.
Mexico reiterates its categorical rejection under any
circumstances of the imposition of the death penalty.
Capital punishment is cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment, with irreparable consequences. We urge the
Iraqi Government to abolish or declare a moratorium
on the application of the death penalty.
Furthermore, Mexico reiterates once again its deep
concern over the abuse of the invocation of Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations in the context of
the fight against terrorism. This practice runs the risk
of de facto broadening the exceptions to the general
prohibition of the use of force, as enshrined in Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter and in the unwavering
jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice.
This is an aberration that we cannot accept and one that
undermines Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I would also like to applaud the recent cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait in moving forward with the
handover of the remains of Kuwaiti and other nationals
so that they may be returned to their homeland, as well
as other property that disappeared during the conflict,
including national archives, which are important for the
recovery of memory for the Kuwaiti people. We urge
both countries to continue this cooperation.
Finally, Mexico welcomes the fact that, in recent
weeks, Iraq has shown great diplomatic activism in the
region and, above all, has demonstrated the political
will to rebuild bridges of cooperation with neighbouring
18/21

23/11/2021

countries. We hope that the recent parliamentary
election will be a turning point in democracy-building
in Iraq and in the entire Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not intend to take the floor again, yet I
cannot help expressing my surprise over the obsessive
persistence that our Estonian colleagues demonstrate
at almost every Security Council meeting, seizing on
any pretext to present a deceptive interpretation of
developments at the Belarusian-Polish and BelarusianLithuanian borders. In that, we see them striving to
distort the causes of a migration crisis that was recently
exacerbated along some sections of the European
Union’s external border and absolving the Western
States of their responsibility for dismantling the
statehood of some Middle Eastern countries.
Today we are discussing problems in Iraq that
have gone unresolved for years — a vivid example of a
practice that persuaded hundreds of thousand people to
seek a better life in Europe. By the way, our Estonian
friends, as part of the international coalition at the time,
also bear direct responsibility for that situation.
My Estonian colleague forgot to mention that any
refugee who goes to Belarus is free to leave the country
at any moment. More than 400 people did so recently,
having returned to Iraq with the help of Belarusian
authorities. Therefore, if anything should be condemned
or rejected today, it is the hypocritical and inhumane
policy of the European Union, which, contrary to its
proclaimed values, tries to ignore harsh treatment of
immigrants by Polish and Lithuanian border officers
who, in doing so, are in violation of every international
convention one can think of and, for that matter, of any
norm of civilized behaviour.
We hope that our Estonian friends, who are trying
to project the image of human rights advocates, will
have enough courage to condemn this inhumane
practice, which affects women and children, inside the
European Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank and congratulate the representative of
Mexico on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also thank Ambassador Martin
Kimani, Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his
able leadership of the Council last month.
I express my appreciation to Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) ,for her efforts and her
briefing. I also take this opportunity to welcome
Ms. Amal Kabashi. I thank her for speaking to the
concerns of Iraqi women, who have made tremendous
progress, alongside Iraqi men, in the political process
and in raising future generations of Iraqis. We stand
with her and all women of Iraq.
In line with resolution 2576 (2021), adopted at the
Council meeting held on 27 May (S/PV.8780), the Iraqi
people participated in the elections to demonstrate their
determination to build the foundations of a democratic
system and to launch reforms. The Iraqi people are now
looking forward to creating a national Government
capable of carrying out its tasks and providing
basic services.
The elections have seen technical, procedural and
security improvements that have contributed to much
smoother elections than before. We dedicated every
effort to these elections, which succeeded thanks to the
work of the security forces and the political, social and
religious stakeholders.
I seize this opportunity to welcome the statement
issued by the Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani.
I would also like to express my gratitude to
all members of the Security Council and to the
international community for accepting Iraq’s request to
ensure the United Nations monitoring of the elections.
I also thank UNAMI, the European Union, our allies,
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, local organizations, Iraqi security forces
and the Independent High Electoral Commission.
I also welcome the statement of the spokesperson
of the Secretary-General, the press statements issued
by the Security Council and UNAMI in that regard,
and the statement issued by the members of the Council
(SC/14701), welcoming the success of the elections, and
the Secretary-General’s report on the electoral process
(S/2021/932).

S/PV. 8910

The Independent High Electoral Commission in
Iraq has taken up the task of conducting the elections
and considering appeals made in that connection. The
Commission accepted the request of certain political
parties to recount and retabulate a number of polling
stations prior to any adjudication by the competent
judicial authorities. The Commission is currently
finalizing the results before referring them to the
Federal Supreme Court. I note that the Commission and
the Court have the final say regarding the results of the
elections, which we are eagerly awaiting.
With regard to the events following the elections,
particularly the failed assassination attempt against the
Prime Minister, I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude and appreciation to the countries that have
condemned that cowardly act. I thank in particular
the Secretary-General for his 7 November press
release (SG/SM/21007) and the Security Council for
its 8 November press statement (SC/14692) in that
connection. I also thank all regional and international
organizations that have issued statements of
condemnation in that regard.
Allow me to make a number of observations
regarding a few elements in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the electoral process and on the situation in
Iraq (S/2021/946).
First, the Government of Iraq thanks the Security
Council for supporting the security of the country.
Iraq remains committed to implementing the national
counter-terrorism strategy and the strategy to combat the
financing of terrorism, in line with the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288).
Under that national strategy, the Government enacted
Law No. 8 of 2021, the Yazidi Survivors Law, to
address damages and the harmful effects of crimes
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
against Yazidis and other components of Iraqi society,
including Christians, Turkmens and Shabaks.
Second, on 29 September, Iraq repatriated 441
Iraqis who had been stranded in the Al-Hol camp in
Syria and transported them to the Jeddah 1 camp in
Ninawa. Iraq will soon receive 202 children from Syria.
In that regard, Iraq calls on the international community
to urge countries that have nationals among the foreign
terrorists in Iraq and Syria to repatriate them as soon as
possible, in line with the relevant procedures.
Third, we once again condemn the use of Iraqi
territory to settle political scores, achieve political

21-3514719/21

S/PV.8910

The situation concerning Iraq

goals or under the pretext of fighting terrorism. We
call for respect for State sovereignty and the principle
of good neighbourliness. Iraq addressed two identical
letters to the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General on 4 November, contained in
document S/2021/927, detailing violations committed
against Iraqi territory and airspace, which amounted
to 1,950 violations in the period from 1 June to
30 September.
Fourth, with regard to the provision of basic
services, we have achieved the following: establishing
1,000 model schools across Iraq; finding solutions to
the salinity of the Euphrates and the low water levels
in the river; issuing loans for macro projects, to the
tune of $14 million; raising the capital of the Iraqi
housing fund to $1.4 billion; and continuing our efforts
to develop State institutions, including digitalization
and e-commerce, as well as establishing a specialized
court to enact cybercrime laws and providing remote
working opportunities for women at home.
Fifth, regarding the empowerment of women, my
Government has made the following efforts: establishing
a centre for the prevention of gender-based violence,
which provides health, psychosocial and legal services
to victims, as well as issuing a national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
ensures the protection of women in times of peace and
war; drafting a code of conduct for the internal security
forces to ensure that women are protected from abuse
and violence in law enforcement operations; setting up
investigative and misdemeanour courts specializing
in trying domestic violence cases; drafting a law that
amends Iraq’s penal code to include provisions for the
protection of women’s rights; and enacting a law that
allows women to join the security forces, as well as
Law No. 47, on supporting and empowering women,
and ratifying the anti-human trafficking law.
Sixth, regarding the Human Rights Commission in
Iraq, since 10 November the current members of the
Commission have resumed their functions until a new
Parliament is formed and new members are nominated.
Seventh, regarding human rights and the rule of
law in Iraq, I have a number of comments to make in
relation to the reports of the Secretary-General. They
are as follows.
The Government has taken a number of measures to
protect demonstrators and prosecute offenders. We set
up a number of investigative committees, in 2019, 2020
20/21

23/11/2021

and 2021, which have issued penalties against members
of the security forces who acted individually and in a
manner inconsistent with Government regulations.
Regarding the joint report issued by UNAMI and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) , entitled “Human
Rights in the Administration of Justice in Iraq: legal
conditions and procedural safeguards to prevent torture
and ill-treatment”, I would like to note that competent
investigative committees are considering that issue.
The Foreign Ministry of Iraq has clarified to the United
Nations that the report included some inaccurate
information. We sent a memorandum to the OHCHR
office in Iraq on 6 October. In the memorandum, we
note that we find it strange that the report refers to
certain violations committed in 3 out of 16 facilities
under the authority of the Ministry of Defence. That
is strange, particularly since the Ministry of Defence
has only one detention facility. To date, we have not
received a response to our memorandum.
Regarding the execution of seven prisoners, we
stress that the proceedings against those defendants were
conducted in line with national laws and procedures. In
that regard, I note General Assembly resolution 75/183,
adopted on 16 December 2020 (2011), in which the
General Assembly stresses the sovereign right of all
countries to develop their own national legal systems,
including determining appropriate legal penalties, in
accordance with their international law obligations.
Some non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
have claimed that there were certain interferences in
their humanitarian work. We request a list of those
NGOs and their legal status to ascertain if those
activities were conducted in line with their legal status.
The Secretary-General’s report mentions that the
International Organization for Migration issued nine
birth certificates. We find that strange, especially since
issuing birth certificates is the exclusive right of the
Iraqi Ministry of Health.
Regarding internally displaced persons, especially
men and boys who were previously detained and
have recently completed their sentences, the report
states that those individuals could be rejected by their
communities given the disparity in the application
of counter-terrorism laws by the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. We do not
understand the link between the possible rejection
21-35147

23/11/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

of those individuals by their communities and the
disparity in the application of the law.
Regarding the coronavirus disease, the Supreme
Committee for Health and National Safety continues
to implement treatment and preventive measures to
contain the number of cases. It will soon expand the
number of people eligible for vaccination to include
those 12 years of age and older .
Regarding the relationship between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government,
relations have never been better. Meetings continue
at the highest levels with a view to reaching a
comprehensive agreement, especially on issues related
to oil, the budget and the deployment of security forces
Regarding desertification and climate change,
the Iraqi Government has adopted a plan on the use
of the closed-loop irrigation system. Iraq has also
adopted its nationally determined contribution, in line
with our commitments under the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. The Government has also adopted and
launched a project to modernize the management of the
Tigris and the Euphrates to generate renewable energy.
Regarding relations with Kuwait, establishing
strong and solid relations with the State of Kuwait
remains a priority of our foreign policy. We attach
particular importance to the issue of missing persons,
compensation, maritime borders and property. In that
respect, I note the following.
Regarding the issue of missing persons, we are
pursuing our bilateral cooperation under the Tripartite
Commission. Most recently, the State of Kuwait
received the remains of 19 individuals and was able to

S/PV. 8910

identify them through DNA testing. The authorities of
Saudi Arabia also recently announced the identification
of the remains of one individual. Given the difficulties
in conducting research, investigation and identification,
the Ministries of Defence and Foreign Affairs of Iraq
made a humanitarian appeal to Iraqis last August to
provide any information they had on the remains of
Kuwaitis and Iraqis who went missing during the war.
Regarding compensation, Iraq has fulfilled most of
its commitments to paying $52.4 billion in full, except
for an amount of $629 million, which we will disburse
in early 2022.
Regarding Kuwaiti archives and property, so
far Kuwait has received eight tons of property and
archives. Iraq will soon hand over more archives,
including books and video tapes, to Kuwait through the
appropriate channels.
In closing, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his steadfast support to Iraq and its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. I appreciate the
continued support of the international community in
our efforts to ensure the well-being and stability of Iraq.
On behalf of my Government. I commend the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and its
Head and their continued support to Iraq in all areas,
especially humanitarian and development, during the
period covered by the report.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on the list. I invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-3514721/21
