S/PV.9174

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9174th meeting

Friday, 28 October 2022, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania
Brazil
China
France
Ghana
India
Ireland
Kenya
Mexico
Norway
Russian Federation
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Ms. Nthoki
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66009 (E)
*2266009*

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

once again erupted into a deadly cycle of violence that
is increasingly difficult to contain. Decades of violence
and its toll on both Israelis and Palestinians, as well as
a prolonged absence of meaningful negotiations and a
failure to resolve the key issues fuelling the conflict,
created fertile ground for that dynamic.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Hungary, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Türkiye, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged
Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations; and
His Excellency Mr. Neville Gertze, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I brief the Security Council
today as the security situation in the occupied West
Bank is caught in a downward spiral. Too many people,
overwhelmingly Palestinians, were killed or injured in
daily violence. Mounting hopelessness, anger and tension
2/29

28/10/2022

In recent weeks, I have had discussions with
Palestinian officials and factions across the West Bank
and in Gaza and a range of Israeli officials and members
of the international community to address the volatile
situation. My message has been clear. The immediate
priority is to work to calm the situation and reverse
the negative trends on the ground. That will require
determined actions by both parties, supported by the
international community.
However, that cannot be a goal in itself. Efforts are
also urgently needed to empower and strengthen the
Palestinian Authority and build towards a return to a
political process. The failure to implement strategies
to address both the symptoms and the root causes
of violent escalations will only worsen an already
explosive situation.
Let me describe to the Council the current
dynamic in the occupied Palestinian territory. In total,
32 Palestinians, including six children, were killed
by Israeli security forces during demonstrations,
clashes, search-and-arrest operations, attacks and
alleged attacks against Israelis and other incidents,
and 311 Palestinians, including one woman and eight
children, were injured. Israeli settlers or other civilians
perpetrated 106 attacks against Palestinians, resulting
in 63 injuries and/or damage to property.
In all, two Israeli security forces personnel were
killed, and 25 Israeli civilians, including five women
and three children, and 13 Israeli security forces
personnel were injured by Palestinians in shooting
and ramming attacks, clashes, the throwing of stones
and Molotov cocktails and other incidents. In total,
Palestinians perpetrated 115 attacks against Israeli
civilians, 100 of which were stone-throwing incidents,
resulting in injuries and damage to Israeli property.
In the reporting period, we saw a spike in fatal
violence across the occupied West Bank. So far, 2022
is on course to be the deadliest year for Palestinians in
the West Bank since the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs began systematically tracking
Palestinian fatalities in 2005.
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The violence was particularly intense in Jenin and
Nablus governorates, in the northern part of the West
Bank. In Jenin, 10 Palestinians, including two children,
were killed by Israeli security forces, while in Nablus
eight Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces.
Most of those fatalities occurred during military
operations to arrest individuals Israeli authorities said
were Palestinians suspected of involvement in attacks
or planned attacks against Israelis and during related
armed clashes.
In one such incident, on 28 September, Israeli
security forces killed five Palestinians during an
operation in the Jenin refugee camp, which involved an
exchange of fire with armed Palestinians. Among those
killed was a bystander and a 12-year-old boy.
Amid a spate of Palestinian shooting attacks
against Israelis in the occupied West Bank, Palestinians
shot and killed two Israeli soldiers at the checkpoint at
the Shu’fat refugee camp, near Jerusalem, on 8 October
and in a drive-by shooting near Nablus on 11 October.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed the 8 October
attacker as a member, and the Lions’ Den Brigades,
a newly formed group of armed Palestinians based
in Nablus, claimed responsibility for the attack on
11 October. Amid search operations for the perpetrators,
the Israeli authorities imposed strict restrictions on
movement. Entry to the Shu’fat refugee camp was
severely restricted for six days, while in Nablus,
strict restrictions were in place from 11 October until
yesterday, 27 October, affecting the delivery of basic
services and economic activity.
Demonstrations and protests spread from Shu’fat to
East Jerusalem and led to clashes between Palestinians
and Israeli security forces. Tensions persisted when, on
13 October, a right-wing Israeli member of the Knesset
led a group through the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood,
at one point brandishing a weapon and making
violent threats.
On 25 October, Israeli security forces shot and
killed five Palestinians during a military operation in
the Old City of Nablus. The Israeli authorities said that
they were targeting an explosives workshop belonging
to the Lions’ Den Brigades and that a senior member
of the group was among those killed. Thousands of
Palestinians subsequently demonstrated in Nablus,
with protests spreading across the occupied West Bank.
Amid the heightened tensions, Palestinians
conducted general strikes and five days of civil

S/PV.9174

disobedience campaigns across the West Bank, with
further clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces.
Settler-related violence and provocations also
significantly increased during the reporting period,
contributing to the dynamic of escalating violence in
the occupied West Bank. Throughout the reporting
period, settlers held numerous demonstrations across
the West Bank, with protesters on multiple occasions
blocking main roads, throwing stones and impeding the
movement of Palestinian residents.
Tensions were particularly high around Nablus,
where settlers obstructed main routes for Palestinian
residents and, on several occasions, groups of Israeli
settlers entered the Palestinian town of Huwwara,
south of Nablus, damaging Palestinian property and
prompting clashes with residents, in some cases in the
presence of Israeli security forces.
On 4 October, three Palestinians, including two
children, were injured after Israeli settlers attacked
a school with rocks and sticks. On 14 October, 15
Palestinians were injured, including two with live
ammunition, in clashes with Israeli settlers and the
Israeli security forces who accompanied them. On
20 October, two members of the Israeli security forces
were injured after they were attacked by a group of
settlers south of Huwwara, prompting condemnation
from senior Israeli officials.
During the reporting period, the Israel Defense
Forces announced that it had opened investigations into
two separate cases, in which soldiers were documented
violently assaulting Palestinians or shooting towards
Palestinian homes.
I am alarmed by the intensity of violence in the
occupied West Bank, including the high number of
Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces, numerous
armed attacks by Palestinians against Israelis, including
killings, and settler violence. I reiterate that perpetrators
of all acts of violence must be held accountable and that
security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order
to protect life. I am appalled that children continue to
be the victims of violence. Children must never be the
targets of violence or put in harm’s way.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced owners to demolish 38
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and three in

22-660093/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem, displacing 81 Palestinians. The demolitions
were carried out owing to the lack of Israeli-issued
building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain. On 3 October, with regard
to the status of Khan Al-Ahmar, the High Court of
Justice granted the State of Israel a postponement until
February 2023 for its response to a petition that seeks
to compel Israeli authorities to evacuate the Bedouin
village in Area C. I call on the Israeli authorities to
end the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and
approve additional plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.
Despite the overall deterioration of the situation,
there were some positive developments during
the reporting period. On 13 October, following an
inter-factional dialogue hosted by the Government
of Algeria, 14 Palestinian factions, including Fatah
and Hamas, signed the Algiers declaration. In the
declaration, the factions agreed, inter alia, to recognize
the Palestinian Liberation Organization as the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and
to hold elections for the presidency of the Palestinian
Authority, the Palestinian Legislative Council and the
Palestinian National Council. I echo the SecretaryGeneral in welcoming the agreement and underscore
the importance of Palestinian reconciliation for a viable
independent Palestinian State.
With regard to the Gaza Strip, Israel increased by
1,300 the issuance of permits for Palestinians from
Gaza to work and conduct business in Israel, bringing
the total number to more than 16,000. The reporting
period saw the highest volume of imports from Egypt
via the Salah ad-Din gate since it began its operations
in February 2018, largely owing to Egyptian-funded
construction projects, with more than 5,000 trucks
entering Gaza during the period. Exports from Gaza
through the Kerem Shalom crossing to Israel increased
by 26 per cent, as compared to the previous period.
Notably, the transport of fish to the West Bank resumed.
Meanwhile, imports to Gaza through Kerem Shalom
decreased slightly, with a daily average of 192 trucks,
as compared to 223 last month.
Delays in the implementation of large-scale
infrastructure projects, such as the Gaza Central
Desalination Plant, have resulted from delays in
Israeli approvals of entry for materials under the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. Ensuring the timely
approval for the entry of such materials is essential to
4/29

28/10/2022

moving important development projects forward and
sustaining vital donor support for such projects.
In the West Bank, on 20 October, Israeli authorities
began implementing a pilot phase of new regulations
governing the entry of certain foreign passport holders
into the West Bank. The new regulations were issued
in the context of a petition submitted to the High Court
of Justice and are far more detailed and specific than
those used in the past.
Unfortunately, the humanitarian response across
the occupied Palestinian territory continues to face
chronic funding gaps. As of October, only 57 per cent
of the requirements of the humanitarian response plan
had been met, as Palestinians across the occupied
Palestinian territory face additional economic pressures
and the risk of food insecurity due to the cost of living.
With regard to the region, in the Golan, the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria was generally maintained
despite several violations of the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement of Forces by both parties, including the
Israel Defense Forces firing across the ceasefire line
into the area of separation and Syrian armed forces
maintaining a presence in the area of separation. I
remind the parties of the need to abide by the terms of
the Agreement and prevent risks of escalation.
I welcome the 27 October signing by the
Governments of Lebanon and Israel of an agreement
that settles their maritime boundary dispute, mediated
by the United States. That is an important and
encouraging development, and I hope that it will
promote increased stability in the region. I underscore
the importance of Lebanon’s forming a new Government
and electing a new President, pursuant to the country’s
constitutional framework.
Lastly, let me turn back to where I started. Concrete
steps by all sides are urgently needed to address
the situation on the ground. I call on the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership to recognize what is at stake
and to take the necessary steps to restore calm. Let
me repeat that such efforts need the full support of the
international community. However, unless the core
political issues are addressed, the deep-rooted mistrust
and hostility will continue to grow. I clearly see the
mounting frustration and anger of Palestinians in the
face of decades of Israeli occupation. The Palestinian
Authority urgently needs the economic support and
political space to fully exercise its authority, including
security in areas under its control. The United Nations
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

remains actively engaged with all relevant parties and
is committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis
to resolve the conflict by ending the occupation and
realizing a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967
lines, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to commend the brotherly nation of Gabon for its able
leadership of the Security Council and for convening this
open debate. We listened to Mr. Wennesland’s briefing.
Our people, our children and our youth are being
killed. They will not die in silence, and they will not die
in vain. What happens next is the responsibility of the
Security Council. We have tried everything. We have
knocked on every door, have searched for any avenue
leading to freedom and dignity; justice and redress;
and shared peace and security. Who thinks it is wise
to shut every door in our face? Have they not wondered
what would happen if we reached a dead end? We are
sparing no effort to demonstrate that there is a peaceful
path forward. Who would it serve to prove us wrong?
How can we explain to our people that 75 years after the
Nakbah they still need to wait for their turn to be free?
Every liberation movement that we have fought
side by side with is now an independent State. Our
oppressor, Israel, became the fifty-ninth State Member
of the United Nations in 1949; 73 years and 134 Member
States later, the State of Palestine has yet to become a
Member State of the United Nations.
What does it mean to be in favour of the twoState solution and then allow the occupying Power the
right of veto over our right to self-determination, over
recognition of our State and over our membership of
the Organization? Recognizing Palestine is not a card
to be played at the right time. Even if it were, look
around. There is no time left. It is the correct political,
legal and moral step to be taken.
Imagine if Europe had decided not to recognize the
Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) until Israel
did. Who would that have served? No one. It would
have been morally unjust and politically unjustifiable.
The European and American recognition of the PLO
contributed decisively to Israel eventually having to

S/PV.9174

recognize the PLO. Israel is trying to destroy the State
of Palestine. The role of the international community is
to protect it, or it would be effectively abandoning the
two-State solution altogether.
We did not come here month after month or go from
capital to capital to demand offensive weapons or even
defensive weapons. We came asking for international
protection for our people — a protection they are
entitled to. If that protection is not afforded and if
the aggression against our people continues, what
is the expected result? Israel kills, maims, displaces,
demolishes, humiliates and then wonders how young
Palestinians turned into lions.
The Israeli representative keeps asking everyone to
put themselves in Israel’s shoes, or should I say Israel’s
military boots? He asks what they would do “if”. Well
I am asking everyone to put themselves in our shoes, in
our ripped shoes and our tired feet from our long march
to freedom. Let me ask everyone here what they would
do if their country were occupied, their land stolen and
their people oppressed — or better yet, what did they
do when they were? I ask everyone to revisit their own
history — what did they do?
Long ago, we said it was time to live and let
live. Either we live side by side or, I fear, we might
die side by side. Help us to live. This is the Security
Council. Endorse that option. Is security best served
by occupying a land and transferring 700,000 Israeli
settlers to colonize it? Is it best served by blockades
or by the killing of innocent Palestinian civilians,
of children? Is it best served by spreading despair
like wildfire?
I have to ask, where does Israel’s right to security
end? Israel claims it in our cities and villages, in our
schools and our universities, in our mosques and our
churches and in our own homes. And where does our
right to security start? Where? What does Israel need
to do to finally be called what it truly is, the aggressor?
And while every people on Earth have a right to defend
themselves, that right belongs to us, not to those
colonizing our land.
We chose the path of peace, and Israel responded
with more violence, colonialism, annexation and
aggression. But I am not here to talk about Israel. Israel
is a colonial Power acting as such, unlawfully grabbing
our land and persecuting our people. I am here to ask
the international community what it is doing about it
and what it is waiting for.

22-660095/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are drifting away from every determination the
Council has made and from our common objective. The
international community invested so much time and
effort and so many resources to advance the two-State
solution. Will it stand idly by while Israel destroys it?
I ask the international community to not pretend that it
cannot see what the alternative to the two-State solution
is. Do not fear the word apartheid, fear what that reality
means for Palestinians today and for everyone else
tomorrow. So many say it behind closed doors and deny
it in public. If the international community cannot even
say it, how can it fight it?
The role of the Council is not only to determine
the way forward; it is to make sure that States embark
on it and keep moving forward until they reach the
destination. It is not to adopt resolutions and allow
them to be breached over decades. It is not to only state
the law but also, and more important, to uphold it. If
the Council is unable or unwilling to do so, it is the
responsibility of the General Assembly to determine
what actions need to be undertaken in support of the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and just and lasting peace.
Our international law-based order never envisaged
a situation of perpetual occupation. That is why the
Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
resolutions have reaffirmed the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. That is why annexation
is rejected. That is why international humanitarian law
has considered all manifestations of colonialism as
grave breaches, and why criminal law has determined
them to be war crimes. That is why aggression is deemed
the supreme international crime and the most unlawful
form of the use of force. Well, Israel is committing such
actions in broad daylight and in defiance of the world
and of the law.
If any here feel confident that Israel is not
committing such acts, let us not continue debating. Let
us instead ask the most authoritative organ in the world
to make a determination. Let us go to the International
Court of Justice and let it make a factual and legal
determination in that regard. Is this a temporary
occupation or a disguise for permanent annexation? Is
it lawful or is it the most abject manifestation of the
acquisition of territory by force? Is it discriminatory
in nature and by design or not? If anyone here honestly
thinks that that is not the case, let us ask the Court.
6/29

28/10/2022

Oppressed peoples do not just surrender. Neither do
they wait for their oppressor to one day finally decide to
do the right thing, especially when everything around
them confirms that their oppressor has no intention to
change course. Our people look around and see more
settlements and settlers. They see walls and blockades,
homes demolished and families displaced. Everywhere
they look, they see annexation — the annexation
Israel announced in Jerusalem 40 years ago and the
annexation it has enacted in the rest of the West Bank.
It is untamed, undeniable and unacceptable annexation.
We know that the world recognizes our
rights — we know the Council does. But standing by
us also needs to mean standing up to occupation. Does
the mighty Security Council have the spine to stand
up to occupation? If there is anything more that can
be done — and members of the Council know there is
much more — they should do it. And they should do it
now. What are they waiting for? Nearly 75 years have
passed since the Nakbah. Nearly 55 years have passed
since the occupation began. What are they waiting
for? They need to do it — to light a candle now, before
darkness takes over.
Trust a man who has been here for a long while: we
are at the end of the road. Once we cross this threshold,
there is no turning back. It is a leap into the unknown,
except for one fact — more bloodshed awaits us until
we find ourselves once again in a position to figure out
a way forward, maybe decades from now. Our people
will not despair. They will not renege on their national
identity or accept subjugation. The Palestinian people
will be free. One day or another. One way or another.
We chose the way the world told us was best — the way
the Council told us was best. I urge the members of the
Council to not let Israel prove them wrong, for our sake
and theirs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): We just heard from the
Palestinian representative. We all read his letters — all
the hundreds of them. We heard President Abbas speak
from the rostrum of the General Assembly just a month
ago (see A/77/PV.10). The message is the same. It has
not changed. It is a message of false victimhood, lies
of oppression and fictions of aggression. Here at the
United Nations, the Palestinians paint a picture that
is completely detached from reality. Yet many in the
international community choose to believe it. All
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

anyone needs to do in order to see past the Palestinians’
falsehoods is to poke their heads outside the walls of
this institution. All anyone needs to do is look at the
facts on the ground.
Today once again, we are hearing blatant lies. The
Palestinian representative calls Israel a colonial State.
But Jews have been living in Judea and Samaria for
thousands of years. One cannot colonize their own
home. If what the Palestinian representative is saying
about Israel is true, how can it be that Israel has signed
six peace agreements with our regional neighbours?
No — Israel is in the midst of a terror wave. Since the
start of this year alone, there have been more than 4,000
Palestinian terror attacks perpetrated against Israelis.
Car ramming, rock throwing, fire bombing, stabbings,
shootings, rockets and many other acts of Palestinian
violence have been become a fact of life for millions of
Israelis. That reality of Palestinian terror has existed
for decades, even well before Israel’s establishment.
We are soon approaching the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations partition plan
to create a Jewish State along alongside an Arab
State — what my friend here called the Nakbah — a
United Nations decision. That plan was rejected outright
by the Palestinians, and since then their terror against
Israelis has grown exponentially. I often ask myself if,
here at the United Nations, we all remember the historic
decision to establish a Jewish State and an Arab State.
Do members of the Security Council remember who
it was that accepted the plan and who rejected it and
started a war? The extent and threat of Palestinian
terrorism did not simply grow on its own. It is the direct
result of decades of incitement and hate. That is the
part that the Palestinian representative always forgets
to mention.
Rather than investing all of its resources into
bettering the lives of its people, the Palestinian Authority
prefers to foster a culture of hate and promote violence.
Generations of refusals to merely recognize the right
of a Jewish State to exist is what really prevents any
progress, in addition to the fact that the Palestinians are
divided and President Abbas does not even represent
all of the Palestinian people and does not control Gaza.
The Palestinian Authority may play the victim here
at the Council. Yet on the streets of Nablus and Jenin,
they praise terrorists. Just last week, Palestinian Prime
Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh visited the families of
terrorists in Jenin, encouraging violence and furthering

S/PV.9174

incitement. Just a couple of days ago, Palestinian
Health Minister Mai Al-Kaila expressed her praise for
and respect to the members of the Lion’s Den terror
organization. But that should not come as a surprise.
After all, their President, President Abbas — just like
his predecessor Yasser Arafat — has made his opinions
on terror and incitement very clear. From funding
terrorists through his twisted pay-for-slay policy to
frequently praising martyrs, the Palestinian culture of
hate truly stems from the top. And when that incitement
trickles down to the bottom, innocent Israelis are the
ones who pay the ultimate price.
The Palestinian leadership has spent many years
repeating its baseless allegations here on the international
stage. Yet at the same time, they consistently refuse to
sit down at the negotiating table with Israel and have
rejected every peace plan placed before them, whether
by Israel or by American Presidents, from both sides of
the political aisle.
Peace can be achieved only through direct
negotiations and mutual — I repeat — mutual
concessions. But that is a fact that the Palestinians
refuse to accept. We all heard President Abbas when he
spoke in the General Assembly last month, launching
once again unilateral campaigns for full membership
status or de facto statehood while bypassing the
negotiating table. That is not the path to peace. It only
makes matters worse. Nevertheless, this institution
refuses to see those facts. The United Nations and
its bodies prefer to stay tangled in the Palestinians’
web of lies. But what is worse is that this institution
has adopted the Palestinians’ dangerous, one-sided
approach. The United Nations, its bodies and many
Member States prefer to demonize Israel, blaming only
one side for every aspect of the conflict. The biased
Human Rights Council, for example, focuses absurdly
disproportionate resources on condemning only Israel.
Israel was even devoted a permanent item on the
Human Rights Council’s agenda, ensuring that each of
its sessions provides a chance to bash the Jewish State.
The report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel (see
A/77/328), which was presented in the Third Committee
yesterday, is yet further proof of the anti-Israel prejudice
and antisemitism of the Human Rights Council. Over
the next couple of weeks, nearly every United Nations
Committee will vote on one-sided anti-Israel draft
resolutions. That package of draft resolutions, the

22-660097/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2022

Palestinian package, virtually takes every issue that
this institution deals with and finds a way to condemn
Israel on the topic. Shockingly, each year those biased
draft resolutions, filled with lies, are adopted with
widespread support. The list of anti-Israel United
Nations practices is truly endless.

or beaten are robbed of their most basic rights. It is no
surprise that economic sanctions — I repeat, economic
sanctions — do not deter such cruel and bloodthirsty
dictators. We can all see how vicious the Ayatollahs are
to their own people, but their tentacles of terror reach
far beyond the borders of Iran. They endanger us all.

This institution’s obsession on focusing all of the
condemnation on one side — on Israel — is not only
part of the problem, it is the problem. The biased
approach of exclusively blaming the Jewish State
sends the message that the Palestinians do not have to
make a single concession. If Israel is always at fault,
then why should they give up a single demand? That
is not the way to achieve peace. In fact, it makes peace
impossible. By continuing along the Palestinian-biased
unilateral path, the United Nations, its bodies and
many Member States directly perpetuate the conflict.
The only way forward is to stop blaming Israel for all
the region’s problems. By exclusively blaming Israel,
the Palestinians are rewarded for their incitement and
terrorism, and chances for peace decrease.

Aside from the constant threat that Iran poses to
maritime trade and shipping routes — we all remember
the 2021 attack on the oil tanker Mercer Street, in
which British and Romanian crew members were
killed — Iran is also the number one global sponsor
of terrorism. The regime pours billions of dollars into
their terrorist proxies, which are spread across the
region and beyond.

While the disproportionate focus of this institution
serves only to perpetuate the conflict, it also takes
the focus away from the most significant threat to the
Middle East, and even the world. For years, Israel has
said that Iran is the most critical danger to the Middle
East. Yet it seems that our warnings fell mostly on deaf
ears. Today the Iranian threat could not be clearer,
but we still sit here in this debate focused on the
Palestinians’ falsehoods and condemnations.
Iran may publicly threaten Israel with annihilation,
yet those who suffer the most from the Ayatollahs’
ruthlessness and terror are the people of Iran. Over
the past couple of weeks, the murderous Iranian
regime has not been able to hide its true colours. Its
real face has been exposed for the entire world to see,
and its inhumanity is truly undeniable. The regime
oppresses women, while murdering them for not
wearing headscarves properly. When the Iranian people
peacefully protest that brutality, they are suppressed
by live ammunition. Hundreds of protesters have been
killed, among them children, and thousands have been
arrested. How many more innocent Iranians must die at
the hands of the Ayatollahs before action is taken?
The regime allows its own people to die of thirst in
Isfahan, while it funds terrorism around the world. Iran
executes thousands of its citizens, and those who are
not executed, killed by the police, tortured, imprisoned
8/29

Between Hamas and Islamic Jihad in Gaza and
Hizbullah in Lebanon, thanks to Iranian funding,
hundreds of thousands of rockets are currently pointed
at Israeli towns and cities. Their sponsorship and
weapons-smuggling to the Houthis in Yemen pose
a threat both to critical infrastructure and innocent
civilians across the Gulf States. But Iran does not only
use its terrorist proxies to cause destruction. It also
directly uses its own military. The Iranian Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps recently launched an
attack against Kurds in Iraq, killing or injuring dozens
of civilians. The most significant threat is that Iran is
galloping at full speed towards nuclear weapons.
Ever since negotiations began to renew the nuclear
deal, it was clear that Iran’s goal was to drag its feet
while continuing to advance its military nuclear
capabilities. Between its increasingly advanced
centrifuges and its growing stockpiles of highly
enriched uranium, Iran is closer than ever to acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. Let us just imagine how
much more emboldened Iran’s terrorist proxies will
be when they can operate freely under the Ayatollahs’
nuclear umbrella.
However, Iran’s aggression extends far beyond the
Middle East. Merely being the source of all regional
evil is not enough; Iran has much higher aspirations.
Iran’s recent audacious attack against Albania’s
cyberinfrastructure is further proof that nobody is safe
from the Ayatollahs’ destructive impact. The rogue
terrorist regime wishes to export its radical Shiite
revolution all around the globe. Now, it is also causing
carnage in Ukraine.
Today it should be clear to all members that not
a single word the bloodthirsty Iranian dictators say
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

can be trusted. As we speak, Iranian attack drones are
flying in the skies above Europe, wreaking havoc. Just
this week, on a visit to the United States, the President
of Israel shared irrefutable proof with President Biden
that the drones operating in Ukraine are of Iranian
origin. There is no longer a sliver of a doubt that
Iranian weapons are now being used in Europe. Yet the
Ayatollahs continue to blatantly deny the truth. They
simply lie directly to our faces.
That should be a cause for serious concern,
especially for those who think that rejoining the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action is still a good idea.
If Iranians continue to lie about their drones, I can
assure the Council that they are also lying about their
nuclear programme and its goals. Where is the logic
in negotiating a nuclear deal, or anything else, with
pathological liars, especially when it is such a shortsighted deal that will expire in mere years? But let
me be clear, deal or no deal, the Iranian regime will
continue with its deadly nuclear ambitions.
There is only one way to convince the regime
to abandon the race to an atomic bomb — a credible
military threat. It worked in 2003 and it will work again
today. Only a credible military threat that endangers
the Ayatollahs’ reign will prevent the critical danger we
will face if Iran becomes a nuclear-threshold State.
Only when the ruthless and dangerous extremist
forces in our region are deterred will we have peace.
Sadly, in the Middle East, peace is achieved through
strength. The day that the Council understands and
internalizes that valuable lesson will be the day that
peace finally spreads across the region. As these
monthly debates prove, sadly, arguing over trivial
disputes in Israel does not bring reconciliation any
closer. Let us look at the bigger and broader picture.
The time has come to brush away all the lies and
distortions that consume so much of the Council’s time
and to focus on the pressing issues at hand. That is the
only way to ensure a future of peace and stability for
the Middle East and for the world.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.

S/PV.9174

First and foremost, I would like to raise our deep
concern about the security situation in the West Bank.
This year is on track to be the deadliest for Palestinians
in the West Bank since 2006. We have seen an incredibly
worrisome spike in violence in several West Bank cities
and a sharp increase in both Palestinian and Israeli
deaths and injuries, including among children. In the
past month alone, at least 23 Palestinians and four
Israelis were killed, and attacks by violent extremists
are on the rise.
We call on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to
do everything in their power to prevent such violence.
That means security forces on both sides must refrain
from taking uncoordinated actions that degrade the
cooperation that has already endured difficult times.
As President Biden has made clear, Israelis and
Palestinians equally deserve to live safely and securely.
Both peoples deserve to enjoy equal measures of
freedom, dignity and justice.
Just as we have called on the Palestinian Authority
to do more to prevent attacks, we also call on Israel
to apply equal resources and vigour to prevent and
investigate all violent attacks against Palestinians.
All perpetrators must be held accountable for
their outrageous attacks. The world must see that
arrests, convictions and punishments are carried out
without bias.
As we head into the height of committee season,
we are once again facing a disproportionate number
of draft resolutions with an unfair focus on Israel.
Those one-sided draft resolutions and activities are
a distraction and do nothing to improve the situation
on the ground. Those outdated texts do not reflect
the changing realities on the ground, with the new
possibilities for cooperation ushered in through the
Abraham Accords and other normalization agreements.
At the same time, we understand that the
Palestinian people need and deserve a political horizon
and something to hope for. Rather than simply rubberstamping those General Assembly resolutions, we
should all be thinking about how to collectively advance
the cause of peace.
Despite our deep concerns about the security
situation on the ground, we also feel that it is important
to highlight real progress. On 11 October, after months
of mediation by the United States, the Governments of
Israel and Lebanon reached a deal to formally end their
maritime boundary dispute and establish a permanent

22-660099/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

maritime boundary between them. That deal secures
the interests of both countries and sets the stage for a
more stable and prosperous region. The United States
applauds the work of Israel and Lebanon to reach that
historic deal.
The agreement underscores President Biden’s
vision for the Middle East: a region that is more secure,
integrated and prosperous, achieved through diplomacy
and cooperation. The Negev Forum Working Group
presents a similar opportunity for countries in the
region to set aside their differences and work towards
shared security and prosperity.
Let me be clear: while those regional peace
agreements are not a substitute for Israeli-Palestinian
peace, we believe that the momentum of those
opportunities can be leveraged to advance progress
towards a negotiated two-State solution. Both Israelis
and Palestinians must remain committed to the idea
that all peoples deserve security, justice, dignity and
democracy. It is incumbent on both parties to work
in good faith towards the vision of two States for two
peoples. In that vein, we believe it is critical that Israel
and the Palestinian Authority refrain from unilateral
actions that undercut that vision.
Progress will not be easy. Setting aside decades of
grievances takes courage and patience, but it is the only
way forward. There is no shortcut to peace.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his briefing and for the work being done to ensure an
amicable resolution of the dispute in the Middle East as
it relates to the question of Palestine.
Ghana takes note of the positive and bold diplomatic
attempts by Israel in recent times to improve ties with
its neighbours and other countries in the Middle East
region. We welcome yesterday’s historic agreement
with Lebanon to demarcate and regulate their rights to
gas reserves on their joint maritime border. It is our
expectation and hope that the rapprochement will mark
the commencement of initiatives by both sides that will
lead to the normalization of bilateral relations between
the two countries.
We applaud the efforts of the Government of the
United States of America, which helped to broker that
landmark agreement. We believe that it takes bold
leadership to invest in peace and encourage the two
countries and all neighbours to work towards good10/29

28/10/2022

neighbourliness and the sustenance of the goodwill that
has been generated in the Middle East — a region with
strategic geopolitical and economic importance for its
States and for the world at large.
It is regrettable that the security situation in the
Middle East has not seen much improvement since our
previous meeting (see S/PV.9139). Rather, there has
been an intensification of violence between Israelis
and Palestinians in the northern West Bank in the
past month. The period has been marked by near-daily
Israeli operations to root out militants following a wave
of deadly attacks against Israelis. There has also been
a spike in the number of raids and arrests, concentrated
in Nablus and the Jenin refugee camp.
As we have stated in the past, we condemn all
incidents of violence, the use of force and unilateral
action on both sides. We do not believe that violence
can help in resolving the Middle East conflict and urge
all militant groups to channel their energies towards
a robust political process that can deliver muchneeded peace — a precondition for regional prosperity
and stability.
We call on both sides and all stakeholders to take
immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all acts of
provocation and destruction, killings and human rights
abuses, in violation of international humanitarian law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
As we are all aware, the State of Israel will hold its
fifth election in three and a half years in a few days’ time.
We trust that the vision of the two-State solution, which
has been widely recognized and generally accepted as
a panacea to the protracted conflict, will continue to be
upheld as the consensus of the international community.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our strong
conviction that the growing insecurity in the Middle
East region does not augur well for a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. We call on both sides to show maximum
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that could
escalate tensions and prejudice the peace and mutual
trust that are urgently needed to stabilize the situation
and reverse negative trends on the ground.
We urge the Council and the wider international
community to be constructive by sustaining the
engagement of the parties, whose efforts in good faith
are required to resolve the decades-long conflict.
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing and assure him of Ireland’s
strong support for his work, and I stress the importance
of the continued facilitation by all parties of his efforts.
As Special Coordinator Wennesland outlined,
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
is extremely grave. Today I want to focus on three
issues: the need for de-escalation and the protection of
civilians; the need to halt Israeli settlements and settler
violence; and the need for accountability.
As the Special Coordinator said, this year is on
course to be the deadliest year for Palestinians in
the occupied Palestinian territory since the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs began
documenting in 2005. The impact on children is
particularly disturbing. The security situation in
the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
has deteriorated sharply. We are concerned that
confrontations between Israeli forces and Palestinians
often arise in response to attacks by settlers or incursions
into Palestinian villages by the Israeli security forces.
In some recent instances, reports suggest that those
killed did not appear to pose a concrete or imminent
threat to justify the use of lethal force. That raises
serious concerns about the excessive use of force.
We are troubled by the restrictions on movement
imposed by Israeli security forces. While such
restrictions have largely been lifted in the Shu’fat
refugee camp and, more recently, in Nablus, in both
cases they remained in place for long periods of time.
The restrictions severely and adversely affect access by
entire populations to basic services, such as health care,
education, food supplies and waste collection — 200,000
people in the case of Nablus.
We are also very concerned at the recent entry
into force of new rules governing entry procedures
for foreigners into the West Bank, which may be
incompatible with Israel’s responsibilities as an
occupying Power under international law.
We welcome the Israeli Prime Minister’s support
for a two-State solution at the General Assembly last
month (see A/77/PV.8). We urge the Israeli Government
to take concrete action to support that aspiration.
Israel’s continued support for, and expansion of,
settlements undermines the recognized parameters
for a two-State solution. Ireland reiterates its call on
Israel to cease all settlement activities. They are illegal

S/PV.9174

under international law and flagrantly violate Security
Council resolutions. We are particularly concerned
about the sharp increase in coordinated and armed
settler violence in parts of the West Bank, especially in
the town of Huwwara and parts of Nablus.
As the olive harvest gets under way, Ireland calls
on the Israeli authorities to act urgently to ensure that
Palestinians living and farming in the occupied West
Bank are able to go about their daily lives without fear
of violence and intimidation.
Turning to the Gaza Strip, it is positive that Israel
increased the number of work-related permits from
15,000 to 16,000 per day, but we note that that leaves
the vast majority of people in the Gaza Strip ineligible
to apply for Israeli exit permits.
Reconciliation among the Palestinian factions is
critical. The recent signing of the Algiers declaration of
national reconciliation is a positive step. We call on the
Palestinian Authority to follow through with inclusive
elections, which are vital to democratic renewal and
legitimacy. We also call on the Israeli authorities to
uphold their obligation to facilitate in full a democratic
process, including in East Jerusalem.
Ireland condemns the killing of two Israeli soldiers
at checkpoints in Nablus and East Jerusalem earlier
this month and the stabbing of two Israeli citizens
earlier this week. We especially deplore attacks
against any innocent civilians in Israel or the occupied
Palestinian territory.
Ireland calls for accountability in respect of all
civilian deaths and, in particular, for an independent
investigation into the killing of journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh.
Ireland remains committed to a two-State solution
as the only sustainable prospect that will enable
Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace. In that
context, Ireland highlights the need for the preservation
of the status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem, and we
acknowledge the custodial role played by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan in that regard.
In addition, a just and lasting solution must be
found for Palestine refugees across the region. Ireland
and the European Union continue to support the vital
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is
essential to stability across the region.

22-6600911/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, I thank the Special Coordinator for
his update on the wider region. Ireland welcomes the
announcement that the Governments of Lebanon and
Israel have agreed to settle their maritime boundary
dispute, and we commend the role played by the United
States and France. As a long-standing troop contributor
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, Ireland
believes that that development can contribute positively
to stability and prosperity for the Lebanese and Israeli
peoples. It demonstrates that the resolution of difficult
issues is possible. Ireland hopes that such progress
will also encourage the formation of a Government in
Lebanon and the election of a new President.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East region in the context of a Middle East settlement.
We just listened to the emotional statement of the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to the
United Nations, Mr. Riyad Mansour, which could not
fail to move anyone who really cares about the fate of
the Palestinian people and wants peaceful coexistence
between the Palestinian and Israeli States.
The Security Council is truly indebted to the
Palestinians. The resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly have not been implemented for
decades. I wonder why that has not been reported by
those that effectively sabotaged them. We believe that
the time has indeed come for the Council to take steps
to rectify that unacceptable situation.
Today’s open debate on the situation in the Middle
East is taking place against the backdrop of yet another
escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation in the
occupied Palestinian territories — the West Bank of the
Jordan River, including East Jerusalem — and around
the Gaza Strip, which resulted in bloody clashes and
numerous casualties.

28/10/2022

such as the construction of settlements in the occupied
territory, the eviction of Palestinians, the destruction
of their homes, the expropriation of property, arbitrary
arrests and the de facto carte blanche of the Israeli
military to use force.
The current situation is the result of many years of
stagnation regarding the Middle East settlement. The
United States of America and the European Union bear
a large share of the responsibility for that tragic state
of affairs. By declaring the need to prioritize other
crises, Washington and Brussels are trying to distract
the attention of the international community from acute
regional conflicts, including the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which is key to the Middle East. Cooperation
within the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, a unique diplomatic mechanism endorsed
by Security Council resolutions, has collapsed. We note
that it is not the first time that that has happened. Our
colleagues always have excuses as to why they are once
again not ready to work seriously towards achieving
peace between the Palestinians and Israelis.
Russia’s position remains consistent and unchanged:
a reliable and long-term solution to the Palestinian
question is possible only on the basis of the two-State
solution endorsed by the United Nations — Palestine
and Israel coexisting in peace and security on the basis
of the 1967 borders. At the same time, Israel’s security
concerns must be taken into account.
We oppose attempts to move away from that
principle or replace it with all sorts of dubious options,
such as an alternative homeland or economic peace for
the Palestinians. Such ideas are promoted by those that
harbour plans to plunge the Middle East into chaos so
as to disrupt the increasing momentum in the region for
resolving long-standing issues through dialogue.

There are almost daily news reports of civilian
deaths in the context of Israel’s so-called anti-terrorist
raids. There are also casualties among the Israeli
military. That development is of the greatest concern.
We call on everyone to show restraint and immediately
refrain from violence and provocative actions.

The many years of stagnation in the political
settlement have been actively exploited by the opponents
of the peace process, which use the current status quo
to create unilateral irreversible realities on the ground.
The violence, coupled with the settlement policies and
attempts to unilaterally change the status of Jerusalem’s
holy sites, further aggravates the situation. That
undermines the prospects for the establishment of an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State.

This is not the first time that such outbreaks of
violence have occurred. The trigger for the resurgence of
violence may be the ongoing unilateral steps, primarily
by Israel, to create irreversible facts on the ground,

We see a way out of that vicious cycle in the immediate
resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, which we
have long urged, and in the restoration of international
cooperation. Other final-status issues, including

12/29

22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees and water resources, should also be resolved
during direct negotiations between the parties. On a
positive note, we acknowledge the recent decision of
the Palestinian factions that met in Algiers to continue
moving towards national unity. We believe that to be
an important step and confirmation of the Palestinians’
desire to engage in negotiations from a common
position. We are ready to assist the Palestinians and
regional actors in that regard.
In principle, we remain committed to collective
efforts. At the same time, in our national capacity,
we are determined to build on our extensive relations
with the parties and all countries of the region in
order to improve the situation in the Middle East and
resolve regional problems, including the PalestinianIsraeli conflict.
We were surprised today to hear the categorical
assertions by the Permanent Representative of Israel
about the allegedly confirmed use of Iranian unmanned
aerial vehicles in Ukraine. We see that as an attempt
to pressure the Security Council and the Secretariat
and impose its view on the international community as
the final verdict. We have already rejected, and again
categorically reject, such allegations.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
As we heard from Special Coordinator Wennesland,
there is an increasing worrisome deterioration of the
security situation in the West Bank. It is crucial that all
parties take urgent steps to reduce tensions, condemn
incitement and avoid further escalation of violence. The
cycle of violence continues to take many lives. We are
alarmed by the number of Palestinians killed in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, by Israeli security
forces, including six minors this month. Investigations
should be transparent and comprehensive. Where there
has been an excessive use of force, those responsible
must be held to account.
We are also concerned about the increase in
Palestinian violence, as a result of which two Israeli
Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers sadly lost their lives
this month after being shot by Palestinians. We repeat
our call on all parties to take immediate steps to
reduce tensions.
We also stress the importance of ensuring access
for humanitarian and development organizations,
including in Palestinian refugee camps, even during
periods of instability.

S/PV.9174

More action also needs to be taken to tackle settler
violence, which has affected IDF soldiers. But it also
affects Palestinians on a daily basis across the West
Bank, especially during the olive harvest. The Israeli
Government needs to end the culture of impunity and
bring those responsible to justice.
As we celebrated the tenth anniversary of the
International Day of the Girl Child this month, we should
all be reminded of the vital role that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) plays in the region, including
in providing education and health services to women
and girls. But, while girls in the occupied Palestinian
territories outperform boys at school and represent
around 60 per cent of Palestinian graduates, the fact
that employment rates remain low, with only 13 per
cent of women over 25 employed, needs urgent and
meaningful attention. The United Kingdom remains a
firm supporter of UNRWA and values its importance as
a vital humanitarian and stabilizing force. We encourage
efforts to improve UNRWA’s serious financial situation,
which will threaten its ability to deliver vital services
later this year if action is not taken.
The need for the parties to engage in meaningful
dialogue and collaborate to address the escalating
situation in the West Bank is urgent. We are working
closely with the parties to that end, and we welcome
the efforts of the Special Coordinator to support
de-escalation and encourage further work to reverse
negative trends on the ground.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his account of most recent developments
on the ground.
We remain deeply worried about the deterioration
of security in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
escalation of tensions and outbursts of violence causing
destruction and victims, especially among innocent
civilians, always brings pain and desperation, which
is just the opposite of what people need and what we
expect. Violence and its consequences remain one of
the serious threats to the prospect of peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. That is why it is paramount
to support every effort, avoid any further escalation and
help restore a political horizon for peace talks to create
the conditions for just and sustainable peace.
A political horizon is a requisite for hope. Without
hope, we are condemned to watch the spiral of violence
move the Israelis and the Palestinians further apart and

22-6600913/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

make it even harder to build trust and work for peace and
coexistence among both peoples. We call on both sides to
step back from taking unilateral actions that exacerbate
tension and commit themselves to de-escalation.
Ensuring rights for everyone and the protection of
civilians must be a priority in all circumstances. The
commitment of the leadership of Israel and Palestine to
work towards a two-State solution is very encouraging.
We reiterate our support for the two-States solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic
and viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States.
We are firm in our support for all genuine initiatives
that put parties on the right track towards the fulfilment
of the aspirations of the Israelis to live free of terror and
in security, and of the Palestinians to live in their own
State. In that respect, reconciliation and unity among
Palestinian factions in clear support of the two-State
solution, through peace and negotiations, not violence,
may help move forward on the path to provide for an
equal measure of peace, prosperity and rights for both
nations and for a just and lasting outcome.
Violence breeds further violence, which leads to a
dead-end. We have seen that many times. The endless
deadly cycle must be broken, and we can stop violence
through negotiations, dialogue and diplomacy, as
well as through and with a perspective. The maritime
agreement between Israel and Lebanon, mediated by
the United States, is a clear example of diplomacy
delivering results. Diplomacy keeps the guns away.
With diplomacy and dialogue, there are always only
winners, no losers. Therefore, nothing will ever replace
dialogue as the best means to achieve stability and
prosperity across the region.
While we support dialogue, understanding and
every step that leads to an improved situation in the
region, we must make sure not to tolerate transgressive
behaviours. The indiscriminate launching of rockets by
Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other terrorist
groups into Israel are unacceptable and should be
firmly condemned by all. But we must also expose and
condemn those who help them in such behaviours. We
condemn in the strongest terms the destabilizing role
that Iran plays in the region and beyond. Iranian money
and support continue to fuel violence through proxies
in the region. Now, as we know, in a clear breach of
resolution 2231 (2015), illegally transferred Iranian
drones are killing civilians and destroying civilian
14/29

28/10/2022

infrastructure in Ukraine. And when Iran does not
send killer drones, they resort to massive cyberattacks
against critical infrastructure in peaceful nations.
We condemn in the strongest terms the particularly
repressive actions of the Iranian regime against its
own people. It is not the first time. Every time Iranians
ask for more freedom and rights, they are met with
brutal repression. But this time, the genie it out of the
bottle. The repressive regime will not be able to kill
all those women who are just asking to live their lives
with dignity, and the many more who support them. If
anything, history teaches us that, despite everything,
freedom ends by wining, and Iran will never be an
exception. While the regime is immured in the past
and obscurantism, its population, the Iranian people, in
particular youth and women, are already in the future.
Coming from a country where multi-religious
harmony is an institution, I cannot avoid reiterating the
importance of maintaining the peaceful coexistence of
all religions and their worshippers. In that regard, we
reiterate our call for upholding the status quo of the holy
sites and praise Jordan’s special role in this respect.
Let me conclude by deploring the sharp rise of
hate speech and other forms of incitement of violence,
in particular one of the most despicable forms of
it — antisemitism. We must stand up. We would
be making a terrible mistake if we were to allow
antisemitism to become trivial. I end by reiterating
what Albanian Prime Minister Rama said in his recent
visit to the Middle East:
“Antisemitism is a cause for everyone, not just for
Israel and for Jewish people. This is why being
against antisemitism is not about keeping the flag
of Israel, but holding the flag of humanity”.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing
and welcome the representatives of Palestine and Israel
to the meeting today.
I wish to emphasize the following three points.
First, the current situation has once again
highlighted the importance of achieving common
security. The recent period has seen a continuation of
the volatile security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The search-and-arrest operations carried
out by Israeli security forces in the West Bank have
resulted in a large number of Palestinian casualties. At
the same time, Israelis have also been killed in attacks.
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9174

The escalating violence has given rise to fear and hatred
and intensified conflict and turmoil, and the situation
could spiral out of control. That development is deeply
unsettling for China.

replace a comprehensive and just solution with
piecemeal crisis management, and neither can it make
up for what is overdue on political and security fronts
with limited economic and humanitarian measures.

Israel and Palestine will remain neighbours, with
interdependent and indivisible security. We call on
all parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint,
refrain from any unilateral action that could lead to
miscalculation or an escalation of tensions and make
every effort to reverse the negative trends on the ground
and to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible.
The occupying Power should earnestly fulfil its
obligations under international law to ensure the safety
and security of the people in the occupied territory.
The international community should attach equal
importance to the security concerns of both Palestine
and Israel and encourage both sides to find the greatest
common ground through dialogue and cooperation
in order to achieve common security. We support the
efforts of Special Coordinator Wennesland to that end.

The international community should facilitate the
resumption of peace talks between the two sides as soon
as possible, steer the Middle East peace process back on
track and seek a long-term settlement on the basis of the
two-State solution. In that regard, the Security Council
is duty-bound to take active and robust actions in order
to support the efforts of Palestinian people to restore
and exercise their inalienable rights, and it must live
up to the expectations of generations of Palestinians of
fairness and justice.

Secondly, the current situation once again highlights
the need to implement the international consensus. In
the West Bank, more than 1,200 Palestinians in the
Masafer Yatta area are at risk of eviction. Many who are
reluctant to leave their homes, where they have lived for
generations, are living in caves in difficult conditions.
Eighteen per cent of Area C of the West Bank has
been designated as military zone for training, with
some 50 per cent more designated for other purposes,
effectively closing it off to Palestinian construction,
economic activity and development.
The continued expansion of settlement activities
encroaches on Palestinian land, expropriates Palestinian
resources and violates the Palestinian people’s right
to self-determination, thereby making a contiguous,
independent and sovereign Palestinian State even
more elusive. We call on Israel to cease all settlement
activities and to create conditions for the development
of Palestinian communities in the West Bank, as called
for in resolution 2334 (2016).
Thirdly, the current situation has once again
highlighted the urgency of advancing the two-State
solution. The Palestinian question remains unresolved
after more than 70 years, the flare-ups of violent
conflicts, the deteriorating humanitarian situation and
the spreading hopelessness are constant reminders that
the status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory is
unsustainable. The international community cannot

Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is crucial to the
cause of independent Palestinian statehood. China
welcomes the internal reconciliation agreement
reached by the Palestinian political factions in Algiers
this month and commends the positive role played
by Algeria in that regard. We believe that it will be
conducive to enhancing intra-Palestinian unity and
promoting peace talks between the two sides.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate China’s support
for the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine that enjoys full sovereignty on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel and the
common development of the Arab and Jewish peoples.
China will continue to work relentlessly alongside the
international community in pursuit of a comprehensive,
just solution to the Palestinian question.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I thank the Special Coordinator for
his presentation.
France is very concerned about the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in East
Jerusalem. The figures speak for themselves. Since
the beginning of the year, more than 120 Palestinians
from the West Bank and Jerusalem and 20 Israelis have
been killed, and many others have been injured. The
extremely high level of tension and the risk of further
escalation of violence require all parties to consider the
consequences of their future actions. In the interest of
all, France calls on them to refrain from any provocation
or unilateral action.
France will never compromise on Israel’s security
and condemns any attack targeting its territory or

22-6600915/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2022

its nationals. It reiterates the imperative need to
respect international law, particularly international
humanitarian law.

his detailed briefing and for his efforts and attempts
to calm the escalating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

As we know, one of the root causes of this resurgence
of violence is the continuation of the settlement policy,
which is illegal under international law, hampers any
political settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and jeopardizes the possibility of a two-State solution.
The increasing violence of the settlers must stop, and
those responsible must be held accountable before
the relevant authorities. France strongly condemns
the advancement of plans to expand and create
settlements, particularly in Area E-1. Furthermore,
we condemn the evictions of Palestinian families and
the demolitions. We are also very concerned about the
latest developments in Masafer Yatta. We call for a halt
to the evictions and demolitions, which are violations
of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Despite the repeated appeals by the members of
the Security Council over the past months to defuse
tensions, we regret the continued trend towards a
dangerous escalation. The recent period has witnessed
a worrisome upsurge in confrontations on the ground
between Palestinians and Israelis. Undoubtedly, the
lack of negotiations between the two parties is one of
the causes of that escalation. The absence of prospects
for a political solution has also led recently to a state of
frustration, fear and feelings of anger over the situation
on the ground.

Another reason for the rising tensions is the growing
restrictions of movement and access for Palestinians
in the occupied territories. Those restrictions, which
now also apply to foreigners in the West Bank,
are unacceptable.
The increase in tension and violence in the
West Bank and Jerusalem described by the Special
Coordinator also illustrates the urgency of resuming
direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians.
France continues to support the two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as capital of both States. We are determined
to work towards the implementation of that solution
within the framework defined by international law,
the resolutions of the Council and the internationally
agreed parameters. That is the only solution that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples for peace and security.
In view of the urgency and gravity of the situation
in the West Bank, the Council must act by unanimously
calling for de-escalation in order to avoid any further
spiral of violence. For that to happen, a credible
political horizon must be restored to defuse the
tensions. France therefore calls on all members of the
Council to contribute actively to the resumption of the
peace process and stands ready to contribute to those
efforts alongside its partners, as it has reaffirmed on
several occasions, including to President Abbas and
Prime Minister Lapid.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
16/29

As for the Security Council, instead of proactively
taking measures to prevent the situation from worsening,
we have reached a stage at which the conflict seems
to control our responses to the ongoing developments.
What we need today is an urgent diplomatic action that
restores confidence between the parties and encourages
them to return to genuine and serious negotiations. We
would like to recall that escalation would not be in the
interest of any party. A political solution is the only way
to end this conflict and establish an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition.
It is imperative in the current situation to stop all
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially those that increase the likelihood of further
confrontations. That includes the repeated incursions
into the cities and villages of the West Bank, mainly
in Nablus, as well as the restrictions on the movement
of residents. The situation is further exacerbated by
continued settler violence, which increased recently
and must stop. In that context, we reiterate that the
construction and expansion of settlements constitutes
a violation of international law, undermines the twoState solution and hinders peace efforts. Considering
the recent increase in the number of casualties, we
remind all the parties to abide by their responsibilities
under international law and international humanitarian
law, particularly regarding the protection of civilians,
especially children. In that regard, we support
Mr. Wennesland’s statement on the need to protect
children from harm following the death of a young
child, Rayan.
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In addition, in the light of the recent incursions into
the Ibrahimi Mosque in the city of Hebron and holy
places in the Holy City of Jerusalem, we affirm that
any unilateral or provocative action in holy places must
also stop. It is imperative to preserve the status quo in
the holy city, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980).
We also highlight the important role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the Holy Sites and
religious endowments under international law and the
historical status quo, without prejudice to the powers
and competencies of the Administration Department of
Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs. We appreciate the
efforts of the Al-Quds Committee, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI of the Kingdom of
Morocco, in protecting the city.
The Palestinian people continue to face difficult
humanitarian conditions. According to United
Nations reports, 36 per cent of the population lives
below the poverty line, and the Gaza Strip has one
of the world’s highest rates of unemployment. We
stress that responding to the fragile humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory requires
intensifying cooperation between the Palestinian
and Israeli authorities and United Nations agencies,
as well as increased international support for the
Palestinian people.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates signed a
cooperation agreement this month with the World
Health Organization to provide $25 million in support
to Makassed Hospital in East Jerusalem, as well as
medicines, medical supplies and equipment.
As we highlight the need to support the Palestinian
people, we appreciate the efforts of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria in facilitating the
recent consultations that resulted in the Algiers
declaration on Palestinian reconciliation. We also
commend the historical role of the Arab Republic of
Egypt in that regard.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing. We share his concern
about the deteriorating security situation in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. His efforts and those
of his team towards de-escalating the situation are
crucial. We urge all actors to engage with the Special
Coordinator, to whom we assure our support.
Norway also echoes the Special Coordinator’s
concern that mounting violence is fuelling a climate

S/PV.9174

of fear, hatred and anger. That cycle of violence has
the potential to spin out of control. Such a development
would be detrimental to the security of both Israelis and
Palestinians. We urge all actors to refrain from actions
and rhetoric that could contribute to further escalation.
We are particularly worried about the increased
use of live ammunition. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 100
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli forces this year,
making 2022 the deadliest year for Palestinians in the
West Bank since 2006.
Settler violence also remains a major concern.
Norway condemns all violence against civilians,
including all acts of terrorism. We urge the parties to
do their utmost to protect civilians, especially children,
exercise the utmost restraint when the use of force is
considered necessary and to ensure that any force used
is proportional to the threat faced. We denounce any use
of force that results in the killing or injury of civilians.
Such incidents should be subject to an independent
investigation, in line with international standards.
We are also concerned about the reported increase in
the number of children detained, as well as the physical
violence being inflicted on children during detention.
We call on the Israeli authorities to uphold international
law and adhere to juvenile justice standards, including
by resorting the use of detention only as a measure of
last resort and for the shortest period of time possible.
Movement restrictions have a significant impact
on access to education and health care in the occupied
West Bank. We welcome Israel’s decision today to lift
some of the closures that had been put in place around
Nablus earlier this month. Norway calls on the Israeli
authorities to continue easing movement restrictions in
Nablus and other places in the West Bank.
We call on Palestinian factions to come together
under a unified leadership with a commitment to
the two-State solution and peace. Palestinian unity
and elections are key to ensuring the legitimacy of
the Palestinian Authority and its institutions. We
welcome the sentiments expressed by Palestinian
factions in Algiers earlier this month, and we urge
Palestinian factions and key regional actors to continue
consultations to advance national reconciliation.
Norway is deeply concerned about the recurrent
critical financial situation of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

22-6600917/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East (UNRWA). It is time to act on the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to increase UNRWA’s
funding from the United Nations assessed budget, and
we call on all to support initiatives to that end.
We have seen a significant positive achievement in
the region recently. We welcome the historic agreement
establishing a permanent maritime boundary between
Israel and Lebanon. We commend Israel and Lebanon,
as well as the United States, for their efforts to reach
that agreement.
Let me therefore conclude by offering one clear
message. Cycles of violence and conflict are not
inevitable. They can be reversed through re-establishing
a political horizon and returning to the negotiating table.
Norway continues to support the two-State solution and
will continue to work towards that goal.
Ms. Nthoki (Kenya): I welcome Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland’s briefing on the recent developments
on the ground, particularly given the trajectory of
events in recent weeks. I welcome the participation of
the representatives of Israel and the Observer State of
Palestine in today’s open debate.
We meet once again against the backdrop of
recurring and escalating violence, as well as fatalities
among both Jewish and Palestinian civilians, including
children. The recent unrest, militia activity and
shootings in Nablus and Jenin, including in the refugee
camps, are concerning. The heightened tensions and
increasing military search-and-arrest operations
and movement restrictions in the West Bank signal
a deteriorating security situation that we have not
witnessed in decades. Beyond security concerns, the
current situation continues to have implications on the
economy and humanitarian aid assistance in the West
Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza.
My delegation has regularly taken note of the
progress made on cooperation between Israelis and
Palestinians at all levels, including in security and
economy matters. As such, it is critical that the
evolving situation, including the underlying issues
fuelling the instability, be urgently addressed before
it reverberates in other areas. The mediating and
de-escalating role of religious and community leaders
from both sides remains critical. Kenya welcomes the
Special Coordinator’s continual engagement with key
figures from both parties and at all levels, including
the recent meetings in Nablus and Jenin. Compliance
18/29

28/10/2022

with obligations, including the protection of the civilian
populations, remains critical.
For years, month after month, the Council has heard
alarming reports of incidents, acts of violence and
fatalities, including clashes between Israeli security
forces and Palestinians; settler-related violence,
demolitions and forced and potential evictions in East
Jerusalem; and the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Gaza. As a Council we continue to strongly, and
rightly, condemn the terrorist attacks and indiscriminate
launches of rockets and mortars by Hamas, the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and affiliated militant groups
targeting civilian-populated centres. But now more than
ever there is an urgent need to shift from an approach
that depicts such incidents as isolated in specific cities
or moments in time. In our view, the Council has to
move beyond the existing cyclical, and in many ways
stagnant, state of engagement with the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Kenya has repeatedly called for enhanced analysis
and contextualization of reports, to be provided by the
good offices of the Secretary-General, to enable us to
better appreciate the implications of those incidents in
the maintenance of peace and security in the region.
Discussions can and should continue, but they should
be embodied in preventive diplomacy and characterized
by Council action. The discussions and actions should
also be commensurate with actual happenings and risks
and a proper reading of the situation on the ground.
The actualization of the long-held goal of a
region where two democratic States — Israel and
Palestine — live side by side in peace and within
secure and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines
will demand greater urgency. It will also demand more
meaningful commitment to the peace process by both
parties in alignment with international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, the Council’s resolutions and
regional peace initiatives and frameworks, both
existing and new. The commitment to an independent,
sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
also means an immediate and complete cessation of
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as demanded by the
comprehensive pillars of resolution 2334 (2016) and the
provisions of resolution 1860 (2009).
It is our hope that the Algiers declaration signed
on 13 October by 14 Palestinian factions can translate
into actual reconciliation and pave the way for elections
to establish a Government of national unity. Kenya
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

welcomes these high-level outreach and mediation
efforts by Algeria and others by neighbouring States,
including Jordan, Egypt and Qatar. Let me reaffirm
that Kenya’s interest continues to be supporting an
end to the protracted conflict. My delegation further
reaffirms that peace efforts, both at the official and
grass-roots levels, that comprehensively integrate the
socioeconomic development of all sectors of society
are and will be critical to the stability and peace of the
region in the interim and for the long term.
We join other delegations in recognizing the
important role played by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
including the call for reinforced funding for the Agency.
The important work of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force also remains vital to the stability of the
subregion. As I conclude, we urge both parties to avoid
unilateral steps that stand in the way of a resumption
of a political process and of ensuring the peace and
stability of the region.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and welcomes
the delegations of Israel and Palestine. The Special
Coordinator has once again provided a clear picture of an
extremely fragile security and humanitarian situation.
First of all, my delegation notes with great concern
the volatility in the West Bank and the high risk of a
major conflagration with repercussions in Gaza and
throughout the region. As we have heard, and as the
entire Council has reiterated, this has been the most
violent year since 2006, with a tragic toll of more than
100 Palestinian fatalities, including 26 children, as
well as 20 Israeli victims. We deplore the escalation of
violence in the West Bank, particularly in Nablus, which
continues to result in deaths, injuries and property
damage. The restrictions on access to that city have
seriously disrupted the daily lives of more than 200,000
people with consequent economic, humanitarian
and psychosocial impacts. In the circumstances, it is
urgent to ensure the immediate and unimpeded entry
of humanitarian personnel and assistance to facilitate
the provision of basic services to the population. On top
of that, settler incitement around Nablus is creating an
atmosphere marked by constant fear and uncertainty,
which could lead to protests and further confrontation.
We urge social leaders to refrain from provocations

S/PV.9174

and the Israeli authorities to bring those responsible for
attacks on civilians to justice.
Mexico has always recognized Israel’s right to
legitimate self-defence in accordance with the rules of
international humanitarian law. We therefore renew our
call for Israeli security forces to observe the principles
of necessity, proportionality and distinction at all times
when they exercise the right to self-defence. At the
same time, we take note of reports issued last month
by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
(see A/77/356) and by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and Israel (see
A/77/328). We call for the visits of those mechanisms
to Israel and Palestine to be facilitated so that they can
discharge their mandate.
Mexico reiterates its support for a political process
leading to a two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as
the future capital of both States, in accordance with
United Nations resolutions. That is the only way it
will be possible to put an end to the spiral of violence
and lay the foundations for future reconciliation. We
support the good offices of Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland in maintaining contacts and dialogue at
the highest level. The international community and the
Council must prioritize an immediate détente to avoid
an escalation that would have greater and even more
unacceptable human and material costs.
In view of the complex humanitarian situation,
Mexico supports the efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. My country plans to make a voluntary financial
contribution to the Agency again this year. We also call
on all Palestinian political factions to continue working
to overcome their differences and focus on meeting the
basic needs of the Palestinian people. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the Algiers declaration signed
by 14 Palestinian factions, which is a step towards
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We hope that the
commitment to holding presidential and legislative
elections will be met without delay.
Finally, we welcome the agreement between Israel
and Lebanon on the delineation of their maritime border,
signed following the successful mediation efforts led by
the United States, which is undoubtedly an encouraging
message for the entire region and the world. We hope it

22-6600919/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

can lay a foundation for promoting a sustainable peace
agreement between Israel and Lebanon.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil remains
deeply concerned about the deteriorating security
situation on the ground, especially in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We thank the
Special Coordinator for his engagement with various
stakeholders with the aim of reducing tensions. We
join his calls for political and community leaders on all
sides to act in good faith through dialogue to prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control. We agree that
the fragility of the situation underscores the urgency
of changing the current dynamics while addressing
the underlying causes of instability. We cannot risk
further escalation.
We call on all parties to exercise restraint. At this
point, it should not be necessary to remind all parties
of their obligations under international humanitarian
law or of the importance of ensuring accountability
and preserving the status quo of the holy sites or
of the role the Waqf Council plays in that regard.
Confidence-building measures are especially needed in
this time of acute crisis.
Brazil welcomes the signing of the Algiers
declaration on 13 October by 14 distinct Palestinian
political groups and thanks Algeria, and notably
President Tebboune, for the successful mediation
efforts. We echo the Secretary-General’s words of
encouragement to all factions to overcome their
differences through dialogue and to follow through
with the commitments contained in the declaration,
including the holding of elections.
We underscore that Palestinian reconciliation can
meaningfully contribute to achieving a durable solution
to the conflict. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
alongside the improvement of living conditions in
the West Bank and Gaza, which will only be possible
with sustainable economic growth, are important steps
towards peace. One must not forget the role played by
poverty, food insecurity and lack of hope in providing
the grounds on which extremist forces flourish.
Low levels of funding to United Nations appeals
signal the fatigue of the international community
in terms of its capacity for assistance, with crises
on several fronts. The humanitarian situation of
Palestinian refugees remains nonetheless critical.
Numerous capabilities must be restored so that the
United Nations can continue providing its indispensable
20/29

28/10/2022

work of assistance, which is necessary for maintaining
stability. The civilian population, including children,
must not continue to pay the price for the failure to
move forward towards a viable political solution to this
long-standing conflict.
Brazil reaffirms its firm belief in the need for a twoState solution, within the framework of international
law and the resolutions of the Council, as the way to
meet the aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians and to
ensure the security of all.
I would like to conclude on a positive note. The
announcement that Lebanese and Israeli negotiators
have agreed, with the mediation of the United States,
to delineate their maritime boundary permanently is
indeed a historic breakthrough and a very concrete
development that will, hopefully, benefit both countries
and contribute to the security and stability of the
region. The successful conclusion of those negotiations
demonstrate that, with a political vision in pursuit of
a common goal, significant progress can be achieved.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.

Special

India welcomes the recent agreement between
Israel and Lebanon on delineating their maritime
boundary. That is a positive step towards achieving
peace and stability in the region. We acknowledge the
constructive role of the United States and France in
bringing the negotiations to fruition.
India has consistently supported peace, stability
and prosperity in West Asia, which is our extended
neighbourhood. Last month marked two years since
the signing of the Abraham Accords. During the first
leaders’ summit of the I2U2 group, held in July, the
Prime Minister of India, the Prime Minister of Israel,
the President of the United Arab Emirates and the
President of the United States agreed to increase joint
investment in six key areas — water, energy, transport,
space, health and food security. Since then, we are
moving forward on projects that aim to bring energy
security, food security and economic growth to West
and South Asia. In that context, we also welcomed
the full normalization of relations between Israel and
the United Arab Emirates, Morocco, Bahrain and
the Sudan.
We hope that those regional developments give
impetus to the Middle East peace process. Accordingly,
we encourage Israel and Palestine to take concrete steps
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to resolve the conflict peacefully and to re-engage in
meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues.
The only way to achieve lasting peace is a twoState solution achieved through direct negotiations,
taking into account the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians for statehood and Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. We urge the United Nations and the
international community to play an important role in
the efforts towards resuming those negotiations. There
is no alternative to the two-State solution.
Turning to the situation on the ground, we are
deeply concerned about the escalation of violence in
Israel, the West Bank and Jerusalem. We condemn all
acts of violence and attacks against civilians, including
acts of terror, provocation, incitement and demolition.
Violence begets violence, and we urge both sides to
break the current cycle of violence before it spirals out
of control.
I will conclude by reaffirming India’s unwavering
commitment to the establishment of an independent,
viable and democratic State of Palestine, while taking
into account Israel’s legitimate security needs. India
remains convinced that to achieve long-lasting peace
and stability in the region, there must be a just,
sustainable and comprehensive solution to the IsraelPalestine conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Gabon.
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his inspiring briefing. We are concerned about the
deteriorating situation he described.
The past few weeks have been marked by a familiar
cycle of daily violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in Israel. The recent Israeli raids, which
have caused numerous casualties, particularly among
young people in the West Bank, on the one hand, and
the attacks claimed by the Lions’ Den armed group
against Israeli troops and civilians, on the other,
reflect an unacceptable deadly violence on a daily
basis. Continuing settlement activities, settlement
expansions, evictions and demolitions of Palestinian
homes exacerbate the frustrations and tensions on
the ground.
We call for restraint and de-escalation, and stress
the need to respect international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, and to ensure the

S/PV.9174

protection of the rights of the Palestinian people, while
guaranteeing the security of Israel. That is what is
needed to achieve the peace we all seek.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, in which youth represent
the largest part of Palestinian society, is alarming.
The population of Gaza is facing a severe shortage of
basic necessities and drinking water, as well as many
restrictions that contribute to food insecurity.
We reiterate our call for funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to ensure the Agency can
continue its work at a time when it most needs to restore
its operational capacity. Without that financial support,
vulnerable civilian populations risk losing access to
health-care services, education and food as a result
of the deteriorating security environment. That would
dramatically increase social unrest on the ground and
exacerbate poverty and violence.
We call for the full lifting of the blockade of Gaza,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), in order to
facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian aid.
On the thorny issue of the return of human remains
to the families, we call on the parties to prioritize a
solution that will generate a climate of trust for a
lasting peace.
Gabon reaffirms its commitment to the two-State
solution — a Palestinian State coexisting with the State
of Israel, living in peace and security within secure
and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the capital.
We urge the parties to refrain from any belligerent
rhetoric or provocative acts that could fuel violence, of
which women and children would be the first victims,
with an increased risk of destabilizing the region.
We call on the parties to resume negotiations in
good faith, with a view to restoring trust and enabling
the aspirations of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples to
live in peace. To that end, the role of the countries of the
region and those with influence on the parties is crucial
to the resumption of peace talks and removal of the
obstacles that stand in the way of the two-State solution.
The recent remarks by Israeli Prime Minister at
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly
regarding the two-State solution (see A/77/PV.8) are
part of a momentum that must be sustained.

22-6600921/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the intra-Palestinian talks, we
welcome the signing on 13 October of the Algiers
declaration by 14 Palestinian factions. Palestinian
unity is essential, both politically and in terms of the
economy, in the context of the two-State solution called
for by all.
We would also like to reiterate our support for the
King of Morocco, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee
of the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation, in
preserving the special status of the Holy City as a
symbol of the common heritage of humankind and
of the three monotheistic religions and as a place of
dialogue and mutual respect. Respect for the status quo
of the holy sites is also a requirement for the peaceful
coexistence of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support to
the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his
tireless efforts for peace in the Middle East. Diplomatic
efforts must continue for the revival of a process aimed
at lasting peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): We appreciate this
opportunity to address this very important matter, as
the world has been faced with a set of multiple parallel
crises since the war broke out in Ukraine in February.
I am representing a neighbouring country of Ukraine,
Hungary. The impacts of the war on us are therefore
immediate and very severe. Member States know
that living next door to the war makes us extremely
interested in peace being made as soon as possible, and
we are very aware of the significance and importance
of achieving conclusive peace as soon as possible.
The war in Ukraine is a regional war. But, in that
context, I want to make the remark that it is absolutely
certain that the more regional conflicts that exist, the
greater the chance that they will all result in a global
war, a world war, which, I believe, is something that
none of us would like to experience.
The war in Ukraine highlights the importance of
putting an end to and resolving the greatest possible
number of — and preferably all — regional armed
conflicts that are currently taking place in the world.
The Middle East has always been a source of serious
security risks in recent decades. The security situation
22/29

28/10/2022

in the Middle East undeniably has a direct impact on the
security situation of Europe, because the consequence
of unrest in the Middle East is the increasing threat of
terror, as well as additional massive illegal waves of
migration. Those both pose a serious security-related
risk to Europe. Particularly at this time, Europe does
not need — and, I would say, would not be able to
handle — another security-related challenge. For us
Europeans, it is therefore of the utmost importance
that there be huge steps made in the Middle East
towards peace.
If we look back at the recent decades, there have been
many failed attempts to bring about peace, or to come
closer to peace, in the Middle East. The first successful
initiative was the Abraham Accords, which was the first
process to offer a realistic hope for peace in the region.
In that regard, I believe that we must recognize the role
of President Donald Trump and Jared Kushner, who
facilitated the cooperation and the discussion between
Israel and the Arab countries that was needed in order
to reach a peaceful and reorganized relationship.
From the perspective of the current situation in the
eastern part of Europe in particular, the methodology
for concluding the Abraham Accords was very
enlightening and telling. We can draw conclusions
from that methodology regarding the situation in
Ukraine, since what was necessary for the Abraham
Accords was the presence of a true leader who was
brave and strong enough to open — or, let us say,
reopen — the communication channels between the
parties, which have been in deep conflict with each
other. The Abraham Accords brought about a very
positive development for the region, which, realistically
speaking, was completely unexpected,
If it was possible for President Trump to make peace
between Israel and some Arab countries and reorganize
the relationship between Israel and the Arab countries,
it must also be possible to create peace in Ukraine,
because there we need the same methodology: dialogue
and the reopening of communication channels.
In conclusion, let me put it this way: we must
look at the example of the Abraham Accords when it
comes to the current security-related challenges. If
there are no negotiations, there will be no peace. If
there are negotiations and discussion, there is hope for
peace. I therefore hope that, even in this Organization,
the rhetoric of war will be replaced by the rhetoric of
peace. We should continue the method put forward by
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

President Trump in the Middle East and maintain the
dialogue between Israel and the Arab countries and
their counterparts. We must also apply that method
in and with regard to Ukraine. We must reopen the
communication channels, and there must be a dialogue
in order to resolve that very serious security-related
challenge in Europe as well.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s open debate. We are grateful for the
efforts of Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, as he resolutely and ably
fulfils his mission in such a complex region as ours.
I do not want to sound pessimistic; however, every
month we see that it becomes harder and harder to
achieve the long-desired peace in the Middle East.
Israel’s policies and practices of expanding the building
of settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
uprooting Palestinians from their homes and lands and
dividing their cities, particularly in East Jerusalem,
generate hatred, aggravate the deadlock that has
stymied the peace process and undermine all efforts to
achieve a two-State solution.
Only a comprehensive and just solution based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 194 (III), among
other resolutions, can provide the basis for a political
settlement that gives the Palestinians their long-overdue
political rights and right to self-determination.
Nevertheless, we have no choice but to call on the
Security Council — and through it the international
community — to put pressure on the unyielding party
to the conflict, Israel, to engage in a robust peace
process. The efforts of the Middle East Quartet are
urgently needed to convince the parties to return to the
negotiating table in a constructive spirit and embark
on a peace process with the aim of achieving a twoState solution. We also note with concern that not all
situations of conflict receive the same attention. It is
necessary that we devote equal attention to the longstanding conflicts in which the Charter of the United
Nations and human rights are being violated.
The lack of long-term funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) risks the
suspension of the essential services that it provides

S/PV.9174

to millions of Palestinian refugees, including those
living in Lebanon. UNRWA’s services are essential for
giving their recipients the dignified lives they deserve
to enjoy. They are also a pillar of stability for the whole
region. That is why we urge the Security Council and
all peace-loving nations to guarantee the predictable
and sustained funding of UNRWA by providing regular
and multi-year contributions and allocating funds to
cover its operational costs from the regular budget of
the United Nations in order to secure adequate capacity
to ensure the continued delivery of its mandate, which
is expected to be renewed for three years in December.
Lebanon greatly values the important role that the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
plays in the maintenance of peace and security in south
Lebanon, and we are grateful to the troop-contributing
countries for their decades-long commitment to
peacekeeping in Lebanon. Israel’s daily violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, which
contravene resolution 1701 (2006), increase tensions in
the area and represent a threat to peace and security.
However, the presence of UNIFIL and its role in
de-escalation and reducing tensions is essential for
creating an environment conducive to enabling stability.
The Lebanese Government remains committed to
implementing resolution 1701 (2006), which we consider
to be the overarching resolution that established the
UNIFIL mandate. We call on the Council to compel
Israel to refrain from committing further airspace
violations and acts of aggression in the territory of
Lebanon, as well as any acts of escalation that could
jeopardize the full implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006).
Lebanon reaffirms the importance of coordinating
the activities of UNIFIL with those of the Lebanese
Government, as stipulated in the UNIFIL statusof-forces agreement, with the aim of implementing
resolution 1701 (2006) in full.
Yesterday, Thursday, 27 October, Lebanon signed
an agreement to delineate its southern maritime border
at an event hosted by the United Nations. We thank all
the parties that facilitated that agreement under the
auspices of the United Nations and hope that it will
bring stability and prosperity to the people of Lebanon.
We also hope to be able to capitalize on that momentum
to explore tangible avenues for seeking viable solutions
of other current issues.

22-6600923/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As outbreaks of turmoil continue to occur on every
continent, allow me to end on a positive note, with a
quote from the President of the Lebanese Republic,
General Michel Aoun,
“As my mandate as President is about to expire, my
gift to the Lebanese people is the demarcation of
the maritime borders. Now that the borders in the
south are stable, there will be no war or instability.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express to you, Mr. President, our
appreciation for your wise leadership of the Security
Council’s work this month. I also thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
Egypt associates itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Group of Arab States, as well as
that to be delievered on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Although Egypt and several other Member States
spoke at the open debate held in July (see S/PV.9099) on
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, today we witness a surge in violence
perpetrated by the occupying forces and settlers. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has reaffirmed that 2022 has been the bloodiest year in
the occupied Palestinian territory since 2006.
Other violations also continue, including the
demolition of Palestinian homes and facilities, the
expansion of settlements and administrative detentions
and the continuing blockade of the Gaza Strip. All those
violations have been documented in United Nations
reports, the most recent of which is the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967.
Egypt continues its efforts to contain any further
escalation of the conflict in the occupied Palestinian
territory in order to protect the lives of the brotherly
Palestinian people. However, if the current escalation
continues, it could lead once again to an increase of
violence that could spiral out of control, bringing to
mind previous cycles of violence that claimed the lives
of innocent Palestinians. That is why all unilateral
measures and acts of violence, whether by the occupying
forces or the settlers, must end.
24/29

28/10/2022

There is also a need to provide international
protection for the Palestinian people and start
implementing the recommendations of the ministerial
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
held in September, at which Egypt expressed the need
for ending the Palestinian economy’s reliance on the
Israeli side and providing it with all the means needed
for it to prosper naturally. It is also important that the
UNRWA mandate be renewed in December, without any
modification or change of its mandate, and that support
be provided to proposals for increasing its funding
through the regular budget of the United Nations.
Egypt reiterates that it will not be possible to
achieve security and stability in the Middle East
without granting the Palestinian people their legitimate
rights, especially their right to self-determination and
to establish an independent State within the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in addition
to the liberation of all the Arab territories occupied
since 1967.
With regard to the developments concerning
the situation in brotherly Libya, we welcome the
appointment of Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya. In
that regard, we stress that, as we are about to adopt a
draft resolution to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the ongoing efforts
to hold simultaneous presidential and parliamentary
elections, building on the constitutional basis that
Egypt has staunchly supported and facilitated, must
be intensified.
We remind all stakeholders of the need for consistency
with regard to the international community’s approach
to the agreed terms of reference. A Government whose
mandate has expired and has ceased to have any legal
validity must not be allowed to continue in power,
as that would undermine the prospects for achieving
stability in Libya and have a negative impact on the
economic potential of our brother people of Libya.
With regard to the situation in our brother nation
of Yemen, Egypt reiterates its support for all efforts
aimed at achieving a comprehensive settlement of
the crisis. We continue to support the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Yemen and his consultations with all
the parties to achieve a settlement through a political
solution that guarantees the unity, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Yemen in line with the agreed terms
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of reference for resolving the crisis. We hope that the
Yemeni stakeholders will agree to renew the truce,
which will help to achieve a successful conclusion of
the transitional phase, the restoration of security and
stability, an end to the Yemeni people’s humanitarian
plight and an intra-Yemeni consensus on reaching a
comprehensive settlement of the crisis.
In conclusion, Egypt joins all the members of the
Security Council and a majority of the international
community in welcoming the delineation of maritime
borders between Lebanon and Israel, which represents
a serious step towards establishing rights, peace and
security in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mrs. Al-halique (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, we would like to express our sincere thanks
and appreciation for your efforts in presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. We also thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
Major regional and international developments
continue to affect the present and future of our peoples.
Those crises demand that we work together to confront
them and mitigate their effects. The large number of
crises around the world tends to shift the international
community’s attention and effort from one crisis to
another, a problem that reinforces the importance of
prioritizing and settling issues that have gone unresolved
for decades, particularly when that is directly tied to
the realization of the rights of peoples in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the provisions of international law. What unites
us under the umbrella of the United Nations are our
common goals of maintaining international peace and
security and promoting constructive relations among
nations based on respect for the principles of equal
rights and the right to self-determination of all peoples,
including the Palestinian people.
For Jordan, the Palestinian question is the primary
and central issue, as it will never be possible to achieve
a comprehensive and just peace or security and
stability in the region and beyond without establishing
an independent sovereign Palestinian State based on
the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with international law and the
relevant international terms of reference, including
the resolutions of the Security Council and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Concerted efforts must be made at the

S/PV.9174

international level to find a genuine political horizon
that will enable a return to serious and effective
negotiations for achieving peace in the region on the
basis of a two-State solution.
Israel continues its unilateral, provocative and
escalatory actions in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We condemn its ongoing incursions into Palestinian
cities and repeated attacks on them, most recently in its
aggression against the cities of Nablus and Ramallah at
dawn on 25 October. Its escalatory military campaign
threatens a new spiral of violence for which we will
all pay a heavy price. In that regard, we must warn
that violence can only generate more violence and
that actions that perpetuate the occupation, combined
with the total stalemate in the peace process, will lead
to a dangerous escalation that threatens security and
stability. Israel bears responsibility in that connection,
as such actions could undermine any remaining chances
of achieving a just peace, as well as the viability of the
peace process.
We also want to warn the world that Israel’s
continuation of its steps aimed at changing the legal
and historical status quo of Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and imposing a temporal and spatial division
of it represent a serious escalation and an unacceptable
violation of international law and of Israel’s
responsibilities as the occupying Power. Based on the
Hashemite custodianship of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem, which is held by His Majesty
King Abdullah II, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
affirms that it will continue its efforts to protect the
holy sites and preserve their historical and legal status
quo. We stress how important it is that Israel respect the
fact that Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in its
entirety of 144,000 square metres, is a place of worship
exclusively for Muslims, and that Jordan’s Department
of the Jerusalem Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs is
the only entity authorized to manage all affairs related
to Al-Aqsa Mosque and regulate access to the site.
With regard to the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), we emphasize the Agency’s
pivotal role in promoting regional stability and as
an important stabilizing factor in the region. Jordan
calls on all Member States to support the renewal of
UNRWA’s mandate during the current session of the
General Assembly and to support proposals aimed
at increasing its funding from the general budget of

22-6600925/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2022

United Nations so that it can continue to provide vital
services to refugees.

jeopardize stability and fuel violence in the region
and beyond.

In conclusion, Jordan calls on the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility for ensuring that Israel
ceases its continuing violations of international law
and the Charter, as well as all unilateral provocations
in the occupied territories, because the consequences of
such acts will be catastrophic for all of us. We also urge
the Council and the international community to take
effective steps at the international level to provide the
Palestinian people with protection and launch genuine
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
in the region so as to maintain international peace
and security.

The OIC commends the continued efforts of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco, as Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee, to protect the Islamic
holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and stand up to the
Israeli occupation authorities’ measures aimed at
Judaizing the holy city. We also praise the concrete
role played by the Al-Quds Committee’s Bayt Mal
Al-Quds Agency in carrying out projects and activities
building development and steadfastness for the holy
city’s inhabitants.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of Gabon on
a very successful presidency of the Security Council
this month.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the States members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
The constantly deteriorating and extremely
volatile situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is getting even worse as
a result of Israel’s escalation of its human rights
violations, breaches of international humanitarian law
and recurrent brutal and criminal assaults, which have
claimed scores of innocent lives and left hundreds of
Palestinian civilians wounded, including children
and women.
The situation in East Jerusalem in particular
remains of deep concern, due to the repeated violations
and daily incursions by Israeli extremist settler groups
and occupation forces into the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, along with their ongoing attempts
to impose a spatial and temporal division of that holy
Islamic shrine. Such acts are in contravention of
international law and the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016), and constitute violations of the historic and
legal status quo at the holy sites. Furthermore, those
violations are provocative and hurt the feelings of
all Muslims across the globe, threatening to ignite
a dangerous religious conflict that would gravely
26/29

We welcomed the signing of a declaration in
Algiers emanating from the Unification Conference
to Achieve Palestinian National Unity, held in Algeria
between 11 and 13 October, and in that regard we
highly commend the efforts of President Abdelmadjid
Tebboune of Algeria and his personal commitment
to achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which
is vital to a politically stable, economically viable,
sovereign and independent State of Palestine.
The OIC reiterates the call for full respect for the
historical and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its holy
sites and for the historical Hashemite custodianship
over the Christian and Muslim holy sites in the city.
In that regard, the OIC stresses that the Jordanian
administration of the Jerusalem Awqaf and Al-Aqsa
Mosque affairs is the only entity authorized under
the provisions of international humanitarian law to
manage all the affairs of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in the
entirety of its 144,000 square metres. It also stresses
that maintaining comprehensive calm requires Israel
to respect the legal and historical status quo of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif and to find a
real political horizon that guarantees the fulfilment of
all legitimate rights of the brotherly Palestinian people,
on the basis of a two-State solution.
In that regard, the OIC reaffirms that the historical
and legal status quo of the holy sites in East Jerusalem
must be maintained and respected. We call upon
international actors and bodies, including the Security
Council, to take urgent action to stop the assaults,
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory and guarantee accountability and
justice for the horrific crimes being committed by the
Israeli occupation forces.
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We express our deep concern about the critical
situation of the approximately 50 Palestinian political
prisoners who last month started a mass hunger strike
to protest Israeli administrative detention abuses, as
well as the inhumane and oppressive treatment they
experience in violation of their most basic human rights.
The OIC stresses that Israel’s law-breaking record
must be urgently checked, in line with its obligations
under all relevant international instruments, and that it
must be held fully accountable for its treatment of all
Palestinian prisoners who it illegally holds captive in
its prisons and detention centres, including women and
children and ill persons.
In the same vein, Israel’s continued and extensive
land appropriation, colonial settlement construction
and facilitation, accompaniment of settlers’ acts
of provocation, violence and terrorism against
the Palestinian civilians, raids of their towns and
vandalism of their properties and agricultural fields
continue unabated, in grave breach of international law,
in particular international criminal law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
In that regard, we stress that such illegal acts,
if left unchecked, will further embolden Israel, the
occupying Power, to continue those recurrent crimes
and violations. It is time for accountability measures
to be pursued, in accordance with international law,
including the many relevant United Nations resolutions
calling for a complete end to Israel’s illegal settlement
activities. We urge the Security Council to uphold its
resolutions in that regard and work to implement them
forthwith as a vital contribution to bringing those
crimes to a halt.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that peace and justice
require accountability for the human rights violations
and heinous crimes that we have witnessed for too long
in occupied Palestine. There cannot be peace without
justice. Ultimately, the constructive and effective role of
key international actors in reviving hopes and prospects
for peace requires urgent efforts to de-escalate the
situation and advance justice.
To that end, this organ is urged to engage in and
promote a multilaterally sponsored peace process
aimed at achieving a just and lasting peace that will end
the Israeli occupation and ensure the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
Palestinian refugees, and lead to the long-delayed
independence and sovereignty of the State of Palestine,

S/PV.9174

within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in line with international law, relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): We have seen many events
unfold recently in the Middle East. On a positive note,
Japan commends the achievement of an agreement
on the Israel-Lebanon maritime boundary, as well
as the mediation efforts of the United States, as
significant and meaningful steps that will contribute
to confidence-building, reduced tensions, and
stability in the region. We are very hopeful for the
constructive engagement of the parties concerned in
the implementation of that historic agreement.
It is true, however, that the region is still faced with
a number of challenges, including the Palestinian issue,
among others. Japan reaffirms its support for the twoState solution based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. We
are pleased to hear that the leaders of both Israel and
Palestine voiced support for the two-State solution at
last month’s general debate of the General Assembly
(see A/77/PV.8 and A/77/PV.10). We are also closely
monitoring the implementation of the Algiers
declaration on the unification of Palestinians, which
was signed by the Palestinian factions, including Fatah
and Hamas, on 13 October. We hope that those efforts
will pave the way to Palestinian national reconciliation
and the holding of elections in Palestinian territories.
Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation and the growing number of casualties
in parts of the West Bank. Any further escalation of
the situation must be avoided. Japan calls on the parties
concerned to refrain from taking any provocative
actions or unilateral measures that could undermine
the prospect for a two-State solution, including Israeli
settlement activities, demolitions and evictions, which
constitute violations of international law and must
end immediately.
At a recent meeting held by Foreign Minister
Hayashi with 16 Arab Ambassadors to Japan, we
emphasized the need for the international community
to continue its support for Middle East peace so that
hope is not lost in the face of the stalled peace process.
Japan is concerned that soaring global food and
fuel prices are making life even more difficult for

22-6600927/29

S/PV.9174

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian refugees. We greatly value the indispensable
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
support of the Palestinian people. Japan has contributed
approximately $30 million to UNRWA this year,
including $6.8 million in food assistance. We maintain
our close coordination with UNRWA, including its
Commissioner-General, Mr. Lazzarini.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s unwavering
determination to contribute to peace and stability in the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate Gabon on its presidency of the
Security Council during October.
We meet today at the usual quarterly open debate
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. The dire situation remains
unchanged. More acts of aggression are being
perpetrated by occupation forces and settlers against
Palestinians in the West Bank. The sanctity of the holy
sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif is being violated. The unjust
and inhumane blockade on Gaza Strip remains in place.
That is emblematic of the plight of the Palestinian
people, who continue to languish under the occupation
without any sign of improvement or resolution of the
crisis, as the international community, including
the Security Council, remains unable to implement
international resolutions and assume full legal and
moral responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, while failing to propose any new
initiative that might break the stalemate and paralysis
blocking the path leading towards a political settlement.
The continued apartheid policy and expansion
of settlements on Palestinian territories constitute a
clear and explicit violation of resolution 2334 (2016),
which unequivocally states that the establishment
of settlements in the occupied territories is illegal.
Furthermore, the continued unilateral decisions
adopted by the occupying Power to systematically
impose a policy of fait accompli on the ground and
change the historical and legal situation of the sacred
Al-Aqua Mosque, while attempting to Judaize the holy
sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, contravene international
law and undermine any hope of achieving a just and
28/29

28/10/2022

comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question, in
line with resolutions of international legitimacy.
As recent events have shown, those practices are
exacerbating the situation on a daily basis, which raises
legitimate questions about the importance of providing
international protection to the Palestinians, especially
in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and Jerusalem.
Those events undeniably demonstrate that there is a
need for concerted efforts by all stakeholders to end
the practices of the occupier, thereby providing the
necessary environment and conditions for resuming
peace negotiations and working to address the root
causes of the conflict by ending the occupation of all
Palestinian territories.
As our country believes that a comprehensive
and just solution to the Palestinian question will
come about only as a result of a comprehensive
political settlement, Algeria, under the direct personal
supervision of President Abdelmadjid Tebboune of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, has hosted
reconciliation talks among Palestinian factions, which
culminated in the adoption of the Algiers declaration,
which was endorsed by the Secretary-General, the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and a
number of countries.
In that regard, the Algiers declaration stresses the
importance of holding elections within one year of its
signing and of Palestinian unity under the Palestine
Liberation Organization, as the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. The declaration
ensures Palestinians’ unity on the internationally
recognized terms of reference to enable our Palestinian
brothers to engage in any future negotiating process
according to a clear and shared vision.
Algeria stresses once again its firm position and
unconditional support for the brotherly Palestinian
people in their quest to enjoy their inalienable rights,
first and foremost among them the right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, together with a resolution of the issue of
Palestinian refugees. We also stress the need to preserve
the legal and historical status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
its holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In that context, we would like to emphasize that
the Arab Peace Initiative remains one of the terms
of reference for a political solution to the Palestinian
question and represents a common position to be
22-66009

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

emphasized during the upcoming Arab Summit, hosted
by Algeria next week. That will contribute to restoring
momentum to the Palestinian question, as it is a core and
central issue for Arab countries. In addition, Algeria
supports Palestine’s request for full membership
in the United Nations, which would accelerate the
process of reaching a political settlement acceptable
to all parties in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Palestinian question holds special meaning for the
peoples of the region and that its prolonged stalemate
could make the region particularly volatile and pose

S/PV.9174

a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we must address the root causes of the conflict
by ending the occupation of the Palestinian territories
and enabling the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination and to establish
their independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President (spoke in French): There are still
a number of speakers on my list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, I intend to suspend this
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

22-6600929/29
