S/PRST/2017/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 October 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8065th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 October 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Libya”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.
“In that regard, the Security Council endorses the United Nations’ Action
Plan for the resumption of an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under
the facilitation and leadership of the United Nations (UN) which was
presented by Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG),
Ghassan Salamé, at a high-level event on Libya in New York on 20 September
2017. The Council welcomes the briefing provided by H.E. Mr. Fayez Al
Sarraj, Prime Minister and President of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord (GNA), on recent political, security and
humanitarian developments in Libya. The Council reaffirms resolution 2259
(2015) and acknowledges Mr Sarraj’s important role in promoting national
reconciliation.
“The Council welcomes the SRSG’s objective to support a Libyan -led
transition that will lead to the establishment of stable, unified, representa tive
and effective governance under the framework of the Libyan Political
Agreement (LPA). The Council welcomes the swift movement to initiate this
process, specifically the meeting of delegates from the Libyan House of
Representatives and High State Council under the auspices of SRSG Salamé
which commenced on 26 September 2017. The Council looks forward to
further sequential implementation of the Action Plan ahead of the holding of
parliamentary and presidential elections within a year.
“The Security Council strongly urges all Libyans to work together in a
spirit of compromise and to engage constructively in the inclusive political
process set out in the Action Plan. The Council reiterates the importance of the
meaningful participation of women throughout the process.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the LPA remains the only viable
framework to end the Libyan political crisis and that its implementation
remains key to holding elections and finalising the political transition. The
Council encourages the Libyan parties to work quickly and cooperatively to
amend and fully implement the LPA to enable further progress set out in the
Action Plan. The Council recalls paragraph 5 of resolution 2259 (2015) and

17-17837 (E)

101017

*1717837*

S/PRST/2017/19

reaffirms that any attempt by Libyan parties to undermine the Libyan-led,
UN-facilitated political process is unacceptable.
“The Council underlines that there can be no military solution to the
crisis and reaffirms the need for all parties in Libya to exercise restraint and
refrain from any violence or actions that could undermine the UN -facilitated
process. The Council calls on all Libyans to respect the ceasefire, as called for
in the Joint Declaration issued after the meeting in Paris on 25 July 2017 .
“The Security Council welcomes recent efforts to strengthen an inclusive
political dialogue among all Libyans, including important efforts by Libya’s
neighbours, international partners and regional organizations, and stresses that
all such initiatives should be consolidated under the leadership of the UN as
called for by the UN Secretary-General and echoed by H.E. Mr. Fayez Al
Sarraj, Prime Minister and President of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord (GNA). The Council emphasise s the
imperative for all Member States to support the primacy of the UN mediation
in Libya.
“The Council also welcomes the Secretary-General’s commitment on
behalf of the UN to building stability, security and national unity in Libya, as
well as his personal engagement in support of the political process and
economic recovery.
“The Council expresses its concern at the deteriorating security,
economic and humanitarian situation in Libya, and looks forward to further
details on the UN’s plans to continue ramping up its presence in Libya as well
as plans for a new round of voluntary funding for the United Nations
Stabilization Facility for Libya (SFL) and recommendations to increase
strategic coordination of UNSMIL and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in Libya.
“The Security Council further welcomes the SRSG’s commitment, on
behalf of the UN country team to intensify the UN’s work on the ground to
help improve the living conditions of all people in Libya, including migrants.
“The Security Council expresses concern over the threat of terrorism and
trafficking in persons and illicit goods which risk undermining Libya’s
democratic transition. In this regard, the Council reiterates the need for unified
and strengthened national security forces, under a unified, civilian
government. The Council reiterates that all parties must comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and international human
rights law as applicable.
“The Council welcomes the Libyan-led efforts in fighting the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) and other
individuals and groups on the United Nations ISIL (Da’esh) and Al Qaida
sanctions list in Libya. The Council urges all Libyans to unite in their fight
against terrorism.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to monitor progress on the
implementation of the UN’s Action Plan, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to provide such updates in his reporting in line with
resolution 2376 (2017).”

2/2

17-17837
