933

9 novembre 1946

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

almost inseparable. But it seems to me that, in
the course of the present meeting, a possible solution has become apparent, which might satisfy
both those who are primarily concerned with
the legal aspect, and those who regard the politi-:cal aspect as the most important; that is, that
we should adopt the procedure of referring these
questions to a ,joint committee, as we have decided to do with one of the other items on our
agenda.
I believe that we could do the same with the
Cuban proposal, referring it to a joint Committee composed of members of both the Legal and
Political Committees. It seems to me that the
Assembly might well agree to such a procedure.

et l'aspect juridique sont a peu prcs inextricables.
Mais il me semble qu'a precisement surgi au
cours de la presente seance une solution capable
de satisfaire a la fois ceux qui, dans une question, considerent surtout l'aspect juridique et
ceux qui voient surtout l'aspect politique: c'est
le procede de la Commission mixte a laquelle
nous avons decide de renvoyer une des questions
inscrites a notre ordre du jour.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Item 31 on the agenda has been referred to a
joint committee, because one delegation presented a legal objection concerning it. I do
not wish to oppose a compromise, but I do not
consider it a good method to refer a question
for consideration to a joint committee, which
means a committee composed not of 51 members
but of 102, which is liable to complicate the
discussions.
Therefore it is my view that the General
Committee is right in its proposal to refer the
suggestion regarding Article 27 of the Charter
to the First Committee; however, I will consult
the Assembly on the Cuban delegation's proposal, namely, that the question be referred to a
joint committee composed of members of the
First and Sixth Committees.

Le PRESIDENT: Le point 31 de l'ordre du jour
a ete renvoye a une commission mixte, parce
qu'une delt~gation avait presente une objection
prejudicielle d'ordre juridique. Je ne voudrais
pas m'opposer a un compromis, mais je ne pense
pas qu'il soit de bonne nlt~thode de renvoyer
I'etude d'un probleme a une commission nTIxte,
qui sera alors composee non plus de 51 membres,
mais de 102, ce qui est de nature a compliquer
Ies discussions.
Pour ce ~otif, je pense que le Bureau a eu
raison de renvoyer a la Premiere Commission les
propositions relatives a l'Article 27 de la Charte;
mais je vais cependant consulter l'Assemblee sur
la proposition de la delegation cubaine. La
proposition de la delegation cubaine consiste a
renvoyer la question devant une commission
mixte composee des membres de la Premiere et
de la Sixieme Commission.
Jemets cette proposition aux voix.
Decision: La proposition est rejetee par
dix-huit voix contre onze.
.
Le PRESIDENT: Y a-t-iI d'autres observations
sur la repartition des points de l'ordre du jour
entre les commissions?
Decision: La repartition des points de l'ordre
du jour est adojJtee conformement aux propositions du Bureau.
La seance est levee 17 h. 15.

I put that proposal to the vote.
The proposal was defeated by
eighteen votes to eleven.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Are there any further remarks on the allocation
of agenda items to Committees?
Decision: T he allocation of agenda items
proposed by the General Committee was
adopted.

Decision:

Je crois done que l'on pourrait donner le
meme sort a la proposition cubaine en la renvoyant a une Commission mixte composee des
membres de la Commission juridique et des
membres de la Commission politique. Il me
semble q ne l'Assernblee pourrait accepter une
teIle procedure.

a

The meeting rose at 5:15 p.m.

FORTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEE'rlNG
Held on Saturday, 9 November I946,at 11 a.m.

QUARANTE·SEPTIEME SEANCE PLENIERE
Tenue le samedi 9 novembre 1946,

a11 heures.

TABLE DES MATIERES

CONTENTS
Pag~

103. Admission of Afghanistan, Iceland and
Sweden to membership in the United
Nations: report of the First Committee:
Resolution
934
104. Notification from the Secretary-General
pursuant to Article 12, paragraph 2 of
the Charter
, 943
105.·Requests for the inclusion of Supplementary I terns in the Agenda: report
of the General Committee . . . . . . . . .. .. 943
106. Terms of Office of Members elected to
the Councils: report of the Sixth Committee: resolution .......•.......... , 964President: Mr. P.-H. ,SPAAK (Belgium).

.

Pages

103. Admission de l'Mghanistan, de l'Islande
et de la Suede comme. Meinbres de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Rapport
de la Premiere Commission. Resolution .. 934
104. Notification du Secretaire general conformement au paragraphe 2 de l'Ar, 943
ticle 12 de laCharte
105. Demandes d'inscription de nouvelles
questions a l'ordre du jour. Rapport du
Bureau
943
106. Dun~e du mandat des Membres elus aux
Conseils. Rapport de la Sixieme Commission Resolution
, 964
President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

934

103. Admission of Afghanistan, Iceland
and Sweden to Membership in the
United Nations: report of the First
Committee:
resoluHon (document
A/1791
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item on the agenda is the report of the
First Committee on the admission to the United
Nations of Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden.
I call upon Mr. Viteri Lafronte, representative
of Ecuador, Rapporteur of the First Committee.
Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador), Rapporteur: The First Committee submits to the General Assembly the fonowing report and resolution:
The General Assembly, at its forty-sixth meeting, held on Thursday, 31 October 1946, decided
to refer to the First Committee the special report
. by the Security Council to the General Assembly
on the admission of new Members, for consideration and report (document All 08) ..
The .First Committee, while continuing to
dic;cuss the report, at its twelfth meeting held
on 2' November 1946, approved unanimously
the recommendations of the Security Council
to the General Assembly that Afghanistan, the
Republic of Iceland and Sweden be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.
The First Committee consequently recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the following resolution:
"The General Assembly has taken note:
"Of the applications for membership submitted to the Organization of the United
Nations by Afghanistan, the Republic of Iceland, and Sweden,
"And of the recommendations of the Security Council on the admission of Afghanistan,
the Republic of Iceland and Sweden to membership in the United Nations,
"And of the report submitted by the First
Committee which unanimously approved· the
recommendations of the Security Council;

('Therefore the General Assembly decides:
"That Afghanistan, the Republic of Iceland
and Sweden be admitted to membership in
the United Nations."
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Kauffman, representative of
Denmark.

103. Admission de I'Afghanistan, de
l'ls!ande et de la Suede comme Membres de l'Orsanisation des Nations
Unies. Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Resolution (document AI 179)
Le PRESIDENT: Le premier point a l' ordre du
jour est le rapport de la Premiere Commission
sur 1'admission de l'Afghanistan, de l'Islande et
de la Suede all sein des Nations Unies.
Je donne la parole a M. Viteri Lafronte,
representant de l'Equateur, Rapporteur de la
Premiere Commission.
M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur), Rapporteur: La Premiere Commission soumet a l' Assemblee generale le rapport et la resolution
suivants:
L'Assemblee generale avait decide, au CaUl'S
de sa quarante-sixieme seance, tenue le jeudi
31 octobre 1946" de renvoyer a la Premiere
Commission, pour etude et rapport, le rapport
special sur l'admission de nouveaux Mcmbres
qui lui avait ete ac\resse par le Conseil de securite (document AI 108) .
La Premiere Commission, tout en poursuivant
la discussion du rapport, en sa d6uzieme seance,
le 2 novembre 1946, a unanimement approuve
les recommandations du Conseil de securite a
l'AssembIee generale en faveur de l'admission de
l'Afghanistan, de la Republique d'Islande et de
la Suede comme Membres des Nations Unies.
En consequence, la Premiere Commission recommande al'AssembIee generale d'adopter la
resolution suivante:
"L'Assemblee generale a pris note:
"Des demandes d'admission adressees a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies par l'Afghanistan, la Republique d'Islande et la
Suede,
"Et des recommandations du Conscil de
securite sur l'admission de l'Afghanistan, de
la Republique d'Islande et de la Suede con-nne
Membres des Nations Unies,
"Et du rapport soumis par la Premiere
Commission qui a unanimement approuve les
recommandations du Conseil de securite.

"Pour ces motifs, l'AssembUe gin-hale
decide:
"Que l'Afghanistan, la Republique d'Islande et la Suede seront admis comme Membres des Nations Unies."
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole it M. KaufIman, representant du Danemark.

Mr. KAUFFMAN (Denmark): In the someM. KAUFFMAN (Danemark) (traduit de ranwhat prolonged discussion wc had in the First glais): Au cours de la discussion assez longue
Committee, the delegation of Denmark made qui a eu lieu a la Premiere Commission, la deleonly very brief remarks. We did so with one aim, gation du Danemark s'est contentee de tres
to see whether we could make a contribution to breves observations, et son unique preoccupation
arriving at unanimity. As long as there was a toujours ete de chercher a contribuer a la.
unanimous agreement amongst us on the prin- realisation de l'unanimite. Puisqne tous les
cipal question-the question of the admission of Membres de la Commission etaient d'accord sur
the three countries, A£ghanistan~ Iceland, and la question principale-celle de l'admission des
Sweden---,-we. strongly felt it was desirable that trois pays: Afghanistan, Islande et Suede-la
our report should be unanimous. And we feel delegation danoise avait la conviction qu'il etait

,

9 novembre 1946

935

strongly that it would be desirable if the Assembly could arrive at a unanimous decision.

Quarante-septieme seance pleni're

It is with t11i:; aim in view that the delegation
of Denmark would like to suggest, as a possible
means of arriving at unanimous agreement, a
drafting amendment to the draft resolution we
have before us.
The drafting amendment that we suggest for
the consideration of this Assembly would simply
be the insertion of a few words in the first paragraph of the draft resolution. After the words:
"The General Assembly has taken note of the
applications for membership submitted to the
Organization of the United Nations," we propose the insertion of the following words: "in
accordance "with Article 4 of the Charter and
rules 113 and 114· of the rules of procedure".
You will see that this drafting amendment is
one that has already been discussed in the Committee. VV c are familiar with it. I place it before
you in the hope that it may'help us in arriving at
unanimity in this decision, and in promoting the
good feeling to which we all aspir"e in the future
work of this Assembly.

souhaitable que le rapport de la Commission fUt
unanime. Elle est persuadee aussi qu'il est desirable que l'AssembIee prenne une decision unanime en cette maticre.
En vue d'aider l'Assemblee a y parvenir, la
delegation danoise sugg'ere d'apporter au projet
de resolution dont la Commission est saisie une
modification de red action susceptible de per~
mettre de realiser un accord unanime.
La modification que nous sonmettons a l'examen de l' AssembIee consisterait simplement a
ajouter quelques mots an projet de resolution.
Il s'ag-irait d'inserer, dans le premier paragraphe,
apres les mots: "1.' Assemblee generale a pris
note des dcmandcs d'admission adressees a 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies," les mots suivants:
"conformcrncnt aux dispositions de l' Article 4
de la Charte et des articles 113 et 114 du regIemcnt intericl1f de l'Ar,semblec".
Cette modification de redaction, comme on le
constatera, a deja ete discntee a 1'1 Commission.
Ce texte est donc connu. Je vous le soumets dans
l'espoir qu'il nous aidera a prendre une decision
unanime et qu'il cn~era l'atmosphere de bonne
entente que nous desirons tous voir regner dans
les travaux futurs de I' Assemblee.

Mr. VAN KLEFFE,NS (Netherlands): I second
the motion on behalf of the Netherlands delegation.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
fanglais): J'appuic cetteproposition au 110mde
la delegation des Pays-Bas.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Morgenstierne, representative of
Norway.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. MOTgenstierne, representant de la Norvege.

Mr. MORGENSTIERNE (Norway): I would
like to associate myself with what was just said
by my colleague from Denmark and support the
amendment suggested by him. We are about
to vote, I trust unanimously, to admit three new
States to the United Nations: Afghanistan, Iceland, and Sweden. The Security Council has
unanimously recommended that they be admitted, thereby signifying that the Council
considers these three countries as peace-loving
States which accept the obligations of the Char~
ter and are able and willing to carry out those
obligations.
We heartily welcome all three States. Two of
them, Iceland and Sweden, are closely related
to my country by ties of common cultural tracl1tions and long historic associations. The Norwegian delegation, therefore, is particularly
happy that these two States should be among th~
first to be admitted to the United Nations under
Article 4 of the Charter. We feel it essential
that the United Nations should aim at including
among its Members all States which stand for
those ideals of peace, democracy and human
rights which have inspired the Charter.

M. MORGENSTIERNE (Norvege) (tTaduit de
Fanglais): Je m'associe aux declarations que
vient de faire le representant du Danemark et
j'appuie l'amendement qu'il a propose. L'Assemblee est sur le point de voter, a l'unanimite
je l'espere, l'admission de trois nouveaux Membres dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies, celle
de l'Afghanistan, l'Islande et de la Suede. Le
Conseil de securite a recommande a l'unanimite
de les admettre, montrant ainsi qu'il estime que
ces trois Etats sont des Etats pacifiques qui acceptent 1es obligations de la Charte, sont capables de les remplir et dispose.'> a le faire.
Nous accueillons cordialement ces trois Etats.
Deux d'entre eux, l'Islande et la Suede, scnt
ctroitement unis a la Norvege par les liens d'une
tradition culturelle commune et d'une longue
a~sociation historique.
La delegation nOTvegielIDe est done particulicrement heureuse que
ces deux Etats soient panni les premiers a etre
admis comme JV[embres des Nations Unies en
vertu de l'Article 4 de la Charte. Elle estime
qu'il y a un interet primordial a ce que les Nations Unies tenderit a reunir tous les Etats qui
sontattaches a un ideal de paix, ala democratie
et aux droits de l'homme qui ont inspire la
Charte.
Bien que, pour des raisons differentes, ni
l'Islande, ni la Suede, n'aient participe a notre
lutte commune contre les Puissances de l'Axe,
nous savons qu'elles sont en mesure d'apporter
une contribution tres pnkieuse a l'effort que
nous accomplissons en commun pour edifier un

Although, for different reasons, neither Iceland nor Sweden were in our common war
against the Axis Powers, we know that they have
a very valuable contribution to make to our common efforts to build a world at peace, where all
human beings will have a chance to enjoy the

9 November 1946

936

monde pacifique dans lequel tous les etres humains pourront jouir des quatre libertes fond amentales. Les pays nordiques n'ont jarnais forme
de bloc, ne le font pas davantage aujourd'hui et
n'ont nullement l'ambition de le faire. Nous
sommes convaincus que l'admission de ces deux
Etats, attaches a la Norvege par des liens de
race' particulierement etroits, ainsi que par
leur situation geographique et par la communaute d'ideal, renforcera de la fa~on la plus
heureuse l' Organisation des Nations U ni es et
notre effort commun tendant a fonder l'unite
du monde.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
1 call upon Mr. Entezam, representative of Iran.
Mr.ENTEz'AM (Iran) (translated' from
French) : I have come to this rostrum to support very warmly the proposal concernin$ the
admission to the United Nations of AfghanIStan,
Iceland and Sweden.
We are happy to be considering three countries whose devotion to the cause of peace no one
doubts. Two of these countries have been members of another international organization, the
League of Nations. They loyally fulfilled all the
obligations imposed on them by the Covenant,
and this is the best guarantee of their future
collaboration with us.
I fear no contradiction in affirming that, from
the very first, the ideal we have all shared is to
see the United Nations become universal. That
is why every advance made in this direction will
be welcomed by my Government.
We are particularly glad that, among these
three States, we see Afghanistan, with which my
country has more than one link of friendship.
We are not only neighbours, we are also of the
same race, we speak the same language and
practise the same religion. We know, moreover,
that Afghanistan is a truly peace-loving country,
always anxious to fulfil hcr international obligations. Therefore, on behalf of my Government, I
sincerely welcome this country to our community.
,

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Entezam, representant de l'Iran.
M. ENTEZAM (Iran): Je suis monte a cette
tribune pour appuyer tres chaleureusement la
proposition concernant l' admission, aU sein de
l' Organisation des Nations U nies, de l'Afghanistan, de la Republique d'Islande et de la Suede.
Nous sommes tres heureux qu'il' s'agisse de
trois pays dont l'attachement a la cause de la
paix ne fait de doute, pour personne. Deux de
ces pays ont ete membres d'une autre organisation internaticinale, la Societe des Nations. lIs
y ont rempli avec loyaute toutes' les obligations
qu'ils avaient assumees par le Pacte. C'est la
meilleure garantie de leur collaboration future
avec nous.
Je ne, crains aucun dementi quand j'affirme
que, des le premier jour, notre ideal, a tous, a
ete de voir 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
devenir universelle. C'est pourquoi chaque
prog~es qui sera fait dans cette voie sera salue
par mon Gouvernement.
Nous eprouvons une joie toute particuliere a
voir, parmi ces trois Etats, l'Afghanistan, avec
lequel mon pays a plus d'un lien d'am.itie.
Non seulement il s'agit d'un voisin, mais nous
sommes issus de la meme race, nous parlons la
meme langue et nous pratiquons la meme
religion. Nous savons, en outre, que l'Afghanistan est un pays vraiment pacifique et soucieux
de toujours remplir ses obligations internationales. C'est pour cette raison qu'au nom de
mon Gouvernement, je souhaite tres sincerement
a ce pays la bienvenue au sein de notre communaute.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Slavik, representative of Czechoslovakia.
'

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Slavik, representant de la Tchecoslovaquie.

Mr.SLAVIK (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslovak delegation was prepared to propose the
same amendment as was moved by the representative of Denmark. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation supports strongly, very strongly,
this amendment.
.
We are voting for the first time in the General
Assembly and it is very important indeed that
we show unanimity. Such an attitude would
create a friendly atmosphere in the Assembly
and would promote the confidence of public
opinion in the United Nations and its organs.

M. SLAVIK (Tchecoslovaquie) (traduit de
l'anglais): La deIegation de la Tchecoslovaquie
avait l'intention de proposer le meme amendement que celui que presente le representant du
Danemark; aussi rappuie-t-elle tres chaleureusement.
C'est la premiere fois que l'Assemblee generale
procede
un vote et il est tres important que
ce vote soit unanime. Un telle attitude creerait
au sein de l'Assemblee une atmosphere amicale
et accroltrait la confiance de l'opinion publique
en les Nations U nies et leurs organes.

, The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There are only two more representatives who

Le PRESIDENT: Nous entendrons maintenant
deux autres representants qui ont detnande la

a

9 novembre 1946

937

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

have asked to speak and, since we are all ill
agreement, I propose to close the list.
I call upon Mr. Kauffman, representative of
Denmark.

parole, et puisque nous sommes tous d' accord,
nous nous arreterons HI..
Je donne la parole a M. Kauffman, representant du Danemark.

Mr. KAuFFMAN (Denmark): I understand
we are about to vote. The Danish delegation is
happy to see that we all appear to be agreed.
Various countries have said a word of welcome,
and the delegation of Denmark would lik~ to do
the same. We would like very warmly to welcome Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden into our
community.

M. KAUFFMAN (Danemark) (traduit de l'anglais): J e crois comprendre que nous allons
proceder au vote. Nous sommes heureux de
constater que nous semblons .etre tous d'accord.
Diverses delegations ont prononce des paroles
de bienvenue et la delegation du Danemark
desirerait faire de meme. Nous voulons, nous
aussi,
saluer' cordialement
l'Afghanistan,
l'Islande et la Suede qui entrent dans notre
communaute de nations.
L'Islande et la Suede sont des pays avec
lesquels le Danemark a des attaches particulierement etroites. Jusqu'a la date recente ou la
constitution islandaise a 6te modifiee, le Danemark et l'Islande etaient deux monarchies unies
sous l'autorite du meme roi. Ce lien n'existe
plus, mais d'autres liens, de parente et d'amitie,
continuent d'unir les deux peuples. Ces liens sont
etroits et puissants, ils le demeureront. Pour ma
part, je crois que ces liens ne pounont que se
resserrer et se renforcer.
Autrefois, la Suedeetait reunie, avec le Danemark et la Norvege, notre nation sa:ur, sous une
meme couronne. Aujourd'hui, il n'y a plus entre
nos pays de liens constitutionnels, mais l'amitie
qui unit nos peuples est beaucoup plus profonde encore que jadis. Comme vousle savez,
le Danernark et la Norvege ant ete envahis par
les armees allemandes, au cours d'une meme
journee d'avril 1940. Cinq longues annees de
domination nazie nous ont enseigne la camaraderie' entre Danois et Norvegiens les sentiments·
de f:atemite sont devenus plus forts qu'ils ne
l'avaient jamais ete au cours de notre histoire.
Pendant les annees ou le Danemark a ete prive
de. sa liberte et isoIe de ses amis, la Suede a ete
pour luicomme une fenetre suverte sur un
monde libre. La Suede nous a aides de plus
d'une maniere et dqns une mesure plus grande
qu'on ne le pense communement. Danois et
Danoises se souviendront toujours avec reconnaissance de la main secourable que leurs freres
et sa:urs de Suede leur ont tendue par-dessus les
caux du Sund.
La delegation danoise est tres heureuse c~e
souhaiter cordiaIement la bienvenue a nos amlS
d'Islande et de Suede.·

Iceland and Sweden are countries with which
Denmark has particularly close ties. Until the
recent changes in Iceland's Constitution, Denmark and Iceland were two monarchies under
one and the same King. This tie between our
two countries no longer exists, but ties of kinship, ties of friendship unite our two peoples.
These ties are close and strong. They will remain so in the future. I, for one, believe they
will grow even closer and stronger.
Centuries ago, Sweden was united with Denmark and our brother nation Norway under
the same Crown. Now, no constitutional ties
bind us, but the friendship between our peoples
is far more intimate than in days of old. As
you will recall, on the same day of April 1940,
Denmark and Norway were invaded by German forces. Five long years under Nazi domination taught us a comradeship and created feelings of brotherhood between Danes and Norwegians greater than ever before in our history.
During the years in which Denmark was deprived of her freedom and we were cut off from
our friends, Sweden was the window of a free
world. We received help from Sweden in more
>,,Tays than one, and to a larger extent than is
usually known. Men and women 9f .Denmark
will always gratefully remember the helping
hands our Swedish brothers and sisters held out
to us across the waters of the Sound.
The Danish delegation is very happy indeed
to welcome our friends from Iceland and
Sweden.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Wellington Koo, representative
of China.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Wel~
lington Koo, representant de la Chine.

Mr. Wellington Koo (China): I rise to
speak very briefly to support the amendment
moved by the representative of Denmark and
supported already by several other delegations.
I do so all the more earnestly because we en-.
tirely associate ourselves with the spirit in which
the amendment has been moved. .
So far as the recommendation to admit the
three States is concerned, there was a sentiment
in the First Committee in favour of such admission,. and the Chinese delegation declared itself
as being heartily in favour of admission. But, as

M. Wellington Koo (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais dire quelques mots tres brefs en
faveur de l'amendement propose par le representant du Danemark et deja appuye par plusieurs
autres delegations. Je le fais avec d'autant plus
d'empressement que nous nous associons entierement a l'intention qui a inspire cet amendement.
En ce qui conceme la recommandation tendant a admettre les trois Etats dont il s'agit, la
Premiere Commission inclinait pour l'affirmative, et la delegation chinoise a declare partager
de tout creur ce sentiment. Mais, pour cc qui est

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

938

regards the wording of the proposed resolution which is now before the Assembly, there
was some hesitation and some doubt on the part
of a number of delegations; including our own,
who felt that the wording might perhaps' be
improved upon.
A happy formula has been found by the
Danish delegation. We think it would help to
remove any hesitation which may have been
entertained by other delegations. In reality) it
does no more than merely refer to a fact; namely,
that the applications have been submitted in
in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter and
in accordance with the rules of procedure. I
think it would help greatly to remove any possible hesitation on the part of other delegations
and would enable all the representatives here to
vote unanimously in favour of the admission of
these three States.
I think this is the. first time that the General
A,>sembly has been called upon to consummate
such a happy act, and I think it would be most
desirable if we could make a genuine demonstration of unanimity on the part of this Assembly in
admitting these three States.
I also wish to express the hope that, since this
amendment has been supported so widely and
can presumably give no cause for further hesitation on the part of one d~legation or another, the
Assembly will proceed to take formal action on
this amendment without, perhaps, engaging in a
long debate.
, !,

9 November 1946

de la redaction du projet de resolution dont
l'Assemblee est actuellement saisie, un certain
nombre de delegations; y compris la notre, ant
manifeste quelque hesitation car eUes pensaient
que l'on pourrait peut-ctre l'ameliorer.
La delegation du Danemark a trouve une
fm'mnle heureuse et propre, selon nous, a lever
tontes les hesitations que pourraient encore
eprouver d'autres delegations. En realite, cette
formule se borne a rappeler un fait, a savoir
que les demandes d'admission ont ete presentees
conformement a l'Article 4 de la Charte et au
reglement interieur. J'estime que cette formule
est de nature a aider puissamment a lever toute
hesitation de la part des autres delegations, et
a permettrc aux delegues ici presents de voter a
l'unanimite en faveur de l'admission de ces trois
etats.
Il me semble que c'est la premiere fois que
I'Assemblce generale est appelee a accomplir un
acte aussi heureux, et il serait, je crois, eminemment souhaitable que ce vote soit un temoignage
authentique de ses sentiments d'unanimite it
l'egard de l'admission de ces trois Etats.
Je voudrais aussi exprimer l' espoir que,
puisque cet amendement a re~u l'appui d'un si
grand nombre de Meinbres, et que, probablement, il ne peut plus faire nai:tre d'hesitation
dans l'esprit d'aucun representant, l'AssemblCe
puisse prendre une decision formdle relativement
acet amendement, sans peut-ctre s'engager dans
une longue discussion.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Arce, representative of Argentina.

Le PRESIDENT; Je donne la parole a M. Arce,
representant de l'Argentine.

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): The Argentine delegation was suspected of wishing to modify the U nited Nations
Charter when it proposed, defended and carried
to success the amendment which has been approved by the Political Committee and embodied
in the draft resolution now before the General
Assembly.
.
This suspicion has persisted, in spite of a categorical statement which I made in the said Committee for the express purpose of dispelling it. I
declared on that occasion, on behalf of the
Argentine delegation, that the proposed amendment neither aimed at modifying the Charter nor
had any connexion with the well-known attitude
maintained by the Australian delegation in regard to the admission of new Members. But all
was in vain.
In the case of those colleagues who adopted so
intolerant an attitude, in spite of the clearness of
the amendment and of the subsequent explanatory statement made in support of it, I find that
the appeal which I made in the general discussion, that we should work in a broad-minded
f.pirit in order to maintain that cordiality which
is the duty of us all, has failed in its effect. And
it would seem superfluous-I mean in regard to
these same colleagues-to adopt a conciliatory
attitude which either would not be understood
if it were understood, would not be apprecIated.

M. ARcE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol): La delegation argentine a ete soupcon-

0:,

nee de vouloir modifier la Charte des Nations
Unies, 10rsqu'eUe a propose, de£endu, et fait
triompher l'amendement que la Commission
politique a approuve et' qui a ete integre au
projet de resolution que l'Assemblee examine
actuellement.
Ce soup~on n'a pas disparu, bien que j'aie
tente de le dissiper par une declaration categorique devant la Commission. J'ai, en effet,
declare, au nom de· la delegation argentine,
que l'amendement propose ne tendait pas a
modifier la Charte, et n'avait aucun rapport non
plus avec l'attitude bien connue de la delegation
australienne en ce qui concerne l'admission de
nouveaux Membres. Cela n'a servi a rien.
Quand je vois certains de mes coUegues adopter une attitude aussi intolerante, en depit de la
clarte de l'amendement et du commentaire dont
je l'ai appuye par la suite, je comprends que
l'invitation que j'ai adressee a tous, au cours du
debat general, n'a eu aucun' efIet, quand j'ai
demande que nous fassions preuve de largeur
d'esprit afin de maintenir, comme nous le devons, la cordialite entre nous. Et i1 paraitrait
superflu, s'il ne s'agissait que de ces mcmes collegues, d'adopter une attitude conciliante, puisque cette attitude n'est pas comprise ou que, si
dIe est comprise, dIe ri'est pas appreciee.

9 novembre 1946

939

I thus find myself obliged to repeat to the
General Assembly that the Argentine delegation
had no hidden intent in proposing the amendment to which I refer: its sole purpose was to
improve the text of the resolution and clearly to
establish three definite and unquestionable facts,
keeping strictly to the provisions of the Charter.
These three facts are:

Quarante-septieme seance pteniere

Cela m'oblige a repeter devant l'Assemblee
generale que la delegation de l'Argentine n'a eu
aucune intention cachee lorsqu'elle a propose
l'amendement auque1 je fais allusion; eUe a
uniquement cherche a ameliorer le texte de la
resolution et a prendre acte de trois faits certains et incontestables) toujours de fa~on strictement conforme aux dispositions de la Charte.
Ces trois faits sont les suivants:
1) L'Afghanistan, la Suede et l'Islande ont
demande a etre admis dans l'Organisation des
Nations Unies;
2) Le Conseil de securite a donne un avis favorable a ces trois demandes;
3) Il appartient maintenant a l'AssembIee
generale de decider si ces trois Etats seront ou
non admis dans notre Organisation.

(1) That Afghanistan, Sweden and Iceland
have applied for membership of the United
Nations;
(2) That the Security Council has approved
the three applications;
(3) That it is now the duty of the General
Assembly to decide whether or no these three
States shall become Members of our Organization.
Allow me to explain the procedure for the
Permettez-moi maintenant d'analyser, a la
admission of Members according to the provi- lumiere des dispositions de la Charte, la procesions of the Charter.
dure d'adrnission des nouveaux Membres.
Countries desirous of becoming Members of
Les pays qui desirent faire partie des Nations
the United Nations must apply to the Organiza- Unies doivent s'adresser a l'Organisation meme,
tion itself, not to anyone of its organs.
et non pas a un de ses organes.
Aux yeux de toutes les nations du monde,
The representative of the Organization, to
whom all nations, whether Members of the qu'ellesappartiennent ou non aux Nations
United Nations or not, should address themselves Unies, le representant de l'Organisation est le
is the Secretary-General. Applications should Secretaire general. Pour cetteraison, les detherefore be addressed to Mr. Trygve Lie. Is mandes doivent 2tre adressees aM. Trygve Lie.
this con'ect or not? It is, of course correct. En est-il ainsi ou non? Il en est ainsi. Or,
Well-the approved mnendment confines itself l'amendement approuve se borne a rappeler,
to affirming this fact in the operative part of the dans le corps de la resolution, cc fait que l'Afresolution, namely, that Afghanistan, Iceland ghanistan, l'Islande et la Suede se sont adresses
and Sweeden applied to the United Nations a l'Organisation des Nations Unies par l'interthrough the Secretary-General who, I repeat, is mediaire du Secretariat general qui, je le repete,
the intennediary through whom the world com- est, en effet, l'organe par l'intermediaire duquel
municates with the United Nations and the le monde communique avec les Nations Unies,
United Nations with the world.
et les Nations Unies avec le monde.
La demande adressee au Secl'etaire general
Presentation of an application to' the Secreconstitue
la premiere ctape de la procedure d'adtary-General is the initial step in the procedure
mission
des
nouveaux Membres. Sans elle, cette
for the admission of new Members. In default
of such application the preliminary steps cannot procedure ne pourrait commencer. Cctte debe taken. Applications are presented in pursu- mande se fait selon les dispositions du paraance of Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter, graphe 1 de l'Article 4 de la Charte, qui stipule
which states that membership in the United que l'admission dans l'Organisation des Nations
Nations is open to all peace-loving States which Unies est ouverte a tous les Etats pacifiques qui
accept the obligations contained in the Charter. acceptel1t les obligations de la Charte. Quand
Upon receipt of an application for membership dIe est saisie d'une demande d'admission, notre
our Organization is officially seized of the request Organisation se trouve officiellement informee
of the applicant State, and by virtue of this re- du desir de l'Etat qui l'a presentee et, se conquest the Secretary-General sends the application formant a ce desir, le Secretaire general transto the Security Council for decision, in accord- met la demande au Conseilde securitepour que
ance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter, celui-ci se prononce a ce sujet, conformement
which states that the admission of any State au paragraphe 2 de l'Article 4 de la. Charte,
to membership in the United Nations will be lequel stipule que l'admission se fait par decision
effected by a decision of the General Assem- de l'Assemb!ee generale sur recommandati0!1
bly 'upon the recommendation of the Security du Conseil de securite.
Council.
The Security Council approved the applicaLe Conseil de securite s'est prononre favotions of Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden; thus, . rablement sur les demandes d'admission de l'Afthe second step in the procedure of admission of ghanistan, de l'Islande et de la Suede; et ainsi,
new States was completed.
la deuxieme etape de la procedure d'admission
de ces nouveaux Etats a ete franchie.
U ne fois que le Conseil de securite s'est proThe Security Council having stated its opinion, the application has then to be submitted to nonce sur la question, la demande d'admission
the General Assembly for decision, in accordance doit etre soumise a la decision de l'Assemblee
with Article 4, paragraph 2, and Article 18, generale, conformement au paragraphe 2 de

Forty-seventh Plenary· Meeting

940

9 November 1946

paragraph 2, of the Charter. To this. end, the 1'Article 4, et au paragraphe 2 de l'Artic1e 1~
First Committee of the Assembly, havmg taken de la. Charte. A cet dfet, la Premiere Commisnote of the applications for membership from the sion de cette Assemblee, apres avoir pris acte de
three above-mentioned countries and of the opin- la demande d'admission des trois pays deja menion of the Security Council, approved a draft tionnes et de la decision du Conseil de securite,
resolution which is the one now before the a approuve le projet de resolution, maintenant
Assembly: requesting the Assembly to decide, in soumis a 1'examen de l'Assemblee, lequel deaccordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of the mande a 1'Assemblee de decider, conformement
Charter whether or no these countries should au paragraphe 2 de l' Article 4 de la Charte, si
be admitted to membership of the United Na- ces pays doivent etie admis ou non dans l'Orgations. When the Assembly's decision is made, the nisation des Nations Unies. Une fois ceti'e decithird step in the procedure for admission, to sion prise, la 'troisieme etape de la procedure
which I have referred, will by completed.
dont je viens de parler se trouvera franchie.
Comme on le comprend facilement, l'organe
Obviously, the United Nations organ which
des
Nations Unies qui decidera de l'admission ou
decides upon the admission or non-admission
of a country must be the one to vote the final de ,la non-admission doit etre ce1ui qui vote la
resolution. In this case the organ is the General resolution definitive. Dans ce cas, cet organe est
l'Assemblee generale.
Assembly.
Apres ces considerations juridiques et de fait,
Now that we have considered the law and
voyons
maintenant ce que dit la resolution.
the facts of the case, let us see what the resolution says. It says: "The General Assembly has Cette resolution est ainsi con<;ue: "L'Assem.taken note of the applications for membership blee generale a pris note des demandes d'admissubmitted to the Organization of the United sion adressees a 1'Organisation des Nations
Nations . . . by Afghanistan, the Republic of Unies . . . par 1'Afghanistan, la Republique
Iceland and Sweden" (first step in the proce- d'Islande et la Suede" (premiere etape de la
dure); "and of the recommendations of the procedure); "et aussi des recommandations
Security Council on the admission of these three du Conseil de securite sur l'admission" de ces
countries" (second step in the procedure); ('and trois pays (deuxieme etape de la procedure);
of the report submitted by the First Committee et "du rapport soumis par la Premiere COlnwhich approved unanimously the recommenda- mission qui a unanimement approuve les
tions of the Security Council. Therefore, the recommandations du Conseil de sccurite. Pour
General Assembly decides that Afghanistan, the ces motifs, l'Assemblee generale decide que
Republic of Iceland and· Sweden be admitted l'Afghanistan, la Republique d'Islande et la
to membership in the United Nations." When Suede seront admis comme Membres des Nathis resolution is passed, the third and final step tions Unies". Une fois que cette resolution sera
votee, la troisieme et derniere etape de la proin the procedure will have been completed.
cedure sera franchie.
OU voyez-vous dans tout ce1a une violation
Where, in all this, is there any infringement or
alteration of the Charter? Is it correct or not ou une alteration de la Charte? Est-il exact ou
that the General Assembly has taken note of the non que l' Assemblee generale a pris acte des
. applications of Afghanistan, Iceland and demandes de l'Afghanistan, de 1'Islande et de la
Sweden? Is it correct or not that the Assembly Suede? Est-il exact ou non que l'Assemblee a
has taken note of the opinion of the Security prisacte de la decision du Conseil? Est-il exact
Council? Is it correct or not that the Assembly ou non que l'Assemblee doit decider maintenant
is now required to decide whether it will admit si elle accepte ces trois Etats comme Membres de
these three States a~ Members of the United Na- l'Organisation des Nations Unies? Oui, tout ceci
tions? Yes-all this is correct, and therefore I est certain et c'est pourquoi je crois que l'Assemconsider it right that the General Assembly blee generale ferait bien d'approuver la resolushould approve the resolution submitted by its tion redigee par sa Commission politique; m.ais,
Political Committee; but in order to show that pour montrer que la delegation de l'Argentine
the Argentine delegation is open to conciliatory accueille les propositions de conciliation, je desuggestions, I wish to state on behalf of my dele- clare, au nom de ma delegation, que nous votegation thafwe shall vote in favour of the amend- rons l'addition proposee par la delegation du
ment proposed by the Danish delegation.
Danemark.
'
I merely wish to note that the Charter laid
Je veux seulement prendre acte du fait que la
gown the unanimity rule for the Security Coun- Charte. n'a etabli la regIe de 1'unanimite que
cil .solely in regard to matters concerning the p~ur le C01.1seil de securite, et en ce qui concerne
mamtenance of peace and the prevention of le maintien de la paix et la prevention de la
war; it did not establish this rule for other guerre, mais non pas pour les autres questions.
matters. Personally, I am against the unanimity Personnellement, je suis oppose a la regIe de
rule. I believe that if it is insisted upon in l'unan~te. Je crois que si on insiste pour l'eteneverything, we shall end by bowing to the dicta- dre a toutes les questions, nous en arriverons a
torship of minorities, even when the minority is accepter la dictature des minorites, meme dans
one against fifty.
le cas ou la minorite est de un contre cinquante.
The PRESI~ENT (translated from French):
. Le PRESIDENT: J e donne la parole a Sir MaI· call upon SIr Maharaj Singh representative haradj Singh, representant de l'nde.
of India.
'

l

9 novembre 1946

941

Sir Maharaj SINGH (India): The Indian
delegation supports the amendment moved by
the representative of Denmark.
We welcome the admission of the three States
concerned to membership in the United Nations
Organization. We are particularly interested in
Afghanistan, an independent State with a pop~
ulation that, is vigorously attached to freedom.
This country is our neighbour; our relations are
of a friendly character, and we keenly desire that
these amicable relations may always continue.
We welcome the admission of Afghanistan.
I next come to Iceland. Recently, there was
a possibility of some of our delegation passing
through Iceland on our way from India to the
United States of America. I confess that, coming as I do from a hot country, I personally was
somewhat perturbed at the prospect. But another portion of our delegation, which subsequently landed in Iceland, found the climate
reasonably congenial and the people warmhearted and friendly. We are glad that they
have been admitted to our brotherhood.
Similarly, we welcome Sweden into our membership. She is, and has been, a peace-loving
country with a democratic constitution and an
enterprising people.

Quafante~septh!me

seance pleniere

Sir Maharadj SINGH (lnde) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation de 1'Inde appuie l'amendement presente par le delegue du Danemark.
Nous serons heureux de voir admis, dans
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, les trois Etats
en question. Nous portons un interet tout particulier a l'Afghanistan, Etat independant dont
la population est fortement attachee a sa liberte.
Ce pays est notre voisin; nous entretenons avec
lui des relations amicales, et nous souhaitons
vivement qu'il en soit toujours ainsi. Nous
accueillons done avec joie l'admission de
l'Afghanistan.
J'en viens maintenant a l'Islande. On avait
envisage que certains membres de notre delegation, au cours de leur voyage des Indes aux
Etats-Unis, passeraient par I'lslande. J'avoue
que, venant d'un pays chaud, j'etais un peu inquiet de cette perspective. Mais d'autres membres de notre delegation qui, eux, ont fait escale
en Islande, ont trouve le climat de ce pays assez
agreable et sa population hospitaliere et amicale.
Nous sommes heureux que l'Islande' ait ete
admise dans notre Organisation.
Nous nous rejouissons egalement de l'admission de la Suede. Elle est, et a ete dans le passe
un pays epris de paix; elle a une constitution
democratique et un peuple entreprenant.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc It) :
I call upon Mr. Lange, representative of
I
Poland.

Le PRliSIDENT: Je donne la parole aM. Lange,
representant de la Pologne.

Mr. LANGE (Poland): Our delegation associates itself with the amendment presented by
the representative of Denmark.
In the name of the Polish delegation, I want
to support the admission of Afghanistan, Iceland
and Sweden to membership in the United Nations. We have examined these applications conscientiously and in great detail and find that all
these countries are qualified, under the Charter,
for admission.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Notre d61egation se rallie a l'amendement soumis
par le representant du Dan'emark.
Au nom de la delegation polonaise, je veux
appuyer les dernandes d'admission de l'Afghanistan, de I'lslande et de la Suede a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Apres un examen consciencieux et approfondi de ces. demandes d'admis- .
sion, nous sommes arrives a la conclusion que
ces pays reunissent les conditions requises par la
Charte pour devenir Membres des Nations
Unies.
Je suis particulierement h'eureux de l'admission
de la Suede au sein de notre Organisation. La
Suede, notre voisine par dela la Baltique, a toujours entretenu avec la Pologne et les autres pays
limitrophes, avant, pendant et apres la guerre, les
meilleures relations de bon voisinage.

In particular, I am happy to be able to
greet the admission, to our Organization, of
Sweden. Sweden is a neighbour of ours across
the Baltic, and I must say that Sweden's relations with us and other neighbouring countries
have been, before the war, during the war, and
after the war, an example of good neighbourly
'relations.
During the war, the people and the Government of Sweden did a great work on behalf of
our war refugees, as well as of refugees from
other countries. The moment the war was
over, the Swedish welfare organizations did a
great work of relief in our country and also
in other countries which fought on the side of
the United Nations.
We appreciate very highly the democratic,
social and cultural traditions and institutions of
tIle Swedish nation. The great political experience which Sweden has acquired in international relations leads us to expect that Sweden,
like few other countries, will make a great
contribution to our Organization.

Pendant la gu"erre, le peuple et le Gouvemement suedois ont genereusement aide nos refugies
et ceux des autres pays. 5itot la guerre finie, les
organisations suedoises d'assistance so~iale .ont
largement secouru notre pays et ceux qUI avment
combattu aux cotes des Nations Unies.

Nous apprecions hautement les traditions democratiques, sociales et culturelles, ainsi que les
institutions de la nation suedoise. La grande
experience politique que la Suede a acquise dans
les relations internationales nous incite a croire
que ce pays sera panni ceux qui contribuent le
plus au succes de notre Organisation.

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

942

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Viteri Lafronte, representative
of Ecuador.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Viteri
Lafronte, representant de l'Equateur.

M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur) (traduit de
Mr. VlTERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador) (translated
from Spanish): I should like to say a few words l'espagnol) : Je voudrais dire quelques mots pour
in emphatic support of the proposal submitted marquer nettement mon accord sur la proposition presentee par le representant du Danemark.
by the representative of Denmark.
L'amendement qui nous est propose est le
The amendment now before us is the same
as that which was proposed by Ecuador in the meme que celui que l'Equateur avait presente a
First Committee, with the idea of securing a la Premiere Commission et qui visait a obtenir
unanimous vote or .at least a large majority, in l'unanimite dans le vote, ou tout au moins une
order that the admission of three new Members forte majorite, de fa~on que les trois nouveaux
into the United Nations should be marked by an Membres des Nations Unies fussent re~us dans
atmosphere of great cordiality and harmony. un esprit de franche cordialite et d'hannonie.
The course of the debate in the First Committee La discussion au sein de la Premiere Commiscaused Ecuador to withdraw a proposal which sion a amene l'Equateur a retirer une proposiwas cordially supported by several delegations tion qui avait cependant ete chaleureusement
even in that Committee. Now that it has come appuyee, au sein de la Commission, par pluup in the General Assembly, Ecuador reiterates sieurs delegations. En prenant maintenant la
her desire to secure, in as many cases as possible, parole devant l'Assemblee generale, l'Equateur
confirme son vif desir d'obtenir, dans tous les
a large majority if not complete unanimity.
cas ou ce sera possible, une forte majorite a
defaut de l'unanimite.
L'intervention du President de la delegation
The statement made by the head of the Argentine delegation has dispelled any doubt, if such de l'Argentine ne laisse .plus auwn doute, si
there could have been after his emphatic decla- toutefois un doute avait pu subsister apres ses
rations, as to the scope and significance of the declarations concluantes, quant a la portee et
amendment which he proposed; and the amend~ au sens de l'amendement qu'il a presente. Celui
ment which is now being submhted by the qui vient d'etre prop9se par le representant du
Danish representative and has been received Danemark et qui a cte accueilli avec enthouwith enthusiasm by all those who have spoken siasme par les representants qui m'ont precede
before me, clearly characterizes the spirit in a la tribune, exprime de fa~on parfaite l'esprit
which we are receiving into the United Nations dans lequel nous admettons, au sein des Nations
the three countries that were recommended by Unies, les trois pays recommandes par le Conseil
the Security Council.'
de securite.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
I call upon Mr. Molotov, representative of the M. Mototov, representant de l'Union des ReUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics.
publiques socialistes sovietiques.
Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques sociaRepublics) (translated from Russian): The listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): La dele.Soviet delegation supports the Danish delega~ gation sovietique appuie l'amendement presente
tion's amendment which improves the resolution par la delegation danoise, qui vise a ameliorer la
by making it somewhat more precise.
redaction de la resolution en y introduisant
certaines precisions.
The Soviet delegation welcomes the entry of
Afghanistan, Sweden and Iceland into the
United Nations.

La delegation sovietique souhaite la bienvenue
au sein des Nations Unies l'Mghanistan, la
Suede et a l'Islande.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Blanco, representative of
Uruguay.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Blanco, representant de l'Uruguay.

Mr. BLANCO (Uruguay) (translated from
Spanish): On behalf of the Oriental Republic
of Uruguay, I wish to welcome three new States
to the United Nations: Afgh9-nistan, Iceland and
Sweden. Each of them represents a factor of
great importance to peace and to the welfare of
the world in general: Sweden, with her advanced
northern civilization and the support which she
h~s always given to the cause of peace; Iceland,
WIth her co-operation in the worst days of the
war; Afghanistan, that Asiatic country for which
we have the most friendly feelings and which has
always been devoted to democratic ideals.

M. BLANCO (Uruguay) (traduit de l'espagnol): Au nom de la Republique orientale de
l'Uruguay, je desire souhaiter la bienvenue des
Nations Unies a trois nouveaux Etats: l'Afghanistan, l'Islande et la Suede. Chacun de ces
Etats peut jouer un role tres important dans
l'reuvre que nous poursuivons pour la paix et le
bien-etre de l'humanite: la Suede, par sa haute
civilisation nordique et l'appui qu'elle a toujours
apporte a la cause de la paix; I'Islande par
l'aide qu'elle a donnee durant les epoques le~ plus
dures de la guerre; I'Mghanistan, ce pays d'Asie
si sympathique et qui a toujours cultive les
grands principes democratiques.

a

a

a

9 novembre 1946

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere .

943

Accordingly, we have supported the amendment moved by Denmark and by the Rapporteur, our dear colleague the representative of
Ecuador.

O'est pour cette raison que nous avons donne
notre appui a l'amendement presente par le
Danemark et par le Rapporteur, notre cher collegue, le representant de l'Equateur.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We will now proceed to the vote. I first put to
the vote the amendment proposed by the Danish
delegation which consists in adding after the
words "Organization of the United Nations" in
the first paragraph of the draft resolution submitted by the First Committee, the following
words: "in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4 of the Charter and of rules 113 and 114
of the rules of procedure."

Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons maintenant au
vote. Je mets aux voix, tout d'abord, l'amendement propose par la delegation du Danemark,
qui consiste a ajouter, apres les mats "l'Organisation des Nations Unies," se trouvant au premier paragraphe du projet de resolution presente
par la Premiere Commission, le membre de
phrase suivant: "conformement aux dispositions
de l'Article 4 de la Charte et des articles 113 et
114 du reglement interieur" .

Decision: T he amendment was adopted

Decision: L' amendement est adopee a ['una-

unanimously.

nimite.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
""Vc will vote now upon the resolution as
amended, which reads as follows:
"The General Assembly has taken note:
Of the applications for membership submitted to the Organization of the United
Nations, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4 of the Charter and rules 113 and 114
of the rules of procedure, by Afghanistan, the
Republic of Iceland and Sweden;
"Of the recommendations of the Security
Council on the admission of Afghanistan, the
Republic of Iceland and Sweden to membership in the United Nations;
"And of the report submitted by the First
Committee which unanimously approved the
recommendations of the Security Council.
aTherefore the General Assembly decides:

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons proceder au vote
sur la resolution ainsi amendee, .dont void le
texte:
"L'Assemblee generale a pris note:
Des demandes d'admi'SSion adressces a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, conformement aux dispositions de l'Article 4 de la
Charte et des articles 113 et 114 du reglement
interieur, par l'Afghanistan, la Republique
d'Islande et la Suede,
"Des recommandations du Conseil de securite sur l'admission de l'Afghanistan, de la
Republique d'Islande et de la Suede comme
Membres des Nations Unies,
"Du rapport soumis par la Premiere Commission qui a unanimement approuve les recommandations du Conseil de securite. .
"Pour ces motifs, l'Assemblee generale
decide:
"Que I'Mghanistan, la Republique d'Islande
et la Suede seront admis COl11me Membres des
Nations Unies."
Decision: La resolution presentee par la Premiere Commission, et amendee, est adoptee a
l'unanimite.

"That Afghanistan, the RepuQlic of Iceland
and Sweden be admitted to membership in the
United Nations."
Decision: The resolution proposed by the
First Committee, as amended, was adopted
unanimously.
104. Notification from the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter (documents
A/124 and A/177l
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The second item on our agenda relates to a
notification from the Secretary-General given in
pursuance of Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter (annex 31). We are not caned upon to
pass a resolution; wc have merely to take cognizance of the Secretary-General's notification.
The General Assembly took note of the Secratar'y-General's statement.

105. Requests for the inclusion of Supplementary items in the Agenda: report
of the General Committee (document
A/1S1)
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item is the consideration of the General
Committee's report on requests for the inclusion
of supplementary items in the agenda. To siro-

104. Notification du Secretaire gen~ral
conformement au paragraphe 2 de
I'Article 12 de la Charte (documents
A/124etA/177l
Le PRESIDENT: Le deuxieme point a notre
ordre du jour concerne une notification du
Secretaire general, donnee conformement au
paragraphe 2 de l'Article 12 de la Charte (annexe 31). I1 ne s'agit pas d'une resolution a
adopter; nous avons simplement a prendre en
consideration la notification du Secretaire
general.
Il est pris acte de la notification du Secretaire
general.
105. Demandes d'inscription de nouvelles
questions Cl I'ordre du jour. Rapport
du Bureau (document A/181)
Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle l'examen du rapport du Bureau de l'Assemblee au
sujet des demandes d'inscription de notlvelles
questions a l'ordre du jour. Pour simplifier la

Forty-sevent~ Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

944

plify· the .discussion we shall take each item
separately.

discussion, nous. prendrons chaque point separe- .
ment.

TRANSLATION AND PUBLICATION OF THE
CLASSICS
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item to be considered is the question of
the translation and publication of the classics
(document A/BUR/47). The General Committee recommends that the General Assembly
shQuld place this item on its agen.da a~d refer
it to the Third Committee for conSIderatIon and
report to the Plenary Assembly.
Are there any observations?

TRADUCTION ET PUBLICATION DES CLASSIQUES
Le PRESIDENT: Le premier point a examiner
est la question de la traduction et de la publication
des classiques (document A/BUR/47). Le Bureau recommande a 1'Assemblee generale d'inscrire cette question a son ordre du jour et de la
renvoyer a la Troisieme Commission pour exament et rapport a l'Assemblee pleniere.
11 n'y a pas d'obsertation?

Decision: The recommendations of the General Committee were adopted.

Decision: Les recommandations du Bureau
sont adoptees..

AUGMENTATION DU NOMBRE DES MEMBRES DU
INCREASE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
CONSEIL ECONOMIQUE ET SOCIAL
ECONOMIC :AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
Le PRESIDENT: Le deuxieme point porte sur
The PRESIDENT (transiated from French):
The second item relates to an increase in the 1'augmentation du nombre des membres du
membership of the Economic and Social Council Conseil economique et social' (document
A/BUR/48).
(document A/BUR/48).
Comme 1'indique le rapport du Bureau, la
As stated in the General Committee's report,
the Argentine delegation has decided to put for- delegation de l' Argentine a decide de presenter
ward a new request for the inclusion of this une nouvelle demande tendant a l'inscription de
question in the provisional agenda of the ne~ cette question a 1'ordre du jour provisoire de la
session of the General Assembly, so that there 18 prochaine session de l' Assemblee generale; done,
no resolution to be adopted.
il n'y a pas de resolution a adopter.
REVISION OF ITEM 15 OF THE AGENDA
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The third item in the General Committee's report relates to the revision of Item 15 of our
agenda (document A/BUR/49). The General
Committee recommends that the General Assembly approve the following revised text of Item 15
of the agenda: .
.
"Report of the Headquarters Commission·
and consideration of possible alternative sites
for permanent headquarters in.the New York
area and in the San Francisco Bay area which
may be available without cost or at reasonable
cost; and appointment of a Planning Commission of Experts.".

REVISION DU POINT 15 DE L'ORDRE DU JOUR
Le PRESIDENT: Le troisieme point du rapport
du Bureau a trait a la revision du point 15 de
notre ordre du jour (document A/BUR/49).
Le Bureau recommande a l'Assemblee generale
d'approuver le texte revise ci-appres du point 15
de l'ordre du jour:

I call upon Sir Hartley Shawcross, representative of the United Kingdom.

a

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
We do not want to start any discussion about
this matter at this stage, or to move any formal
amendment. I rise, therefore, merely to clarify
a point. We assume that we are right in supposing that it will be open to the Committee,
jf it is so minded, to consider other alternative
sites apart from the two which are specificallY
mentioned.
.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Bloom, representative of the
United States of America..
Mr. BLOOM (United States of America) : The
United States hopes very sincerely that the
United Nations will remain in this country. We
feel that it would be a mistake to move' the
headquarters to another 'country, and we shall

"Rapport de la Commission du siege et
examen d'autres emplacements possibles pour
le siege permanent situes dans la region de
New-York et dans celle de la baie de SanFrancisco et qui seraient eventuellement disponibles a titre gratuit ou a un prix acceptable; et designation d'un Comite d'experts
charge de la question des batiments."
J e donne la parole Sir Hardey Shawcross,
representant du Royaume-Uni.
Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS

(Royaume-Uni)

(traduit de lJanglais): Je n'ai pas l'intention de
provoquer une discussion sur cette question, au
point Oll nous en sommes, ni de proposer un
amendement formel. Si je prends la parole, c'est
simplement afin d'eclaircir un point. Je pense
ne pas me tromper en presumant que la Commission aura la latitude, si c~est la son intention,
d'examiner, en dehors des deux sites designes de
fagon precise, tous ceux qui pourraient etre
proposes.

a.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

M. B 1 0 0 rn,

M. BLOOM (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Les Etats-Unis esperent fermemc::nt
que le siege des Nations Unies restera fixe sur
leur territoire; ils estiment que ce serait une
erreur que de le transferer sur ce1ui d'un autre

9 novembre 1946

945

vote against such a proposal. The United States
wishes to be of the greatest possible assistance
in reaching a satisfactory solution of the question
of the pennanent headquarters, and it is our
opinion that the best way that we can do this
is through the adoption of our proposal for a
revision of this item in the form in which it has
been submitted.
In view of the urgent need of reaching a decision at this session, we should not favour any
revision of this proposal to include consideration
of sites outside the New York and San Francisco Bay areas.

Quarante-septieme seance pJeniere

pays et ils voteront contre toute proposition faite
dans ce sens. Les Etats-Unis desirent contribuer
dans la plus large mesure possible a la solution
du probleme du siege permanent et a leur avis
le meilleur moyen de parvenir a c~tte solutio~
serait d'adopter la proposition de la delegation
americaine tendant a modifier la forme sous
laquelle la question a ete inscrite a l'ordre· du
jour.
Etant donne la necessite imperieuse de prendre
u~e, dc~ision au cours d~ la ptesente session, la
delegatIon des Etats-Ums n'est pas favorable a
une revision de sa proposition tendant a etendre
l'examen rclatif au siege, a des emplacements
situes hors de la region de New-York ou de la
baie de San-Francisco.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Manuilsky, representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole aM. Manuilsky, representant de la Republique socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine.

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): You are
aware that, at the meeting of the General Committee, the Ukrainian representative raised the
question of an amendment to the United States
delegation's proposal to consider the area of San
Francisco city in addition to New York. This
amendment is a proposal to examine the question of a permanent or temporary location of the
United Nations headquarters in Europe.

M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): Au cours
de la reunion du Bureau, le representant ukrainien, vous le savez, a propose un amendement a
la proposition faite par la: deIegation americaine
d'envisager egalement comme sieges possibles,
New-York, et la region de la ville de San-Francisco. Notre amendement consistait a proposer
qu'on etudiftt egalement la question de fixer en
Europe le siege permanent ou temporaire de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
En proposant cet amendement, la delegation
ukrainienne partait de l'idee que cette nouvelle
resolution concernant le siege de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies s'ecartait de la resolution de
Londres. A Londres, nous avions pris une decision au sujet de New-York, et il s'agit donc d'une
proposition entierement nouvelle. Il ·est 'evident
que si San-Francisco convient aux Etats situes
dans 1'0cean Pacifique-comme l' AustraIie par
exemple-cette ville, en raison de son eloignement, souleve une certaine hesitation chez toute
une serie de pays europeells.
De plus, la delegation ukrainie~ne a indique
d'autres inconvenients. Elle a faIt remarquer,
en particulier, qu'il faudrait engager des frais
trcs considerables pour l'installation des Nations
Unies, ce qui greverait le budget de 1'Organisation et aurait une influence facheuse sur la
situation des petits Etats. En second lieu, nous
avons mentionne egalement la cherte de la vie
aux Etats-Unis et la crise des logements; nous
avons dit que ce pays avait garde certains reglements adoptes autrefois a l'egard des immigrants
et qui, encore que cela soit assez etrange, sont
parfois appliques aux membres des delegations
des Nations U nies, ce qui ne laisse pas de presenter certains inconvenients.
Tels sont les motifs qui font que nous avons
insiste. pour qu~ le debat soit elargi et pour que
ce Comite soit egalement saisi de la question d'un
siege temporaire ou permanent de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies en Europe. Mais on
nous a fait certaines objections. On nous a dit
que noter proposition creerait une situation catastrophique. Tel n'est pas notre avis. Neanmoins,
pour laisser a nos collegues le temps de la refIe-

In submitting this amendment, the Ukrainian
delegation had in mind that the decision on the
site for the United Nations headquarters differed
from the London decision. In London, we decided on New York; the later decision is therefore entirely new. It is obvious that, while San
Francisco is convenient for countries on the
Pacific-such countries as 'Australia-that city,
on account of its geographical remoteness, will
undoubtedly give rise to a good deal of hesitation on the part of a considerable number of
European countries.
Furthermore, the Ukrainian delegation pointed
out several inconveniences, in particular, that the
establishment of the United Nations at the present time is very costly, that this will mean a
heavy burden on the increased budget, and that
it will seriously affect the small nations. Secondly, we also drew attention to the high cost
of living here, to the housing shortage, and also
to the continued existence of certain regulations
drawn up in the past to cover immigration and
which, strange as it may seem, are sometimes
applied to members of United Nations delegations. This is bound to create difficulties.
These are the reasons why we insisted that this
matter be placed on a broader ba:;:is and that the
question of a temporary or permanent European
site for the United Nations be also submitted to
this Committee. Certain objections, however,
were raised. It has been said that these proposals
would create a catastrophic situation. We, of
COurse, do not think so. Nevertheless, in order
to allow for consideration and reflection, the

9 November 1946

946

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

Ukrainian delegation will not insist upon its pro- xion la delegation ukrainienne n'insistera pas sur
posal, but would like now to express its wish that : sa p~oposition. Eile desire toutefois, d.t'S maix:tethe next regular session of the General Assembly nant formuler le vreu que la prochame ses.~on
be held in Europe. The Ukrainian delegation . ordi~aire de 1'AssembIee se tienneen Europe. La
brings this wish to the notice of the Secretary- : delegation ukrainiellne s~umet ce va:~ au Secfl~­
General. Moreover, it reserves the right, during i taire general, et die se reserve le drOlt, au COlll'S
the General Assembly, to submit to the General ! de la presente session de l'A,,~emblec. de saisir le
Committee a proposal to hold the next regular I Bureau d'une proposition prcvorant la COllVOCu.se.<;SlOn
'
de'1'"
'
!! tion de la prochame
.'l.:.;sem I)I'et' g('l\(:session in Europe.
: rale en Europe.
I

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): . Le PRESIDEl':T: Je donnc la parole i\L VelI call upon Mr. Velloso, representative of Brazil. I loso, representant du Bresil,
M. VELLOSO (Bresil): Je serai tres bre!. Au
Mr VELLOSO (Brazil) (translated from
I
nom
de la delegation du Bresil, j'appuie trr:,
French): I shall be very brief. On behalf of the
I fermement l'avis qui a ete cxprimc pm'
Brazilian delegation, I strongly support the opinion expressed by Mr. Bloom, on behalf of the I M. Bloom, au nom de la delegation des EtalsUnited States delegation, with regard to the , Unis, au sujet du siege pel1nanent des Nations
permanent headquarters of the United Nations. Unies.

i

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Molotov, representativc of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donnc la parole M. },lo1otov, representant de l'Union des Repuhliqut'S socialistes sovietiques.

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet
delegation supports the idea expressed by the
reprcsentative of the United Kingdom, namely,
that the item of the agenda we are now discussing should be considered as applying not only to
New York and San Francisco, but also to other
sites which may interest the appropriate bodies
entrusted with a solution of this problem.

M. 11oLOTOV (Union des Rcpubliques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit dll russe): La cWegation sovictiquc appuie !'idee exprimee par le
representant du Royaume- Uui. ElIc cOllsi&rc
qu'il convient d'interpretcr le point de I'Ol'drt~ tlu
jour que nous examinolls en ce moment cmnmc
s'appliquant non seulcment
N<:w-York et
San-Francisco, mais aussi
c1'autres liclIx qui
pourraient retcnir l'attt'lllion des organi"m('s
auxquels nous avon:; confie l'ctudc de: n'tte
question.
La delegation sovietique approun' cp;akment
les considerations que vicnt de dc\'clopper le
representant de l'Ukraine, M. Manllilskv. NCltrt
delegation e.~lime qu'il convicnt qU{~ la prcwhaine
session de l'Assemblce gencralt- St tknrl(~ en
Europe. L'A5.<;emblec gencral(', on le :-lnit. a
commence ses tl'avaux a Londr('s. Aujourd'hui.
eile siege New-York.
ne st'rait pas miHl\'ail>
que nous etablissions une regIe d'alternan{'(~ dans
les sessions, et q u'ainsi nOllS con\"oquiClIlS la prochaine session en Europe. Le \"(I'U emis par la
delegation ukrainicnne not!!: parait ple:incmrnt
justifie et raisonnablc.

The Soviet delegation also supports the views
expressed by the representative of the Ukraine,
Mr. Manuilsky; it considers that it would be
appropriate for the next session of the General
Assembly to be held in Europe. We know that
the General Assemblr began its work in London,
and is now meeting in New York. It would not
be a bad idea to establish a rotation of the
sC!;sions of the General &sembly and that as a
result the next ~ession should be held in Europe.
The wishes of the Ukrainian delcgationin this
matter seem to 1lR well-founded and appropriate.

.

a

a

a

a

n

Le PRESIDENT: AuclIn amcl1de1Ue~nt n 'a ctr
The PRESIDENT (ltalls1ated fmln French):
propose
all texte qui a
renvoye 1'.'\...c;.,c;embUe
No amendment has been proposed to the text
referred to the General Assembly by the General generale par le Bureau. NOlls now; tnmvo/lS. par
Committee. We arc therefore confronted by a consequent) en presence d\me d<'ll1bl(' difficultf
double difficulty, which wc shall have to try to qu'il faudrait tachex' de 8urmont~r.
surmount.
The first difficulty arises from the fact that the
La premiere vient de ce que le. repr6wtant
representative of tht~ United Kingdom has pro- du Royaume-Uni a propose a l'A~"embl€'e g(nc.
posed that th~ Gcner~~l A$:cmbl{' should interpret rale d'interprcter le texte qui est sOllIllis a ('I'l1e-ci
the ~ext s~bnll!ted to It as 1l1lplymg the possibility comme impliquant la possibilite de di::eut('1'
of dlscussmg SItes other than those in New York d'autre's sieges que eeux de New-York ('t de SaIland San Francisco.
Francisco.
. If. the Gene:al Asseu;bly accepts this proposal,
Si l' Assemhlee gencrale acceptc tette pl'OposiIt wdl be pOSSIble ,to dISCUSS, in committee, sites tion, il sera possible de discllter, en com I11t't,i(lll,
oth.er.than those of New York or San Francisco. d'autres sieges que cdui de New-York OIl c:elui
.
C"
ThIS IS not quite in accordance with the text of dS
e an-F'ranC1SCO.
eCl n est pas tout 'C'
a alt (:oncour~e. Th~ te~t is very clear, If it is propd..,ed forme au texte, bien entendu. Le texte est tr~s
to dlScuss SItes 1ll the United States other than clair. S'il est question de discuter d'autres sieges
those of the New York or San Francisco areas que celui de New-York et celui de San-Francisw
wc should say so.
' aux Etats-Unis, il faut le dire.

ete

a

9 novembre 1946

947

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

I call upon Sir Hartley Shawcross, representative of the United Kingdom.

Je donne la parole a Sir Hartley Shawcross,
representant du Royaume-Uni.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I am afraid that in a desire to
be brief, I must have failed to make myself
clear. "Ve had hoped that this was a matter
which could have been dealt with merely by
way of an interpretation by you, sir, of the
rules of procedure. But, if you think it more
proper, I am quite ready to move an amendment so as to make it clear that it will be open
to the Committee to consider alternative sites.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je crains de n'avoir pas
'ete assez clair par souci d'etre bref. Nous
avions espere qU'il s'agissait d'une question que
le President aurait pu trancher lui-meme, en
interpretant Ies dispositions du reglement interieur. Mais, si le President le juge plus a propos, je suis tout pret a deposer un amendment
afin qu'il soit bien entendu qu'il sera loisible a
la Commission de prendre en consideration differents emplacements.
La delegation du Royaume-U ni ne desire pas
rouvrir la discussion sur Ies merites COmpal1eS de
l'Europe et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique. Tout
au contraire, nous croyons fermement que l'on
doit s'en tenir a la decision prise a Londres en
faveur des Etats-Unis.

It is not the desire of the United Kingdom
delegation to reopen any di.~cussion on the
alternative merits of Europe as against the
United States of America. On the contrary, we
arc strongly in favour of adhering to the decision
which was taken in London in favour of the
United States of America.
Nor do we desire, at this stage, to discuss the
relative merits of different sites in the United
States. That is obviously a matter which is more
appropriate for the Committee than for the
Assembly at this stage. We are merely concerned
with the question of procedure. The question of
the report of the Headquarters Commission in
favour of the site in Westchester County having
been reopened, we want to make it quite clear
that it will be open to the Committee to consider
sites in the United States of America other than
those in the New York area and in the San FranCISCO area.
There are some who would prefer San Francisco to the site in Westchester County. There
are others who consider that there are alternative places on the east coast of the United
States of Americ;a which might be preferable to
San Francisco. We want to make quite sure
that these matters are open to the Committee
and, accordingly, I beg formally to move an
amendment to the item now before the Assembly in the sense that the Committee be
entitled to consider alternative sites in addition
to those in the New York and San Francisco
areas in the United States of America.

NOllS ne desirons pas .non plus discuter, au
stade actuel, les merites respectifs des differents
emplacements situes aux Etats-Vnis. C'est la,
de toute evidence, une question qu'il est preferable, au point ou IlOUS en sommes, cl'examiner en commission plutot. que devant l'Assemblee. Seule, la question de procedure nous
interesse. Le rapport de la Commission du
siege, favorable au site du com.te de Westchester,
ayant tte remis en question, nous desirons qu'il
soit bien 'etabli que la Commission aura la faClllte d'envisager des sites, aux Etats-Unis
d'Amcrique, autres que ceux des regions de
New-York et de San-Francisco.
Certains prefereraient San-Francisco au comte
de Westchester. D'autres estiment qu'il y a, sur
la cote orientale des Etats-Unis, des emplace~
mcnts qui pourraient ctre choisis de preference
a San-Francisco. Nons voudrions ctre absolument SUI'S qu'il sera loisible a la Commission de
discuter ces diverses questions et, en consequence,
j'ai l'honneur de proposer un amendement au
projet actuellement a l'examen devant I'Assemb1ee, stipulant que la Commission aura le droit
de prendre en consideration, aux Etats-Vnis,
d'autres sites que ceux des regions de NewYork et de San-Francisco.

Mr. BLOOM (United States of America): The
United States is unalterably opposed to the
amendment offered by the United Kingdom and
will vote against it.

M. BLOOM (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des EtatsUnis est im€ductiblement opposee a l'amendement propose par la del,egation du RoyaumeDni et votera contre.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Wellington Koo, representative of
China.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Wellington Koo, representant de la Chine.

Mr. Wellington Koo (China): I do not propose to enter into a discussion on the merits of
the question of a pennanent site for the United
Nations. We have before us the revised text of
the item relating to the permanent site proposed
by the United States, and we have also an
amendment to that revised text proposed by the
T€fpresentative of the United Kingdom. I wish
to confine my remarks to these two aspects.

M. Wellington Koo (Chine (traduit de
l' anglais): J e n'ai pas l'intention de discuter,
quant au fond, la question du siege permanent
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Nous
sommes maintenant saisis a ce sujet d'un projet
de revision du point 15 de,l'ordre du jour, soumis par les Etats-Vnis, et d'un amendement a
ce projet propose par le representant du
Royaume-Uni. Je me lirniterai done a deux aspects du probleme.

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

948

9 November 1946

Ceux d'entre nous qui ont participe aux deThose of you who took part in the Lon~on
meetings will recall that not only at the mee~mg bats de Lond~cs se rappelleront qu~ le: quesof the Assembly, but also at the meetings tion du siege perma?en~ d~ l'O;gamsa;lOn ?es
of the Executive Committee and the Preparatory Nations Unies a falt 1 obJct dune diSCUSSion
Commission, we had a very full discussion of trcs compl(~te, non seulemel:t it l'Assc!nblce gethis question of the permarient .headquarters. of nerale mais aussi au ComIte executlf et a la
the United Nations. The Clunese delegatIOn Com~ission preparatoire. I.a delegation chiproposed, in the first i~stance, that, San noise s'est prononcee des le debut en fa"cur de
Francisco should be the SIte. As the diSCUS- San-Francisco. 11 a ete dt~cide, afin de circonsion developed, in order to simplify the debate, scrire les debats de trancher tout d'abord la
it was decided that the question of the country question de savoir d~ns que.l p~}'s serait fi~e le
should first be taken into consideration and a siege permanent de I Or~an.lSatiOn. Dne fOJ? la
decision reached on that point. But after t~at, question du pays tranchce, il a fnllu dctcflluner
when we had decided on the country, the regIOn la region ou les zones de cc pars dans lesqueU~
or areas within that country were discussed, and l'Organisation devrait ""t~tahEr, et k .;:hoix s'est
it was decided that the New York area should porte sur la region de New-York.
be the area within which a permanent site should
be chosen.
All those discussions lasted nearly six months
Ces discussions se sont POUrsUlVICS pendant
from the day of opening of the Executive Com- pres de six moi~, a part~r d~1 )Otl~ Otl, on.t cOI~~
mittee proceedings to the close of the General mence les travaux du (.onute c.xccutlf, JUsqu a
Assembly.
ce1ui de la cl6ture de l' Ac;scmblee generale.
If I say that discussions and debates took
Je puis dire, litteralement, que. nous ~vons
place day and night, it was literally so, be- travai1le jour et nuit, car il a fallu teIllr de
. cause we had many long night sittings in longues et nombreuses seances de nuit pour arorder to decide this question. Now, the river a. une decision sur cette question. Nous
question of the country wa~ decided, the ques- sommes maintenant fIxes et sur le pays et slIr la
tion of the area was deCIded, but not that region, mais il reste encore a determine.r l'e.mof the permanent site. Therefore, we have before placement du siege permanent. Telle est la quesus at the beginning of this meeting the question tion dont nous sommes saisis au debut de ce.tte
of choosing the site; the Westchester and Fair- seance. I1 s'agit de choisir un emplacement dans
field Counties are the general area<; within which les comtes de Westchester et de Fairfield.
a site is to be chosen.
We have a proposed revision of item 15 of the
Le representant des Etats-Unis propose de
agenda by the representative of the United States modifier le point 15 de l'ordre du jour, de fa~on
to enlarge that item in order to include one more a. etendre l'examen des emplacements possibles
area, San Francisco. In the General Committee, ala region de San-Francisco. Nous nous sommes
we spoke in favour of that revision. In the first prononces en faveur de cette proposition devant
place, we favoured it because it was the Chinese le Bureau de l'Assemblee pour deux raLc;ons: la
delegation which had originally put forward the premiere, c'est que c'est SUI' San-Francisco que
San Francisco area. But we had another reason, s'etait d'abord porte le chobc de la delegation
which is this: In view of the importance of chinoise; la deuxieme, c'est que, etant donne,
the location of the permanent headquarters, d'une part, l'importance du choix de la region
and in view of our experience in that part of the ou l'Organisation etablira son siege permanent
country, we felt it would be advisable, as a mat- et, etant donne, d'autre part, ce que nous savons
ter of policy, to compare ag-ain the New York du developpe.ment de la region de Ran-Francisco,
and the San Francisco areas. We are not com- nous estimons qu'il serait de bonne politique de
mitted to either. I say so without any final la mettre de nouveau en paraIlele avec ce1le de
commitment as to which is really the better one. New-York. Nous n'avons pm aucun engageThat remains to be studied; but we do think ment a l'egard de I'une ou de l'autre. Cc que
that a new comparison would be desirable, j'en dis n'implique aucun engagement sur le
so that when we arrive at a final decision, it point de savoir queUe est la meillcure. C'est
will be a decision which will meet the wishes la une question qui reste a ehldier, maL"! nous
of the greatest number of delegations.
estimons qu'il est souhaitable de proceder a une
nouvelle comparaison, afin d'arriver une de~
cision definitive qui soit de nature a recueillir
l'approbation de la majorite des representants.
Now, as far as the country is concerned, we
Pour ce qui est de la question du pays, nous
want to declare that we find ourselves unable to tenons a declarer qu'i1 nous est impossible d'apsupport the amendment which has just been puyer l'amendement soumis par le representant
made by the representative of the United King- du Royaume~Uni, et cela, pour des raisons que
dom, and I will say very briefly why we oppose je vais brievement exposer: cette question du
it. The question of the country is one which pays qui, crayons-nous, est de nature a influer
was thoroughly discussed in London and one grandement sur le developpement et l'avenir des
which we believe has a great bearing on the Nations Unies, a fait l'objet d'un examen comdevelopment and on the future of the plet a Londres. II y avait de nombreuses conUnited Nations. Many considerations were siderations a faire entrer en ligne de compte, et

a

9 novembre 1946

949

Quar~nte-septieme seance

pleniere

taken into account, and. finally led the ces considerations ont amene l'Assemblee geneGeneral Assembly, at its first session in London, rale, au cours de sa premiere session a Londres,
to the conclusion that, from the point of view of a la conclusion que, tant dans l'interet' de la'
the future success of the United Nations, from future reussite des Nations Unies que de l'avis
the point of view of the largest number of dele- de la majorite des delegations, les Etats-Unis
gations, the United States of America was the d'Amerique etaient le pays le plus indique pour
country which was most suited as the home for accueillir l'Organisation. A mon avis, i1 serait
the United Nations. I think it would be very eminemment regrettable de reduire a neant le
unfortunate if we were to throw overboard all resultat d'un travail minutieux qui nous a dethe work that was done in London, for I must mande six mois d'efforts a Londres. Tous les
say that, it was work that was done very aspects du probleme ant ete etudies et discutes;
thoroughly, extending over a period of six nous avons pris une decision qui, vivement conmonths. Every aspect of the situation was taken testee au premier tour de scrutin, a finalement
into consideration, was debated, and a decision recueilli une approbation unanime.
was reached. In the first vote that decision was
very close, but, in the end, it was made unanimous.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Le representant du RoyaumeThe representative of the United Kingdom feels Uni croit que vous n'avez pas tres bien compris
that you have not quite understood his remark; sa remarque; voudriez-vous lui permettre de
would you permit him to explain it?
l'expliquer?
Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
Sir Rartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
On a point of order, I think I can make myself (traduit de l' anglais): Il s'agit d'une motion
clear. I stated, I hope, in the clearest possible d'ordre et je voudrais preciseI' ma pensee.
terms that we did not want to reopen the ques- J'ai declare - et j'espere l'avoir fait en termes
tion of the country in which the permanent aussi clairs que possible - que nous ne desirions
site should be located. On the contrary, the pas revenir sur la question du pays ou doit etre
United Kingdom delegation adhered firmly to installe le siege permanent. Au contaire, la delethe decision which was taken in London, that gation du Royaume-Uni s'en est tenue strictethat country should be the United States of ment a la decision de Londres fixant le siege de
America. All that we were concerned with, was 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies sur le territoire
that it should be open to the Committee to con- des Etats-Unis d'Amerique. Le seuI point qui
sider alternative sites in the United States, not nous preoccupait, c'etait que la Oommission eut
only San Francisco and the New York area.
toute liberte d'examiner les differents emplacements possibles sur le territoire des Etats-Unis
et que 1'0n ne s'en tint pas seulement aux regions
de San-Francisco ou de New-York.
Mr. Wellington Koo (China): I want to
M. Wellington Koo (Ohine) (traduit de
thank the representative of the United King- l'anglais): J e tiens a remercier le representant
dom. It was really an error on my part. I du Royaume-Uni. Je me suis en effet trompe.
think I meant to say that it was the amendment Je voulais dire qu'il s'agissait de l'amendement
moved by the representative of the Ukraine. propose par le representant de l'Ukraine. Nous
We have a proverb in Ohina referring to a per- avons, en Chine, un proverbe ou il est question
son who tries to put the hat of Mr. John on the de que1qu'un qui tente de coiffer Monsieur X
head of Mr. Smith. This is a typical case where du chapeau de Monsieur Y; c'est precisement
I have made this error and I apologize. ce que je vieps de faire a l'egard de Sir Hardey
But my point is this: It is not so much which Shawcross, et je Iui presente mes excuses. Mais
delegation made the motion; whichever delega- void ou je veux en venir: I1 ne s'agit pas tant
tion moved the amendment, our delegation de savoir quel1e delegation a propose l'amendecanno~ support it. I was in the process of exment; queUe que soit la delegation qui l'ait
plaining why we are opposed to the amend- propose, nous ne pouvons I'appuyer. J'etais en
ment, and I must express my gratification train d'exposer les motifs pour lesque1s nous nous
to the representative of the United Kingdom y sommes opposes; aussi suis-je tres heureux que
for reminding me that his delegation is far from le representant du Royaume-Uni m'ait rappe1e
being opposed to the maintenance of the origi- ,que sa delegation, loin de s'opposer au maintien
nal decision as regards the country, and is really de la decision prise au debut relativement au
pays choisi, est en realite de tout creur avec
heartily on the same side.
nous.
Je disais il y a quelque temps, apropos du
I was saying a little while ago, as regards the
choice of country, that the discussions and the choix du pays, que les discussions et les debats
debates in London had been very thorough and de Londres avaient ete tres complets et que la
that all aspects of the question had been taken question avait ete examinee sous tous les angles.
into consideration. Therefore, we believe that Nous estimons done que la decision prise alors
that decision should ,be maintained. I think- doit etre maintenue. Je pense - de notre point
from our point of 'view and, I submit, from the de vue particulier, et aussi, je crois, du point
point of view of the Organization as a whole- de vue de I'Organisation prise dans son ensemble
that it wbuld be a great misfortune for us to - qu'il serait desastreux de remettre tout le pro-

950

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

bleme en question et, si je puis dire, d'annuler
reopen this whole question, and so to speak, ~o
tout le bon travail qui a ete fait a Londre:s.
cancel all the good work that was done 111
London.
Je desirerais done, au nom de ma de}egati~n,
Therefore in the name of our delegation, I
insister tres vivement aupres de celle de I Ukrame
wish to urg~ the delegation of the Ukraine very
pour qu'elle ne rnaintienne pas son amendement.
strongly not to insist on its amendment.
Quant a. la question de savoir. ~tl se tiendra
Now, as regards the question of the plac@ for
la prochaine Assem~lce, l~ proposltlOn vaut ce:~
the next Assembly; this is certainly a propos~l
tainement qu'on I examme, surtout du fait
which deserves consideration, especially as It
qu'elle a ete avancee si soudainement. VOU!
has been made so suddenly. I think you will all
me comprendrez taus, j'en suis cer~ai.n, si)e .dis
understand if I say that, so far as the Chinese
qu'en ce qui concerne la deleg~~lon chmo~e,
delegation is concerned, we would like to reserve
nouS dcsirerions reserver notre POSltlOIl et eludlef
our decision and make a study of the problem
la question avant de nous prononcer a cet egard
before we express our definite view. However,
de maniere definitive. Toutefois, nous scrons
we shall be glad to express our views after we
heureux de le faire apres avoir examine la
have made a study of the proposal.
proposition.
Le PRf~SlDENT: Pcrmeucz-moi de clarifier
The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
quelque peu ces debats. Le Bun~an n?us ..~ reI should like, if the A'lSembly will allow me, to
eommand6 d'approu\'cr It: texte tiu p<llllt 1:> de
clarify the discussion a little. The General Committee has recommended the Assembly to ap- l'ordre du jour et la delegation ell! R()'aume~
prove the revised text of item 15 of the agenda, Uni nollS a suggcre verbalcment Ull tlrm:ndeto which the United Kingdom delegation has ment. Je crois que satisfaction lui S('rait donnee
proposed an amendment verbally. I think that si l'on ajoutait, dans le tc..xte du Bureau; aprcs
delegation would be satisfied if we were to add, les mots "baie de San-Francisco" lcs moL" "ou
in the text proposed by the General Committee autre part aux Etats-Unis." C'cst le settl amellafter the words "San Francisco Bay area" the dement que nous ayons pour le moment.
ll
words "or other parts 'Of the United States •
This is the only amendment before us for the
mom.ent.
Je donne la parole a :M. 1\f:wEachcn. fPpn"I call upon Mr. MacEachen, representative of
sentant
de l'Umguay.
Uruguay.
M. :MACEAClIE~ (Uruguily) ,tradllil dc l'anMr. MACEAGHEN (Uruguay): You will apglais):
L' ~\sscmblcc ulmpn·lIdr.l l:erlainClllcnt
preciate my difficulty in asking to speak on this
matter. You all know that, in LOlldon I pre~ qu'il est trcs delicat pour moi dc, dt~rnandcr a
sided over Committee 8 of the Preparatory prendre la parole sur ccUe qU(~stion. V()lI~ saV(~
Commission. As has already been said here, it tous en efIet que fai prc.'Sidc fl Londrcs le Comitc
was very difficult to reach some sort of a solu- 8 de la Commission prcparatoire. Commc~ on l'a
deja dit ici, il a ete tl'Cs difficile de p<ln'('nir a
tion. I only wish to make one point.
une solution quckonque. Je de:iirc scukmcnt
faire observer ced:
D'une part, la delegation dc:s Etats-Unis
The delegation of the United States of
America, apparently considering that the site d'Amerique estimant l semble-t-il, que l'etablissein New York is not completely satisfactory and ment du siege a. New-York ne danne pas entim
that the possibility of moving the site to West- satisfaction, et considerant qu'un tramlfc'rt evenchester County lllay not be entirely satisfactory tuel dans le eomte de We..'ltchestcr presente (-galein view of the cost, has enlarged the scope of ment certains desavantages du poillt de vue
our inquiry in order to include San Francisco. financier, propose d'eIargir le champ de llolre
It seems to me that this proposal is extremely examen afin d'y inc1ure San-Francisco, Cettc
proposition me paratt tout a fait raisonnable.
reasonable.
On the other hand, the United Kingdom
D'autre part, comme la delegation dll RoJ"audelegation has remembered that in London me-Uni nous l'a rappele, les pays qui, a Londres,
those who were partisans of Europe were very ctaient partisans de l'Europc, el(:sirerait~nt tres
concerned to have in the United States a site as vivement que l'on ('hoisit aux I::tats~Ullis un e111close as possible to Europe. This was a very placement aussi rapprochc que possible de l'Euimportant consideration from all points of view, rope. Cette consideration ctait jugt:'C tres
in particular, rapidity of movement and ex- importante a taus cgards, ll(.ltamment ~n cc qui
pense.
concerne la rapidite des deplacemenL'i et les frais
a prevail'.
It seems to me that there is a point which
L'amendcment des Etatc;-Unis presente, a man
is of considerable concern to all of us; it is avis, un point d'interrt consicUrahle pour nous
included in the United States amendment, tous: il s'agit de la reference aux terrains "que
and refers to sites "which may be available l'on pourrait eventuellcment se procurer a titre
without cost or at reasonable cost." I think gratuit ou a un prix acceptable". C'est la, i1 me
that this is an extremely important point. May semble, un point extrSmement important. Aussi
I suggest that we can merge the two proposals me permettrai-je de suggerer la fusion de.'l deux
j

9 novembre 1946

951

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

and include the British amendment within the
United States amendment.

propositions qui nous sont soumises, l'amendement britannique etant incorpore a l'amendcment des Etats-Unis.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I should very much like amendments to be submitted in writing, as it is difficult to put. to the
vote an amendment which has not been drafted.

Le PRESIDENT: J'aimerais fort que les amendements soient presentes parecrit, car i1 est
difIicile de mettre aux voix un amendement non
redige.

:rvIr. BLOOM ( United States of America):
I wish to thank the representative of Uruguay
for the suggestion made to amend the amendment offered by the United Kingdom. But the
United States delegation feels that it cannot
accept the United Kingdom amendment.

M. BLOOM (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): J e desire remercier le representant
de l'Uruguay de la suggestion qu'il vient de faire
de modifier l'amendement presente par le
Royaume-Uni, mais la delegation des Etats-Unis
estime qu)elle ne peut pas accepter l'amendement du Royaume-Uni.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Sir Bartley Shawcross) representative
of the United Kingdom.

Le PRE:SIDENT: Je donne la parole a Sir Hartley Shawcross, representant du Royaume-Uni.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
Again I do not wish to enter into any
discussion of the relative merits of sites. It is
[Jahaps a little embarrassing that the United
States delegation, after previously having taken
the view that it would not seek to influence a
decision in favour of one site or another, should
wish to curtail discussion of alternative sites in
the United States itself.

Sir Rartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l' anglais): Cette fois encore, je ne
desire pas entamer une discussion quelconque
sur les avantages relatifs des differents emplacements. Il est pe).lt-etre un peu genant de voir
que la delegation des Etats-Unis, apres avoir tout
d'abord pris une position qui cousistait a ne pas
chercher a faire pencher la decision en faveur de
td ou tel emplacement, desire maintenant limiter
la discussion des difIerents emplacements possibles sur le territoire des Etats-Unis.
Tout ce que desire la delegation du RoyaumeUni, c'est qu'il soit loisible a la Commission
d'examiner d'autres emplacements eventuels qui
pourraient etre cedes a l'Organisation sans frais
ou a un prix raisonnable, sur la cote orientale des
Etats-Unis.
Je propose done d'ajouter simplement au
texte que vous avez deja sous les yeux, apres:
"la region de la baie de San-Francisco," les mots
"ou autres parties des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et
qui seraient eventuellement disponibles a titre
gratuit ou a un prix acceptable". Le texte de la
resolution serait done le suivant: "Rapport de la
Commission du siege et examen d'autres elnplacements possibles pour le siege permanent
dans la region de New-York, dans celle de la
baie de San-Francisco ou dans d'autres parties
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et qui seraient eventuellement disponibles atitre gratuit ou a un prix
acceptable." Ce serait, a notre avis, une erreur
que de restreindre le champ d'etude de la Commission chargee d'examiner la question aux
seules regions de San-Francisco et de New-York.
L'honorable representant de l'Uruguay a expose le point de vue de certains pays d'Europe
sur les inconvenients que presenterait pour ces
pays le parcours suppIementaire de 5.000 kilometres de New-York a San-Francisco.

. So far as the United Kingdom delegation is
concerned, all that wc desire is that it shall be
open to the Committee to consider other alternative sites which may be obtainable without
cost or at reasonable cost on the eastern seahoard of the United States.
I would propose, therefore, simply to add
after the words "the San Francisco Bay area",
which you already have before you these words:
"or other parts of the United States of America
which may be available without cost or at
reasonable cost." The resolution would therefore
read: "Report of the Headquarters Commission
and consideration of possible alternative sites for
permanent headquarters in the New York area.
in the San Francisco Bay area, or in other
parts of the United States of America which
may be available without cost or at reasonable
cost" . We think that it would be wrong for
the Committee) which will have to consider
this matter, to be restricted in its consideration
to the alternative of the San Francisco or the
New York area.
The representative of Uruguay has indicated
the view which is held by certain European
countries as to the disadvantage of having to
travel a further three thousand miles after arrival in New York, in order to get to San
Francisco.
It appears to the United Kingdom delegation
I1 semble a la delegation du Royaume-Uni
that there may be other sites, some of them qu'il existe peut-etre, sur la cote orientale de
nave already received some consideration, on I'Am€rique, done plus pres des pays europeens,
the eastern seaboard of America, which are d'autres emplacements, dont certains ont deja renearer for that reason to the European States, tenu l'attention, qui devraient etre pris en consiwhich ought to be considered, and which may deration et pourraient presenter des avantages
have greater merits than those offered by San superieurs a ceux que nous ofIre San-Francisco.

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

952

Francisco. We do not want to discuss those
merits now; we merely ask that the whole matter
should be open to the Commission which will
have to consider the problem.

Nous ne desirons pas discuter maintenant de ces
avantages; nous demandons simplemcnt que la
Commission qui sera chargee d'etudier ce pro-.
bleme ait la latitude de l'examiner dans son
ensemble.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The position is now clear. I shall first ask the
Assembly to vote on the United Kingdom delegation's amendment to the effect that the words
"or other areas in the United States of
America" be inserted after the words "San
Francisco Bay area" in the text recommended
by the General Committee for the approval of
the General Assembly.
I put this amendment to the vote.
Decision: T he amendment was adopted by
twenty-eight votes to fifteen, with two abstentions.

Le PRESIDENT: La situation est maintenant
claire. Je vais d'abord appeler l'Assemblee a
voter sur l'amendement de la delegation du
Royaume-Uni qui consiste a ajouter au texte
que le Bureau recommande a l'Assemblee generale d'approuver, apres les mots "baie de SanFrancisco" les mots: "ou d'autres regions des
Etats-Unis".
Je mets l'amendement aux voix.
Decision: L' amendement est adopte par
vingt-huit voix contre quinze, et deux abstentions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We will now vote on the complete text, including the United Kingdom delegation's amendment.

Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix le texte
complet avec l'amendement du delcgue du
Royaume-Uni.

Decision: The proposal was adopted by
thirty-tMee votes to two~ with one abstention.

Decision: La proposition est adoptee par
trente-trois voix contre deux, et une abstention.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
With regard to Mr. Manuilsky's proposal that
the next session of the Assembly be held in
Europe, I would remind him of rule 5 of the
rules of procedure, which governs this question:
"Sessions shall be held at the headquarters
of the United Nations unless convened
elsewhere in pursuance of a decision of the
General Assembly at a previous session or at
the request of a majority of the Members of
the United Nations."
If Mr. Manuilsky really wishes the next
Assembly to be held in Europe, he must ask for
his proposal to be included in the agenda in
the usual manner.

Le PRESIDENT: En ce qui concerne la proposition de M. Manuilsky tendant a ce que la prochaine Assemblee soit tenue en Europe, je rappelIe au delegue de l'Ukraine l'article 5 de notre
reglement interieur qui regIe cette question:
"L'Assemblee generale se reunit au siege de
l'Organisation a moins qu'elle ne soit convoquee en un autre lieu en vertu d'une decision
prise au CaUl's d'une session anterieure, ou ala
demande de la majorite des Membres de
l'Organisation."
Si M. Manuilsky desire vraiment que la prochaine AssembIee se tienne en Europe, il1ui appartient de demander regulierement l'inscription de sa proposition a l'ordre du jour.

RESOLUTION CONCERNING THE CRIME OF
GENOCIDE

RESOLUTION RELATIVE AU CRIME DE GENOCIDE

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We now have to consider the recommendation
concerning the crime of genocide (document
A/BUR/50). The General Committee proposes
that this question be listed on the agenda and
referred to the Second Committee.
Are there any comments?

Le PRf,SIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle l'examen de larecommandation sur la resolution relative au crime de genocide (document A/BUR/
50). Le Bureau propose que cette question soit·
inscrite a l'ordre du jour et renvoyee a la
Deuxieme Commission.
11 n'y a pas d'observation?

Decision: The General Committee's proposal was adopted.

adoptee.

CREATION BY THE UNITED NATIONS OF
ADVISORY BOARDS

Decision: La proposition du Bureau est
.CREATION P:AR L'ORGANISATION DES
NATIONS UNIES DE COMITES CONSULTATIFS

Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle l'exaThe PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the recommen- men de la recommandation relative a la proposidation relating to the proposal submitted by tion de la delegation du Liban concernant la
the delegation of Lebanon for the creation by creation par l'Organisation des Nations Unies de
the United Nations of advisory boards (docu- comites consultatifs (document (A/BUR/52).
ment A / BUR/5 2) . The General Committee Le Bureau de l'AssembIee propose que cette
proposes that this question be inserted in the question soit inscrite al'ordre du jour et renvoyee
agenda .and referred to the S~cond and Third . aux Deuxieme et Troisieme Commissions pOUf

9 novembre 1946

953

Quarante~septieme sea'nee pleniere

Committees, for consideration of its economic
and social aspects, respectively, by the relevant Committee.
Are there any comments?
Decision: The General Committee's proposal was adopted.

que celles-ci examinent, chacune en ce qui la
concerne, son aspect economique et son aspect
social.
11 n'y a pas d'observation?
Decision: La proposition du Bureau est·
adoptee.

CREATION OF A WORLD UNIVERSITY ALLIANCE

CREATION D'UNE ALLIANCE UNIVERSITAIRE
MONDIALE
LE PRESIDENT: Le sixieme point du rapport
du Bureau concerne la creation d'une Alliance
universitaire mondiale (document A/BUR/53).
Le representant du Liban, qui assistait a la discussion de cette question, a decide de presenter
une nouvelle demande tendant a inscrire le point
a l'ordre du jour de la prochaine session de
l'Assemblee generale.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Item 6 of the General Committee's report deals
with the creation of a world university alliance
(document A/BUR/53). The representative
of Lebanon, who was present at the discussion
on this question, decided to submit a further
request to the effect that this item be listed on
the agenda of the next session of the General
Assembly~
.
We have simply to take note of this request.

Nous prenons acte de cette demande.

RESOLUTION CONCERNING THE CALLING OF A
CONFERENCE TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER XI UF THE CHARTER
REGARDING NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Item 7 of the General Committee's report calls
for the consideration of a resolution on the proposal to hold a conference to implement the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter regarding
Non-Self-Governing Territories (document A/
BUR/54) . The General Committee recommends that this question be placed on the
agenda of the General Assembly and referred simultaneously to the Fourth and Sixth Committees.
Are· there any observations?
Decision: The General Committee's proposal was ~dopted.

RESOLUTION RELATIVE LA REUNION D'UNE
CONFERENCE AYANT POUR OBJET LA MISE
EN APPLICATION DES DISPOSITIONS DU
CHAPITRE XI DE LA CHARTE CONCERNANT
LES TERRITOIRES NON AUTONOMES
Le PRESIDENT: Le septieme point du rapport
du Bureau a trait a une resolution relative a
la reunion d'une conference ayant pour objet
la mise en application des dispositions du Chapitre XI de la Charte concernant les territoires
non autonomes (document A/BUR/54). Le
Bureau recommande a l'Assemblee generale que
cette question soit inscrite a. son ordre ~u jour et
qu'elle soit renvoyee simultanement aux Quatrieme et Sixieme Commissions. .

RESOLUTION CONCERNING PERSECUTION AND
DISCRIMINATION
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Item 8 of the General Committee's report deals
with a resolution concerning perSecution and
discrimination (document A/BUR/51). During the debate on this question, the representative of .Egypt, who was present, amended his
proposal by deleting the preamble to the resolution, together with the words "in those areas"
which appear in the last paragraph. He requested that the General Assembly be invited
to consider this question without referring it to
a Committee.
This proposal was rejected by' the General
Committee. The result of the voting was three
in favour, three against and three abstentions.
I call upon Badawi Bey, representative of
Egypt.

RESOLUTION RELATIVE AUX PERSECUTIONS ET.
AUX DISCRIMINATIONS
Le PRESIDENT: Le huitieme point du rapport
du Bureau concerne un~ resolution relative aux
persecutions et aUx discriminations (document
A/BUR/51). Au caurs de la discussion de cette
question, le representant de l'Egypte, qui assistait
aux debats, a apporte une modification au texte
de sa proposition en supprimant le preambule de
la resolution ainsi que les mots "dans ces regions"
figurant au dernier paragraphe. 11 a demande
que l'Assemblee generale soit ~vitee a ex~er
cette question sans la renvoyer a une ComnusslOn.

BADAWI Bey . (Egypt) (translated from
French): The Egyptian delegation has submitted for inclusion in the Assembly's agenda
a draft resolution on persecution and discrimination. This resolution is contained in document
A/BUR/5i.
The first part of this document, which I
shall call the premises, sets forth certain facts

11 n'y a pas d'observation?
Decision: La proposition du Bureau est
adoptee..

Cette· proposition n'a pas ete acceptee par le
Bureau', le resultat du vote a ete troix
. voix pour,
troix voix contre, et trois abstentlOns.
Je donne la parole a Badawi Bey, representant
de l'Egypte.
BADAWI Bey (Egypte): La delegation egyptienne a soumis, afin de l'ajouter a l'ordre du
jour de notre Assemblee, un projet de resolution
sur les persecutions et les discriminations. Ce
projet fait l'objet du document A/BUR/5i.

Dans la premiere partie de ce document, que
j'appellerai l'expose des motifs, sont avances cer-

, I

FortY~5eventh

Plenary Meeting

954

9 November 1946

a

tains faits re1atlfs des persecutions et des discriminations qui, vraisemblablement, ant ete perpetres en Europe centrale apres la victoire des
democraties et la mise en vigueur de la Charte.
Dans la second partie, que j'appellerai le dispositif, la resolution comporte une declaration de
principe - declaration abstraite - et adresse un
appe1 aux Gouvemements et aux autorite.'l pour
qu'ils se conforment la lettre et l'esprit de la
Charte en prenant les mesures les plus promptes
et les plus energiques pour mettre fin aces
discrirninations.
S'il est un point acqui'l, c'est que toutes les
If anything is certain, it is that any form of
persecution or discrimination, whether on reli- persecutions et toutes les discriminations re1igious, .racial or any other grounds, is contrary gieuses, raciales ou autres sont contraires a la
to both the. letter and the spirit of the Charter. Charte, a sa lettre et a son esprit. Ai-je besoin
Need I say that no one in this Assembly disputes. d'affirmer que nul, dans cette Assemblee, ne met
the force of that principle which, moreover, is en doute la vigueur de ce principe qu'enonce
embodied in Article 55 of the Charter? In d'ailleurs l'Article 55 de la Charte? En effet,
point of fact, this Article provides that the cet article parte que les Nations Unies favoUnited Nations shall promote "universal respect riseront "le respect universel et effectif des droits
for, and observance of, human rights and fun- . de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales pour
damental freedoms for all without distinction as taus, sans distinction de race, de sexe, de langue
to race, sex, language or religion." Moreover, ou de religion". Cet article, d'ailleurs, n'est que
the Article merely re-echoes the declaration of l'echo de la declaration des quatres libertes prothe four freedoms proclaimed by President clamees par le President Roosevelt, a la memoire
rendre l'hommage le plus
Roosevelt, to whose memory I wish to pay a duque1 je tiens id
respectueux.
most respectful tribute from this platform.
Mais cette declaration de principe resterait lettre
But this declaration of principle would remain a dead letter, devoid of meaning, if the marte, vide de sens, si le principe n'etait pas
principle were not carried into effect and if, mis en application, et si, apres une declaration
after such an emphatic declaration, we were to sonore, on se derobait a la tache. L'obligation
shirk the task before us. It is therefore incum- nous incombe done, non seulement de mettre ce
bent upon us not only to apply this principle, principe a execution, mais egalement de veiller
ace qu'il soit partout respecte.
but also to see that it is universally observed.
Cc que je dis la, je ne l'invente pas; je ne le
This is no invention on my part, it is not
even a proposal; it is one of the provisions con- propose meme pas. Cela constitue une dispositained in the Charter. Is it. not laid down in tion de la Charte. L'Article 56 ne dit-il pas
Article 56 that: "all Members pledge themselvs qllc "les :Membres s'engagent, en vue d'atteindre
to take joint and separate action in co-operation les buts enonces l' Article 55, a. agir, tant conwith the Organization for the achievement of jointement que separement, en cooperation avec
the purposes set forth in Article 55"?
l' Organisation" ?
Let us suppose for a moment that the slave
Supposez, pour un instant, que, dans une
trade is being practised in a given area. Do you region donnce, on se livre au commerce des
think it would be permissible for us to witness esClaves. Pensez-vous qu'il nous sera permis
such a violation of the principles ·of the Charter d'assister a cette violation des principes de la
without doing anything about it? D9 you think Charte sans prendre aucune mesure? Pensezwe could remain inactive, content with having vaus que nous pouITons nous croiser les bras,
pruclaimed a principle just to abandon it forth- satisfaits d'avoir declare un principe pour l'abanwith?
.
donner aussit8t?
This holds good for every form of persecution
11 en va de mem~ pour toutes les persecutions
and discrimination. All such anti-social' conduct et toutes les discriminations. Ces actes·antisociaux
springs from a denial of the social standards for dccoulent tous de la negation des normes sociales
the protection and observance of which the pour la defense et la mise en pratique desquelles
United Nations was established.
notre institution a ete ert~ee.
Having said that, I hasten to point out that,
Ceci dit, je m'empresse de declarer que la
in submitting this draft resolution, the Egyptian delegation egyptienne, en soumettant ce projet,
delegation is guided only by rational, social and n'a ete inspiree que par des considerations rationhumanitarian considerations. No political mo- neUes, sociales et humanitaires. Aucun mobile.
tives are involved. Let no one impute to us palitique n'est en cause. Que l'on ne nous attritherefore the intention of opening the side en- bue done pas l'intention d'introduire par la
trance to a question which should only be petite parte une question qui ne saurait etre
ushered in by the main door. The cause we are· introduite que par la grande porte. La cause
?efending today, the safeguarding of freedom, que nous defendons aujourd'hui, qui est la sauve~ ~n~ we are always ready to defend whenever garde de la liberte, est ceile que nous sommes
It IS ill danger. There are other questions on toujoUIS pretsa defendre chaque fois qu'elle se
the agenda of the Assembly which arouse in us . trouve en danger. Dans 1'0rdre du jour de
regarding the persecution and discrimination
which would appear to have been practised in
Central Europe after the victory of the democracies and the coming into force of the Charter.
The second, which I shall call the operative
part, comprises a declaration of principle-an
abstract declaration-and an appeal to Govermnents and authorities to conform both to
thc letter and the spirit of the Charter by taking
prompt and energetic steps to put an end to
such discrimination.

a

a

a

~j .

.J.

a

9 novembre 1946

955

the same feeling and on which we shall take up
the same attitude.
.
I wish to revert now to the premises on which
the resolution is based.' It would appear from
enquiries conducted in certain Central European
countries that racial and religious persecution
and discrimination, inherited from the nazi
regime, are still widespread after the suppression of that regime. We do not wish to attach
undue importance to these enquiries or to assign
to them a degree of authority which they cannot
be said to possess. But at the same time such
extensive and circumstantial evidence cannot be
ignored. We need not concern ourselves with the
conclusions reached, since they are not relevant
to the question under consideration. What are
and must be of interest to us are the facts revealed by these enquiries, the racial and religious
discrimination they have brought to light. We do
not regard the findings themselves as established
facts; but if I may refer to our own legal system
-which, moreover, is in conformity with all the
Latin systems-I would say that, if we do not
accept these enquiries as an indictment, we must
at least accept them as a source of information.
Now, this information has alarmed us, as it
would any defender of liberty. We cannot dispose of it simply by closing our eyes and ears
to it.

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

l'Assemblee, il Y a d'autres questions qui pravaquent chez nous le merne sentiment et apropos
desquelles nous prendrons la meme attitude.
Je reviens aux motifs de la resolution. Des
enquetes faites dans certains pays de l'Europe
centralc, il ressort que les persecutions et les discriminations raciales e~ religieuses, legs du regime
nazi, continuent a faire rage apres la suppression de ce regime. N ous ne voulons pas attafher
a ces enquetes une autorite outre mesure, une
auto rite qu'ellcs ne peuvent pas posseder. Toujours est-il que ces enquetes etendues et circonstanciees ne sauraient etre ignorees. Nous faisons abstraction des conclusions auxquelles dIes
ant abouti; ces conclusions ne sont pas applicables a la question que nous examinons. Ce qui
nous interesse, ce qui doit nous interesser, ce sont
les faits que les enquetes ont reveles; ce sont les
discriminations raciales et religieuses qu'elles ont
constatees. Ces constatations elles-memes, nous
ne les prenons pas pour des faits etablis. Mais,
s'il m'est permis de me referer a not.re systeme
juridique, d'ailleurs conforme a tous les systemes
latins, je dirai que, si nous ne retenons pas ces
enquetes comme une mesure d'instruction, nollS
sommes appeles ales retenir au moins comme
une mesure d'inIormation. Or, cette information
nous a alarmes. Il n'est pas un de£enseur de la
liberte qui pourrait n'en pas etre alarme. Ce n'est
pas parce qu'on fermera les yeux et se bouchera
les oreilles que cette information disparaltra.
Il nous faut done tirer la chose au clair. De
deux chases l'une: ou bien ces persecutions et
ces discriminations ne sont que le produit de
l'imagination, elles n'bnt pas eu lieu ou leur
gravite a ete exageree; ou bien dIes se sont
produites et dIes continuent a faire des victimes.
Dans la premiere de ces hypotheses, nous nous
en tirerons avec la satisfaction d'avoir accompli
notre devoir et tranquillise nos esprits. Dans
I'autre, nous sommes dans l'obligation d'agir.
C'est a l'Assemblee generale, dit l'Article 13 de
la Charte, qu'incombe la tache de deveIopper la
cooperation internationale et de faciliter pour
tous, sans distinction de race, de sexe, de langue
ou de religion, la jouissance des droits dr.
l'homme et des libertes fondamentales.
C'est la, je le rcpete, le seul but de notre projet de resolution. 11 est d'ordre social et );1umanitaire. Il s'inspire de la Charte.

We must therefore get the situation clear.
There are two alternatives: either such persecutionand discrimination are merely a figment of
the imagin.ation-they have not occurred or their
gravity has been exaggerated, or else they really
have occurred and ar~ still working havoc.
. If the first hypothesis is true, we shall have the
satisfaction of knowing that we have done our
duty and our minds will be at rest. If the second
is true, we are bound to take action. Under the
terms of Article 13 of the Charter it is the duty
of the General Assembly to promote international
co-operation and to assist in the realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion.
That, I repeat, is the sole aim of our draft
resolution, which is based on social and humanitarian principles and inspired by the spirit of the
Charter. .
.
Doubtless the objection will be raised that our
On ne manquera probablement pas de souagenda is already overburdened, that we must lever l'objection que notre ordre du jour est deja
confine ourselves to urgent and practical ques- trop charge, que nous devons nous arreter aux
tions. To this I would reply in conclusion: how questions actuelles et pratiques. A cela je remany of the scourges, whether social or of some' pondrai en tenninant: que de maux, sociaux et
other kind, which have ravaged our world and autres, qui ant ravage notre monde· et notre
our society, could we not have prevented if societe, auraient pu etre prevenus si, au moment
we had attacked them at the root at the proper opportun, dans le lieu convenable et dans les
time, in the right place and under favourable conditions propices, on en avait detruit les
conditions?
racines!
The PRESIDENT (translated. from French):
May I ask the representative of Egypt if, contrary to the conclusions of the General Committ~, he requests that this item be placed on the
agenda?

Le PRESIDENT: Le representant de l'Egypte
demande-t-il que, contrairement aux conclusions
du Bureau, sa proposition soit inscrite a l'ordre
du jour?

Forty-seventh Plenary Meetirig

956

9 November 1946

RIAD Bey (Arabie saoudite) (traduit de IJanglais): La delegation ,de 1'Arabie sao~d.ite Cl;ppuie la proposition de 1Egypte tendant a mscnre
cette question a. l'ordre du jour, afin que l' Assemblee generale des Nations Unies adopte une
motion ou il serait formellement declare qu'il est
dans l'interet superieur de 1'humanite de mettre
un terme immediat aux persecutions et aux discriminations religieuses ou soi-disant raciales et
que l'Assemblee invite les Gouvernements et les
autorites responsables ase conformer a la Charte
des Nations Unies, dans sa lettre et son esprit,
et a prendre, a. cette fin, les mesures les plus
promptes et les plus energiques.
Nous n'ajoutons vraiment rien, nous cherWe are really not adding anythin.g, .but are
implementing two of the great prm.cIples. of chons seulement a. appliquer deux des principes
the Charter mentioned in Article 1 and ill ArtIcle fondamentaux de la Charte, enonces a. l'Article
55, that there must be no discrimination or per- premier et a. l'Article 55, selon lesquels il ne
doit y avair ni mesures discriminatoircs, ni
secution.
persecutions.
This matter has been mentioned on several
Cette question a ete soulevee a. differentes reoccasions in some of the Committees. I recall prises dans diverses Commissions. Tel a ete le
that it was brought up in the Third Committee, cas notamment a la Troisieme Commission, celle
the Social and Humanitarian Committee, and des questions sociales, humanitaires, et cultueven in one of the sessions which was so ably relies, et meme au cours de 1'une des seances que
presided over by you, Mr. President, where. the vous avez presidees avec tant de competence,
representative of Haiti brought the matter to our Monsieur le President. Au cours de cette seance,
attention in a very subtle 'way; he said that, le representant d'Haiti a attire notre attention sur
especially in this great Assembly of ours, we had cette question avec beaucoup de finesse; il a
to come to a conclusion to the effect that it was declare que, specialement dans cette grande
imperative that we declare that we did not Assemblee, il est necessaire d'arriver a une
accept or permit any discrimination or persecu- conclusion: a. savoir qu'il est essentiel que nous
tion.
declarions formellement que nous n'admettons, ni ne permettons aucune mesure discrimi·natoire, aucune persecution.
In another meeting of the Third C<?mmittee
La question a ete egalement discutee au cours
the matter was also discussed, and I remember d'une autre seance de la Troisieme Commission,
that the representative of Australia .said, on et je me rappelle que le representant de l'Ausanother question, that it was a complex problem tralie a dit apropos d'une autre question: 11
involving definite considerations which ought to s'agit la d'un probleme complexe impliquant
be respected and should be referred to some other certaines considerations dont il y a lieu de tenir
body of broader scope than the Committee- compte; ce probleme devrait etre renvoye a un
meaning, for example, the General Assembly.
autre organisme qui aurait une competence plus
vaste que la presente Commission, par exemple
a l'Assemblee generale.
It is in this sense, I think, that the Egyptian
C'est dans cet esprit, a mon avis, que la deledelegation has presented the proposal, and I . gation egyptienne a presente sa proposition; et
think, as the representative from Egypt said, that je pense, comme le representant de l'Egypte l'a
we cannot sit here and not accept such a recom- dit lui-meme, que nous ne pouvons pas ici ne pas
mendation unanimously. It has no particular accepter a l'unanimite une telle recommandameaning, but is just an implementation of a defi- tion: elle n'a pas d'objectif particuIier, elle est
nite principle of our Charter.
simplement l'application d'un principe qui est
formellement enonce .dans notre Charte.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole aM. Chacall upon Mr. Chagla, representative of India.
gIa, representant de l'Inde.
Mr. CHAGLA (India): I beg to support the
M. CHAGLA (Inde) (traduit de IJanglais):
resoluti.on moved by the representative of Egypt. J'ai l'honneur d'appuyer la resolution presentee
par le representant de l'Egypte.
It will be noticed that the Egyptian represenLes membres de la Commission ont certainetative has considerably altered the form of the ment remarque que le representant de l'Egypte
resolution that was originally suggested. Origi- a sensiblement modifie la teneur de la resolution
nally, there was a preamble to the resolution and qui avait ete pres~ntee. Primititivement, la resothe resolution was restricted to several States lution comportait' un preambule et ne visait que
of Central Europe. Ultimately, in the General divers Etats de l'Europe centrale. En dernier
COl;nmittee, t~e Egyptian delegation made a lieu, au Bureau de l'Assemblee, la delegation
radIcal alteration; the: preamble W<l,S deleted and egyptienne a apporte a ce texte une modifi-

RIAD Bey (Saudi Arabia): T~e delegation of
Saudi Arabia supports the Egyptlan proposal .to
put this matter· on the agenda, as a defi~l1te
motion that the General Assembly of the U~Ited
Nations. should declare that it is in the hIgher
interests of humanity to put an immediate end
,to religious and so-called racial persecution and
discrimination, and call on the Governments and
responsible authorities to conform both to the
letter and to the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to take the most prompt
and energetic steps to that end.

.

" .

9 novembre 1946

957

also the expression "in certain areas." As a result,
the resolution is now of a general character. It is
not aimed at any particular State.
'
Now, I fail to understand how any Member
of the United Nations can possibly object to
the retention of this item on the agenda. What
is the exact meaning of the resolution? It protests against discrimination and persecution whenever they may be taking place, in whatever part
of the world; all it does is to draw the attention of the Members to the fact that they should
immediately put an end to religious persecution
and discrimination if they occur in any part
of the world. It is a reminder to all Member
States that they should live up to the very high
standards which are laid down in the Charter of
the United Nations.

The Egyptian representative has drawn your
attention to Article 55, and I might also draw
your attention to the preamble of the Charter.
Article 55 is very explicit. It says: "The United
Nations shall promote universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language, or religion."
Now, I really cannot understand what is the
basis of the opposition to the retention of this
item on the agenda. Is there any Member State
here which is in favour of persecution or discrimination? Is there any Member State here which
does not want to protest against any persecution
or discrimination if it is taking place in any part
of the world? We are here to strengthen our
Organization, and I feel that a resolution of this
character which will draw the attention of all
the States to persecution and discrimination, if
they are going on, would strengthen the Organization and would make it the great moral force
for which it is intended.
We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that there
is discrimination going on in some parts of the
world. The delegation of India has made an
actual complaint against one Member State of
this Organization. I do not want to enter into
the merits of that, but I only want to draw your
attention to the fact that there is an actual complaint pending before the Organization.
This resolution is not aimed at any particular
State. It is general in character and, to my mind,
its utility and its value have been increased by
the fact that it is general in character and not
restricted either to European, Asiatic or African
States.
I do suggest, with all the strength that I command, that it would be a great mistake to delete
this resolution from the agenda. What impres-

Quarante-septieme seance pleniert=

cation radicale: le preambule a' ete supprime
ainsi que l'expression. "dans certaines regions".
De ce fait, cette resolution presente maintenant
un caractere general. Elle ne vise plus aucun
Etat en particulier.
Je ne puis comprendre, clans ces conditions,
qu'un Membre des Nations Unies, queI qu'il
soit, puisse vraiment se declarer oppose au maintien de cette question a I'ordre du jour. Quelle
est, en fait, la portee de cette resolution? C' est
tine protestation contre les mesures discriminatoires et Ies persecutions quels que soient le moment ou le lieu ou eUes se produisent; en somme,
el1e se borne a attirer l'attention des Membres
sur le fait qu'ils devraient faire cesser immediatement toute persecution et supprimer toute mesure discriminatoire fondees sur la religion, s'il
en existe queIque part dans le monde. Cette
resolution rappelle a chacun des Etats Membres
que le fait d'appartenir a l'Organisation leur
impose l'obligation d'agir con£ormement aux
principes tres eleves qu'enonce la Charte des
Nations Unies.
Le representant de l'Egypte a attire votre
attention sur l'Article 55 et je pourrais, de meme,
vous rappeler le Preambule de la Charte. L'Article 55 est tres explicite. Le texte en est le
suivant: "Les Nations Unies favoriseront le respect universe! et effectif des droits de I'homme
et des Iibertes fondamentales pour tous, sans
distinction de race, de sexe, de langue et de
religion."
En verite, je ne peux pas comprendre sur quoi
1'0n se fonde pour s'opposer ati maintien de cette
question a l'ordre du jour. Y a-toil, ici, un Etat
Membre qui se declarerait en faveur de persecutions ou de mesures discriminatoires? Y a-toil,
ici, un Etat Membre qui ne soit dispose it protester contre toute persecution ou toute mesure
discrirninatoire s'il en existe dans une partie
quelconque du monde? Nous sommes id pour
renforcer I'autorite de notre Organisation et j'ai
le sentiment qu'une resolution de cette naturequi attirera l'attention de tous les Etats sur Ies
persecutions et les mesures discriminatoires, au
cas ou il en subsisterait-renforcera l'autorite de
l'Organisation et en fera la grande force morale
qu'elle doit constituer.
Nous ne pouvons fermer les yeux sur le fait
que l'on continue a appliquer des mesures discriminatoires dans certaines parties du monde.
La delegation de l'Inde a depose une plainte
formeUe contre un Etat Membre de l'Organisation. Je n'entreprendrai pas d'examinet si cette
plainte est fondee; je desire seulement attirer
votre attention sur le fait qu'une plainte formeUe
a ete deposee devant notre Organisation.
La resolution qui nous occupe ne vise aueun
Etat en particulier. ElIe est de caractere general et, a mon avis, le fait qu'elle a un caractere
general et une portee qui n'est limitee ni aux
Etats europeens, ni aux Etats asiatiques, ni aux
Etats africains, ne fait que la rendre plus impor~
tante et plus· utile.
Avec toute l'energie dont je suis capable, je
declare ici que ce serait une grave erreur que de
retirer cette resolution de l'ordre du jour. QueUe

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

958

sion would you be creating on th~ outside ~or~d?
The impression would be that this OrgaruzatlOn
has not the strength to condemn persecution and
discrimination if they are taking place in any part
of the world. Is that the impression you want to
convey to the world at a stage when we are just
a growing Organization, when we want. to
.strengthen ourselves and create an impressIOn
upon the world that we do not merely sign
Charters, but believe in observing the objects and
purposes of the Charter?

I strongly commend the resolution of the
Egyptian delegation for your support.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Saint-Lot, representative of Haiti.
Mr. SAINT-LoT (Haiti) ( translated from
French): The Republic of Haiti is happy to be
able· to offer, through me, its spokesman, its
sincere congratulations to the Egyptian delega. tion for requesting the inclusion in our agenda of
one of the most important questions which the
conscience of this august Assembly must face, a
question, the importance and gravity of which, it
has never failed to appreciate. My country is all
the more gratified since only a few months ago it
took the initiative in tabling a proposal to the
same effect at the Mexico Conference, a proposal
which, unfortunately, was not adopted.
The Republic of Haiti supports the Egyptian
proposal wholeheartedly and to the fullest possible extent. It does so, not only because my
country is a Negro Republic, but also because, as
a Member of the United Nations, it attaches
great importance to the ultimate sllccess of the
work undertaken by this Organization.
My country fee1~ that such a vital problem as
the crying evil of racial discrimination should not
be glossed over or shirked; it should be considered
with all the good faith it deserves and with all the
loyalty necessary to enable the Organization of
which we are Members to achieve the fine and
noble purpose of establishing greater harmony,
understanding and brotherhood between men,
regardless of their language, their religion or the
colour of their skin.

This question of racial and religious discrimination has played a very prominent part in the
past. It was partly in order to remedy the harmful effects of that discrimination that the whole
world, the civilized world, the world that still
attaches a certain value to the human being, to
the dignity of the human person, launched a
concerted attack on fascism and nazi~m.
To have got rid of Hitler is not enough. We
must also get rid of Rosenberg, that is, of the
exponent~ of the theory of raciali!\m and of all
those ~'ho tend to divide men into' water-tight
con:part:n:ents, to classify them according to
vanous slIght and unimportant physical differ~nces (for experience has shown that thirty or

9 November 1946

serait la reaction de I'opiniol1 publique s'il en
etait ainsi? L'opinion croirait que notre Organisation n'est pas assez forte po~r :oz:dam~ler
les persecutions et les mesu~es dlSCrmllUatolres
qui peuvent exist Cl' en un heu qucI 'onque du
monde. Est-ce la l'impression que VOllS desircz
donner au monde, au stade actud, aIm":> que
"otre Organisation se trouye encore en pldne
eroissance, au moment ou nous desirons affcnnir
notre autorite et bire comprcndrc au mondc que
nous ne nous contentons pas de signer des
chartes, mais que nous summc:; decide:; a respccter les fins et ~l attdndre ks huts de la
Charte?
Je vous demande done instaml1lcnt d'appuyer
la resolution de la delegation cgypticnnl:.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donnc la parole
1L Saint-Lot, representant d'Haiti.

a

M. SAI::>;T-LoT (HaIti): La Republique
d'Haiti est heureuse de pouvoir, par man organe,
adresser ses plus vives felicitations
la delegation egyptienne qui a hkn V1111h, demander
I'inscription a I'ordre du jour de l'.'\.sscmblCe
generale de l'une des qUe."tiom; IC$ plu~ importantes qui se posent a la com:ricnce de.' notre haute
Assemblce et dont l'importance et Pintcrct ne
lui ant jamais echappe. 1\lon pay~ ~ f{-lidte
d'avoir pris, il y a que1que'\ mois ;l peine,
l'initiative d'lIne proposition tendant aux memes
buts, proposition dep~el" "lllr le hnrc-:lll d(' la
COllfprC'n!'(' e'e MC',';!'(, ("t(jui n'a malheurru!tt'ment pas ete acccptce.
La Republique d'Haiti appuie la proposition
de l'Egypte, dans toute sa force et dans toute sa
teneur. EIle l'appllie. mm pa..<; l'f:lI1<'mcnt par:~e
qu'elIe est nnc republiquc d(' ni'~l"es, mais aU!'I..'li
parce que, Membre des Nations Unies., eUe
attache une tres grande importance au su~
final dr.s tranux entrepris par cette Orga-

a

nis~tion.

La Republiquc d'Haiti estim' qu'un probl(:me all:\Si important que po.<;c un mal aussi
aigu que cdui des di:·:rriminations raciale-, ne
peut ctrr ni csr'omote, ni mcmt': elude; it doit
CtH':. pris en consideration avec toute la bonne
foi qu'il requiert et toute la loyaute nece.".'laire
ram ~erm("ttre a l'()r~ani."atinn dont nOllS
sommes Membres c!'attl"indrc {'("tk fin nohI' et
elevee: instaurer entre les hommes plus de concorde, de comprehension et de frnternite, queUes
que soient leur languc, Ieur reli~ion ou la couleur de lcur peau.
Ccs discriminations racialn: ct l"cIigieuscs ant
eu une tr(:s ~rande imporlance d~l.n." le passe.
C'est en partic contrr km"!' mCfait!' que le monde
cntier, le monde civilise, le mondc qui attache
encore unc rcrtaine \'aklll" a rt:trc humain, a
la personne humaine, s'cst conccrte puur nWIle,'
l'as.~atlt contre le fascisme et le nazism{'.
II ne sumt pas d'a\"oir supprimc Hitler.
II fant C:gaIcmcnt ~upprimr.r Rc.~~nberg, ('C.'it-adi:'c !cs thl~orjdens dll racisme, ccux qui ont
tcndanr.c a cnmpartimt.'llt('1' les !lflmmt's, it le~
~cricr sdon une foule de petitrs diff"l'cn(es. 'Ill atiques qui n'ont aucune importance (car l'experience est la pour d6nontrer qu'il suffit de trentc

~.

f} novembre 1946

95')

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

forty years are enough to eliminate these distinctions) .

ou quarante ans pour que toutes ces caracteristiques disparaissent).

Our fundamental concern is Man, his reactions and his inherent ability to progress.
Those are the factors that should carry weight
with us, not the colour of his skin or purely external characteristics resulting from his physical
environment.

Au fond, il y a l'homme, ses l'eactions, ses
possibilites de perfectionnement. C'est surtout
ce qui doit avoir de la valeur a nos yeux, et
non pas la teinte de la peau ou les simples
caracteristiques exterieures que determinent les
conditions physiques dans lesquelles vivent les
humains.
Unequestion d'une telle importance, disonsnous, doit etre abordee avec bonne foi -et
loyaute. Certes, nous nous heurterons a certaines
reactions, mais nous ne devons pas en avoir peur
si nous voulons reellement construire la paix et
elaborer un monde nouveau fondesur d'autres
ideaux.
Voila pourquoi nous appuyons cette resolution
de l'Egypte, car si la Charte de San-Francisco
doit avoir a nos yeux une certaine dlicacite, il
faut qu'outre les principes qui y sont stipules,
elle prevoie des forces de coerc,;ition. Il faut en
assurer la mise en reuvre. Or, on ne peut le faire
si, tout en proclamant l'eminente dignite de la
personnalite humaine, tout en proscrivant les discriminations de race et de religion, nous ntavons
pas un organisme qui nous permette de savoir
qud est le sort reserve it ccrtaines minorites qui,
pour des questions de race et de religion, S011t
avidement, au sein de notre collectivite, exploitees et opprimees.
I1 ne peut pas exister un monde de justice
quand il y a encore, sur un point quelconque
de notre planete, des etres humains qui vivent
dans l'angoisse et dans la crainte, dont les
libertes ne sont pas respectees, dont les prerogatives essentielles ne sont pas non· plus
sauvegardees.
Quels que soient nos discours, queUe que soit
l'hypocrisie de nos formules, cette paix pour laqueUe nous lutterons, ce monde nouveau que
nous voulons edifier ne seront qu'un !enrre si
nous avons peur· de regarder les realites telles
qu'elles sont.
Tel est le point de vue de la delegation de
mon pays qui, je le repete, serait h~ureuse ?e
voir inscrite a l'ordre du jour des NatlOns Urues
cette palpitante question des discriminations radales et religieuses.

A question as important as this, we repeat,
should be approached in good faith and in a
spirit of loyalty. We shall, of course, come up
against certain tendencies, but we must face
them without fear if we genuinely wish to construct peace and a new world based on fresh
ideals.
That is why we support the Egyptian resolution; if the San Francisco Charter is to be at all
effective, it must, we think, provide for enforcement action to implement the· principles laid
down, and we must see that such action is taken.
But this cannot be done if, whilst proclaiming the
high dignity of the human person and outlawing
discrimination based on race and religion, we
have no organ capable of ascertaining the fate of
certain minorities in our community, who are
greedily exploited and harshly oppressed on account of their race or religion.

There cannot be a world of justice so long as
there are any parts of our planet where human
beings live in fear and anxiety, where their freedams are not respected and where there are no
safeguards of their fundamental rights.

Whatever speeches we may make, if we rely
on empty words and are afraid to look facts in
the face, that peace for which we are striving
and that new world we wish to build will be a
mere delusion.
That is my delegation's point of view; we
should be happy, I repeat, to see this burning
question of racial and religious discrimination
placed on the agenda of the United Nations.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Lange, representative of Poland.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Lange, representant de la Pologne.
.

~

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de r anglais) :
J'ai lu avec le plus grand interet la resolutio.n
qu'a proposee le represent~~ d~ l'~gypte; Je
tiens a declarer que notre delegatIOn eprouve la
plus grande s)'ffipathie a l'egard des se~timents
et des idees dont s'inspire cette resolutIOn.
La nation polonaise est restee pendant six
ans sous l'occupation nazie et elle sait tout ce·
que signifie la discrimination raciale. Six millions de citoyens de notre pays sont morts au
caurs de cette occupation; plus de trois millions
d'entre eux etaient des juifs. C'est pourquoi nous
approuvons l'esprit qui inspire la resolution presentee par le representant de l'Egypte.
I1 nous semble toutefois qu'il faudrait y ap-

Mr. LANGE (Poland): I have read the resolution proposed by the representative of Egypt
with the greatest interest, and I want to state
that our delegation has the greatest sympathy
for the sentiments and ideas which are the basis
of this resolution.
The Polish nation was for six years under
nazi occupation, and knows what racial discrimination means. Six million of our citizens
perished during that occupation; more than
three million of these were Jews. We welcome,
therefore, the spirit of the resolution of the
Egyptian representative.
However, it seems to us that the resolution

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

960

requires a number of amendments. First ~f. all,
it speaks of racial discrimination, and religIous
discrimination and persecution in several States
of Central Europe. I am afraid that a doctrine
of this sort might imply, if adopted in this form,
the acceptance of racial and religious persecution in other parts of the world.

porter un certain nombre de modifications. Tout
d'abord, la resolution mentionne des mesures de
discriminations fondees sur la race et sur la religion et de persecutions qui pourraient exister
dans plusieurs Etats de I:Europe centrale. Je
crains que si elle est expnmee et adoptee dans
ces termes, cette these ne semble impliquer que
les persecutions raciales et rcligieuses sontacceptables lorsqu'elles se produisent dans d'autres
parties du monde.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
This part of the resolution has been withdrawn
by the representative of Egypt.

Le PR(.:SIDENT: Cette partie de la resolution
a ete retiree par le representant de l'Egypte.

M. LANGE (PoIogne) (traduit dt l'anglais):
Ma remarque est done sans objet. J'avais sous
les yeux le texte non amende. Je desire po."ier une
seconde question; eHe s'inspire de l'experience
que nous avons faite dC$ m~lIre'l di!'C'riminatoires
et des persecutions dont ont soufl'crt les minorit6
raciales et religieuscs d'Europc ccntrale ct orientale.
Pour autant que jc le sa. he. tou~ l~ GouTo the best of my knowledge, all Governments
vernements
de cettc partic de l'Europe s'oppoin that part of Europe are most strongly opposed
to any form of such discrimination or such per- sent tres energiquement aces mesurt!' di:-crimisecution. In the case of our own country, we natoires et ces persecutions SOllS quc1quC' forme
have not only constitutional guarantees of the qu'elles se presentent. l'our cc qui ~t de mon
equality of all citizens, but we have special pays, non seulement l'cgalitc des C'ito)'t'ns est
legislation which prohibits any incitement to garantie par la con<::titution, mais nous avans des
religious or racial discrimination and, in certain lois speciales qui interdisent toute incitation a.
cases, even applies to the families. We also des mesures de discrimination religieuse au rahave special tribunals which try all such cases. ciale et qui, dans ccrtains cas, s'appliquent aux
familles des interesses aUS'li bien qu'a r~ derniers. Nousavons aussi des tribunaux spCC'iaux
devant lesquels sont portces toutes Ies affaires de
cet ordre.
11 est vrai qu'iI subsistc en Europe- pas
However, it is true that in Europe - not only
in Central Europe - and maybe in other parts selllement en Europe fcntm1e -_. C't peut-etre
of the world, there are strong remnants of that allssi dans d'autres parties du monde, d('S foyers
ideology which, for several years, had a great assez vigoureux de Cl'tte doctrine fa~i~e qui,
influence; namely, fascism. And fascist move- pendant de longues annces. a ('x("rc~ unc m
ments exist in Europe. They exist also in my grande influence. It y a en Europe dt'S mouveown country. The new democratic Governments ments fascistes. 11 y en a mi:me dans mon pays.
of Central and Eastern Europe do their best to Les nouveaux Gouvemements democratiques de
oppose these fascist movements and to protec;t all l'Europe centrale et de l'Europe orie:ntale font
religious and racial minorities whose members de leur mieux pour lutter contre ccs mouvements
sometimes are attacked by such fascist organiza- et proteger toutes les minorites reliweuses et rations.
ciales dont les membrcs sont parfois cn butte aux
attaques des organi,sations £:lscist~.
Unfortunately, this attitude of the democratic
Malheureusement, l'attitude des Gouve:meGovernments in Central and Eastern Europe is ments democratiques de l'Europe ccntrale ct de
very frequently misunderstood. In our own case, l'Europe odentale est tre~ souvcnt mal intcrp~­
statements were made that 'we are allegedly a tee. On a dit, par exemple, que la Polo~e etait
police State because we put in jail those who un Etat policier parce que nous cmprisonno ns
excite or permit excesses against our Jewish ceux qui se livrcnt des incitations la violence
fellow-citizens.
contre nos concitoyens juif:- ou CCIlX qui t()lrrcnt
une telle violence.
Furthermore, the fascist groups and elements
De plus, les groupcs et Ies elcm(;~nl<; f:l. istes
which have still remained in that part of Europe qui subsic;tent encore clans cctte partie de rEu~
get support and encouragement from ahroad.
rope re~oivent des appuis et des encouragements
de l'extericur.
I think the question was discus~ed in detail
le crois que la question a etc discutce cn debefore the Third Committee in connection with
tnil devant la. Troisicme Commission au sujet du
the question of refugees and the operation of problcme des refugies et des a~ements des orf~cist organizations in the refugee camps, where ganisations fascistcs dans lcs camps de rc:fugies
direct .contacts are maintained with similar ou elles entretiennent des contacts directs avec

Mr. LANGE (Poland): I will drop this point.
I had an old copy of the text. The other point
which I want to mention is based on the experi. ences we have had in connexion with the persecution and discrimination of racial and religious
minorities in Central and Eastern Europe.

a

a

a

9 novembre 1946

961

Quaranfe-septieme seance p(eniere

organizations in the countries of Central and lcs organisations de meme nature des pays
Eastern Europe.
d'Europe centrale et orientale.
Furthermore, in certain cases, like that of
En outre, il y a des cas particuliers comme ce1ui
Yugoslavia, or in our own case, there are entire de la Yougoslavie ou de notre pays; on laisse
fascist organizations, even military organizations, dans certaines parties de l'Allemagne operer de
which are allowed to operate in some parts of veritablcs organisations fascistes, voire militaires;
Germany, and which, again, maintain contact \ ces organisations se ticnnent en contact avec les
with their fascist followers in the countries of ! fascistes des pays d'Europe orientale et centrale
Eastern and Central Europe. and which inspire j et les incitent a. commcttre des actes de persecuthem to acts of persecution and violence against ] tion et de violence contre des membres de mino~
members of religious or racial minorities.
1 rites religieuses ou ethniques.
J'estime qu'il faut tenir compte de ces faits.
I think that these facts should be taken into ,I
account. Therefore, if the Assembly decides to I C'est pourquoi, si l'Assemblee decide d'inscrire
put the Egyptian rerolution on the agenda, I re- i la resolution cgyptienne a l'ordre dll jour, je me
serve, in the name of my delegation, the right I reserve le droit, au nom de ma d~Iegation, de
to present amendments at the proper time. These I presenter des amendements en temps opportun.
amendments will mention the remnants of I Ces amendements mentionneront l'existence
fascism which still operate in Europe; they will; d't'-lemcnts fascistes qui operent encore en Eucall upon aU Governments to intensify their j rope, invitcront taus les Gouvernements a iutenstruggle against the remnants of fascism and. ; sifier kur lutte contre ces derniers representants
finally, will call upon all Goyernments and du fascisme, et engageront enfin taus les GouPowers to refrain from giving any encourage- \ 1':Tlt'lltt'l1t:-: et toutcs les Puissances a s'abstenir
:nent to t~~e re~nnants of fascism or frOl:n mak- d'encoura~cr d'une fac;on quclconque ces 61erng any dlfIlcultles for the new democratIc Gov- : mcnts faScliites, et a s'abstenir de crecr des diffiernmcnts wbich arc struggling against fasci.c;m. ! CllltCS nux nouveaux Gouvernements democratiques qui luttent contre le fascisme.
!

1

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I,
Le PRr.;SIDENT: Je donne la parole a
call upon :Mr. Manuilsk)1, reprec;entnti,'c of the: :M. Manuilsky, representant de la Republique
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
. sodalistc sovictique d'Ukraine.
Mr. MANUlI.SKY (Ukrainian Soviet Sociali.<;t ~
~r. ),IA:-;CILSKY (Republique socialiste sovieRepublic) (translated trom French): A mis- j tique d'Ukraine): n y a eu un malentendu
understanding arose when we discussed this ques- j lorsque nous avons discute cette question au
tion in the General Committee. It then appeared Bureau. Il apparais.'5ait alors que nous etions un
that we were more or less obliged, by the terms, pen tenus, par cette proposition, d'en Iimiter
of this proposal, to restrict its application to Cen- ll'application a I'Europe centrale. Mais qu'est-ce
tral Europe. But of what does Central Europe: que l'Europe centrale? e'est notamment l'Alleconsist? Of Germany and AtLCJtria, in particular, i magne, l'Autricht, des pays au s'exerce le concountries under Allied control.
: trole allie.
We wondered whether, under these conditions, - Nous nOlls sommes demande si. dans ces conthe result of this proposal mi~ht not occasionally t ditions, la proposition n'aurait pas parfois pour
be to shield the German population from the J remitat de defendre la population allemande
Allied authoritit~. and the Control Commic;sions. I contre les autorites alliees, contre les CommisI sions de contr8le.
Voila. pourquoi j'etais anime d'une certaine
This is why 1 was rather chary of the proposal.!
I suspicion a regard de cette proposition.
After listening to the speech of the representaApres avoir cntendu le discours du representive of India and the eloquent words of the repre-I' tant de l'Inde et cdui, fort eloquent, du representative of Haiti, however, I have understood its senta.nt d'Haiti, j'ai micux compris de quoi it
import more clearly, and am now in a position to . s'agissait. Je puis declarer maintenant, au nom
declare, on behalf not onl)' of the delegation of de la delegation d'Ukrainc et, j'en suis silr, de
the Ukraine, but also I am sure of all the Slav toutrs le." delegation!'; slaves qui sont id, que nons
delegations here. that we are prepared to give sommes disposes a soutenir ardemment cette
our full support to this proposal.
proposition.
Je propose, en consequence. de declarer clos
I therefore Stlg~est that the debate on this proposal should be closed and the Assembly invited le debat et de demander a I'Assemblee de voter
to adopt the proposal by acclamation.
la proposition par nc:cIamntions.

I

I

The PRESIDENT (translated trom French):
I call upon Mr. Noel-Baker, representative of
the United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole ~l M. NoelBaker, representant du Royaume-Uni.

Mr. NOEL~BAKER (United Kingdom): After
the very long discussion which we had in the
General Committee, it gave me particular pleasure to hear the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic accept the point of
view which I defended there at some length

M, NOEL-BAKER (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l' anglais): Apres notre tres longue discussion all
Bureau de 1'Assemblce, j'ai etc particulierement
heurel1x d'entcndre le rcpre~('nt;mt de b Rfpublique socialistc sovietique d'Ukraine aclmettre
le point de "ue ql1e j'a\'3i~ n~~('z longucm,'nt de-

i,

~.

-=
Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

962

against what he at that time argued. I had
originally asked if I might speak in order to
make the proposal which he has made, n~dy,
that this resolution should be adopted WIthout
reference to a Committee.
However, it has been suggested by the representative of Poland that he would like to put
forward amendments. I accept the argument
on which he based his proposal. I believe with
him that there are remnants of fascist movements
in Europe. I assure him, if he was thinking of
any Governments with whom I have any contact, that no one would be more delighted than
we should be to support the strongest measures
that can be taken against those who persecute
people of the Jewish race. I would, therefore,
be ready myself to support amendments to this
resolution, if they are thought to be necessary,
which were in the sense proposed by Mr. Lange.
On the other hand, if he thinks that the resolution in its new fonn will do as it is, I hope
then that the Ukraine proposal will be accepted
and that the resolution will be adopted at once.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I would remind the Assembly that we are not
discussing whether the resolution should be
adopted, but whether this matter should be included in the Assembly's agenda. If the proposal submitted by the Egyptian delegation is
put on the agenda, it will come before the Assembly again for full discussion.
I call upon Riad Bey, representative of Saudi
Arabia to speak on a point of order.

.9 November 1946

fendu contre les arguments qu'il avait lui-meme
soutenus alors. C'est precisement pour faire la
proposition qu'il a faite lui-meme, a savoir
d'adopter la presente resolution sans la renvoyer
a une Commission, que j'avais a l'origine demande la parole.
Toutefois, le representant de la Polognc a
manifeste le desir de proposer des amendements.
J'accepte les arguments sur lesquels il fonde sa
proposition. Je crois avec lui qu'il existe en
Europe des restes de mouvements fascistes. Je
puis I'assurer, s'il pensait a ce moment a des
Gouvernements avec lesquels je puisse etre d'une
maniere quelconque en relations, que nul ne
serait plus dispose que moi a appuyer l'adoption
des mesures les plus energiques contre ceux qui
perseeutent des personnes de race juive. Je serais done pret, pour ma part, a appuyer, si on les
juge neeessaires, des amendements a la presente
resolution qui s'inspireraient du meme esprit que
ceux qu'a proposes M. Lange. Si, par contre, i1
estirne que la resolution, sous sa forme nouvelle,
peut convenir telle qu'elle est, j'espere que la
proposition de l'Ukraine sera acceptee et' que la
resolution sera adoptee immediatement.
Le PRESIDENT: Je rappelle que nous discutons, non pas la question de savoir s'il faut
adopter la resolution, mais l'inscription de cette
question a l'ordre du jour de l'Assemblee. Si la
motion presentee par la delegation egypticnne
est mise a l'ordre du .i0ur, dIe reviendra devant
l' Assemblee et provoquera une discussion COInplete.
Je donne la parole a Riad Bey, representant
de l'Arabie saoudite, pour nne motion d'ordre.

RrAD Bey (Saudi Arabia): We are discussing
RIAD Bey (Arabie saoudite) (traduit de l' annow the question whether the proposal of the glais): La presente discussion a pour objet de
Egyptian delegation will be placed on the decider si la proposition de la delegation egypagenda. But if the Assembly accepted the pro- . tienne sera inscrite ou non a l'ordre du jour.
posal of the representative of the Ukraine, Cependant, si l' AssembIee acceptait la proposiwhich consists in adopting by acclamation· the tion du representant de 1'Ukraine, qui consiste a
text of the Egyptian proposal, we should have adopter par acclamations le texte de la propodecided at one time on the inclusion of this item sition egyptienne, l'inscription de cette proposion the agenda and on the text itself. If the tion a l'ordre du jour, et l'adoption de son texte
representative of Poland were to withdraw the se trouveraient decidees du meme coup. Si, par
amendment proposed, we could then proceed as consequent, le representant de la Pologne etait
I have indicated, and the question would be dispose a retirer l'amendement qu'il vient de
settled.
proposer, nous suivrions la procedure que je
viens d'indiquer et la question se trouverait
reglee.
.
I should like to remark here that the question
Je tiens a faire remarquer des maintenant que
relative to the fascist elements which remain in la pr?position presentee par l'Egypte ne fait pas
Europe is not mentioned in the text presented by mentlOn du probleme des elements fascistes qui
the delegation of Egypt.
subsistent encore en Europe.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: L'AssembIee agira comme eile
The Assembly will act as it thinks fit, but, as l'e.ntend, mais, en tant que President, je dois
President, I must see that the rules of procedure fall'e respecter les regles de procedure.
are observed.
The question before us is that of the inclusion
La question posee est celle de l'inscription a
of the item on the agenda and not the discussion 1'ordre du jour et non pas la discussion du fond
of the substance of the problem. The delegations du probleme. Les delegations n'ont pas ete prewere not notified that the substance of this venues que cette question viendraitendiscUS8ion
matter would come up for discussion, and had quant au fond et, si les orateurs avaient bien
the ~pe.akers been good enough to keep within vo'ulu demeurer dans les limiteS de l'ordre du
the linuts of the agenda, that is, only discussing jour, c'est-a-dire ne discuter que sur I'inscrip-

9 novembre 1946

963

Quarante-septieme seance pleniere

the question of the inclusion of the item on the
. agenda, this debate need never have taken place.
As only the question of the inclusion of the
item on the agenda is to be dealt with, we cannot take any decision on the substance of the
matter today.

tion a l'ordre du jour, toute cette discussion n'aurait pas eu lieu.
11 nous faut decider seulement si la question
doit etre inscrite a l'ordre du jour; nous ne pouvons prendre aujourd'hui decision sur le fond.

Mr. SAINT-LOT (Haiti) (translated from
French): I will confine myself to a suggestion.
The proposal of the Ukrainian representative
consists of two parts. The first part asks us to
adopt by acclamation the proposal of the
Egyptian delegation, that is, to include the question of discrimination on the agenda.
In the second part, the Ukrainian representative goes further, and states that if the Assembly
accepts the suggested amendments he would consider the second part adopted.

M. SAINT-LOT (Haiti) Je me bornerai a presenter une motion. La proposition du representant de l'Ukraine est composee de deux parties.
L'une d'elles tend a nous demander de voter
par acclamations la proposition de la deh~gation
de I'Egypte, c'est-a-dire d'inscrire a l'ordre du
jour la question des discriminations.
Dans la deuxieme partie, le representant de
l'Ukraine va plus loin et il declare que si l'AssembIee acceptait les amendements qui sont suggeres,
il considerait cette deuxieme partie comme
acquise.
Le President vient de rappeler quelques regles
qui empechent l'adoption de la deuxieme partie
de la proposition. Nous sommes d'accord avec
lui a ce propos.
Il semble, toutefois, que la premiere partie de
la proposition pent etre adoptee, a savoir que
la proposition faite par l'Egypte d'inscrire la
question a l'ordre du jour est adoptee par accla- .
mations. En dIet, cette premiere partie n'a ete,
au fond, combattue par pcrsoffile. C'est pourquoi e1le peut etre considcree comme acceptee.

The President has just reminded us of certain
rules which preclude the adoption of the second
part of the proposal. We agree with him on this
point.
It appears, however, that the first part of the
proposal can be adopted, that is to say, the
Egyptian proposal for the inclusion of this item
on the agenda by acclamation. Indeed, this first
part has not really been opposed by anyone; it
can therefore be, regarded as accepted.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I can allow that procedure. The Egyptian delegation asks that, contrary to what was suggested
by the General Committee, its proposal shall be
included on the agenda and come directly before the Assembly again, for- a discussion of the
substance of the problem. I can put that to the
vote now, if you wish; in fact, I think I could
have done so long ago.

Le PRESIDENT: Je puis admettre cette procedure. La delegation de l'Egypte demande que,
contrairement a ce qui a ete suggerc par le
Bureau, sa proposition soit inscrite a l'ordre du
jour et revienne directement devant l'Assernblee,
pour etre discutee au fond. Cela, je puis le mettre aux voix des maintenant, si VOllS le voulez;
j'estime meme que j'aurais pu le faire depuis
longtemps.

Mr. NOEL-BAKER (United Kingdom):
move that.

I

M. NOEL-BAKER (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): yappuie cette proposition.

Mr. BLOOM (United States of America): The
delegation of the United States of America
wishes to go on record as approving the resolution offered by the Egyptian delegation. The
hour is late. We do not believe there should be
any more talk on this subject, and I second the
motion of the two. representatives who spoke
previously that we should adopt the resolution
immediately.

M. BLOOM (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis approuve la resolution proposee par la delegation
cgyptienne et desire que cette approbation figure
au proces-verbal .. 11 se fait tard. Nous ne pensons pas qu'il soit necessaire de debattre plus
longternps la question, et j'appuie la motion des
deux representants qui m'ont precede et qui ont
propoRe l'adoption immediate de la resolution.

111'. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The
Soviet delegation considers that the question
under discussion relates solely to procedure, and
the explanations given by the President, a few
moments ago, are fully approved by the Soviet
delegation.
The best thing we can do now, especially in
view of the late hour, is to adopt the proposal
by acclamation without any voting and include
this question on the agenda. The Soviet delegation is in favour of this procedure.
.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques socinlistes sovietiques) (traduit du rwse): La delegation sovietique estime que la question qui nous
occupe n'a trait qu'a la procedure, et elle approuve sans restriction l'explication que vient
de donner le President.
Le mieux que nous puissions faire maintenant,
etaIJ,t donne l'heure tardive, ce serait d'adopter
la proposition par acclamations, sans scrutin, et
d'inscrire cette question a. l'ordre du jour. La
delegation sovietique appuie done la proposition
. tendant a ce que l'AssembIee decide par acclamations d'inscrire cette proposition a l'ordre du
jour.

I

"

Forty-seventh Plenary Meeting

9 November 1946

964

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Assembly will no doubt agree to accept
the proposal of the representative of the Uni?n
of Soviet Socialist Republics. It would be VVlSe
to decide unanimously that the question shall
be placed on the agenda and referred back
directly to the Assembly.
Decision: The President's proposal was
adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: L'Assemb1ee sera sans doute
d'accord pour accepter la proposition qui a ete
formulee par le representant de rUnion des Republiques socialistes ~~etiques. La sa~esse est
de decider, a. l'unarunute, que la questIon sera
portee a. I'ordre du jour et reviendra directement
devant l' Assemblee.
Decision: La proposition du President est
adoptee.

106. Terms of Office of Members elected
to the Councils: report of ~he Sixth
Committee: resolution (document
Aj182l

106. Duree du mandat des Membres elus
aux Conseils. Rapport de la Sixieme
Commission. Resolution {document
Aj182l

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The last item on our agenda can, I think, be
dealt with rather rapidly. We now have to
examine the report of the Sixth Committee on
the terms of office of members elected to the
Councils (annex 32).
I call upon Mr. Bailey, representative of Australia, Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee.
Mr. BAILEY (Australia): Mr. President, at

this hour I am sure that the Sixth Committee
would not wish me, and you would not pennit
me, to read the lengthy report which the Com. mittee has presented to the Assembly. I shall
read the resolution as the Committee's agreed
solutiQD of a rather technical matter. The resolution is as follows:
"The General Assembly,
"1. Approves the report on the terms of
office of Members elected to Councils presented by the Sixth Committee;
"2. Resolves to replace rule 87 of the
amended provisional rules of procedure for
the General Assembly and rule J of the supplementary provisional rules of procedure for
the first session of the General Assembly by
the following rules:
Rule 87
"The term of office of members shall begin
on 1 January following their election by the
General Assembly, and shall end on 31 December following the election of their successors.
Supplementary Rule]

":NIembers of Councils elected for one, two
and three years during the first part of the
first regular session of the General Assembly
shall hold office until 31 December 1946,
1947 and 1948, respectively. Their successors
shall be elected during the second part of the
first regular session and during the second
and third regular sessions of the General
Assembly respectively, and shall take and
continue in office in accordance with rule 87."

Decision:
adopted.

The resolution was unanimously

The meeting ~ose at 2:55 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT: Le dernier point a notre
ordre du jour pent, je pense, etreexaminc a.c;sez
rapidement. I1 s'agit dl1 rapport de la Sixieme
Commission sur la duree du mandat des Mem~
hres clus aux Conseils (annexe :)2).
Je donne la parole a. M. Bailey, representant
de I'Australie, Rapporteur de la Sixicmc Commission.

M. BAILEY (Australie) (traduit de l'flnglnis) ~
Monsieur le President je suis sQr que la Sixicme
Commission ne desirerait pas, ct que \'ous ne
perrnettriez pas ql1'a cette hcure tardive je
donne lecture du long rapport que la Commission a soumis l'Assemblee. le lirai st~1I1ement
la resolution sur laque11e la Commi~ion s'est
mise d'accord pour rcsoudre cc probl('me d'ordre
plutot technique. Voici cc texte:
((L'Assemblee genera/e,
"1. Approuve le rapport relatif all=< mandats des Etats Mern bres Bus aux Conscils
sente par la Sixieme Commission;
"2. Decide de remplacer l'article B7 du
glement intcrieur provisoire modi fie de r A~
semblee generaIe et I'm-tide J du r,egk..ment
provisoire additionne1 de la premiere session
de l'Assemblee generale par les articles suivants:

a

prere-

Article 87
"Le mandat des membres entre en vigueur
le 1er janvier qui suit leur election par I' Assemblee generale et prend fin le 31 decembre
qui suit l'eIection de leurs successeurs.
Article addition.nel J
"Les membres des Conseil eJus pour un,
deux ou trois ans, au cours de la premiere
partie de la premiere session ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale r~tcront en functions) respectivement; jusqu'au 31 deccmbre 1946,
1947 et 1948. Leurs successeurs scront clus
respectivement au cours de la deuxicme partie
de la premiere session ordinaire et au COlU'-S des
deuxieme et troisieme sessions ordinaires de
I'Assemblee generale; l'article 87 rcglera leur
entree en fonctions et la duree de leur mandat."
Decision: Cette resolution est adoptte
['unanimite.

La sloncc est [elIte a 14 h. 55.

a
