UNITED

NATIONS

YEAR

THIRTY-SECOND
th

MEE’I ‘I NG: 15 JUNE 1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/20 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . , . , . .’

1

Expresbion of thanks to the retiring President ........................
Adoption of the agenda ......................................
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12342 and Add.1) . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.20 12

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2012TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

15 June 1977, at 11.30 p.m.
issue, members have agreed that an invitation should be
extended, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisiona!
rules of procedure, to Mr. Vedat Celik. I understand from
our consultations of yesterday that members of the Council
wish to follow the same procedure this time. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council decides to extend
an invitation to Mr, Celik under rule 39 and, at the
appropriate time, I shall ‘invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 2)
It was so decided.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12342 and Add. 1)
The meeting was called to order at 11.55 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
I. The PRESIDENT: First, and very briefly, considering
the very short time available, I should like to pay a tribute
to my predecessor, the representative of Benin, who
showed me how well things can be handled. I hope I can do
as well.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12342 and Add.1)
2. The PRESIDENT: I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the question on the agenda. I therefore propose, in
conformity with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and in
accordance with the usual practice, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.
At the invitation of the Resident, Mr, Z. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. I, lXrkmen (mrkey) and Mr. G. Papoulias
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that, on
previous occasions when the Council has considered this

4. The PRESIDENT: The report of the Secretary-General
and Add.11 concerns the United Nations operti
tion in Cyprus for the period 7 December 1976 to 7 June
1977. I should like also to draw attention to the report of
the Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph6 of
Security Council resolution 401 (1976) -[S/12323]. In
addition, the Council has before it a draft resolution
[S/12346] drawn up in the course of consultations among
its members.
[S/l2342

5. I propose now, if I hear no objection,
resolution to the vote immediately.

to put the draft

A vote was taken by show of hands.
me draft resolution

was adopted by 14 votes to none. 1

One member (China) did not participate

in the voting.

6. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General has indicated
a wish to speak following the adoption of the draft
resolution, I now call on him.
7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken careful
note of the resolution which the Council has just adopted. I
wish to assure the Council that I will do my utmost to give
effect to its decisions. As far as UNFICYP is concerned, the
necessary arrangements will be made for the continuance of
its functioning for the next six months.
8. The resolution just adopted-just in time-also requests
me to continue the mission of good offices entrusted to me
by the Council in resolution 367 (1975). I have reported
fully to the Council on my efforts so far, most recently in
the current report and also in my report of 30 April 1977
[S/12323]. My Special Representative in Cyprus and I shall
continue our efforts to assist the negotiations between the
representatives of the two communities. I continue to
1 Seeresolution 410 (1977).

believe that these negotiations are the best available method
of achieving a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem. I hope that the current series of meetings being
held under the auspices of my Special Representative at
Nicosia will be effective in clearing the way for substantive
negotiations on all issues at the next full round of talks.

means of improving the financial situation. I shall continue
my own efforts in this regard and I should be most grateful
for the active co-operation of the members of the Council
in solving this very urgent problem, which in the present
circumstances throws a heavy burden upon a very small
number of States.

9. I wish to draw the special attention of the Council to
the paragraphs of my report relating to the financial
situation of UNFICYP. The deficit now stands at $54.1
million. It is, therefore, more necessary than ever to find

10. I shall keep the Council fully informed of my efforts
to carry out the tasks which it has entrusted to me.
The meetingrose

on Thursday, 16 June, at 12.05 am.

2
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

l.OQ.(or

equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-March

1977-2,200

,

;
