United Nations

S/PV.5191

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5191

st meeting
Tuesday, 31 May 2005, 3.50 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Djeffal
Mr. D’Alotto
Mr. Saizonou
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mrs. Collet
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Manongi
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Letter dated 24 March 2005 from the Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly (A/59/710)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-36558 (E)

*0536558*

S/PV.5191

The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Letter dated 24 March 2005 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General
Assembly (A/59/710)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Royal Highness
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel.
It is so decided.
I invite His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al-Hussein to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document A/59/19/Add.1, which contains the report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and its Working Group on the 2005 resumed session,
and document A/59/710, which contains a letter dated
24 March 2005 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the General Assembly transmitting the
report of the Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid

2

Al-Hussein, Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel.
I now give him the floor.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein: May I
congratulate you, Madam, and the members of the
Security Council on preparing an excellent draft
presidential statement on the subject of sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I am most grateful to the Council for
having organized this briefing and for having invited
me to participate. This is the first time in its history
that the Council has ever had a public meeting of this
sort, devoted exclusively to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations
generally.
Over the past several months, and in reaction to
first reports from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, some members of the Council were of the
opinion that an immediate and open discussion by the
Council on sexual exploitation and abuse was merited,
and the argument for it was indeed strong. After some
reflection, however, those members deferred to the
General Assembly, so that a broad strategy for dealing
with sexual exploitation and abuse could be put into
place — a strategy based on consultations between all
the major troop- and equipment-contributing countries,
the Secretary-General, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office of Legal Affairs. It is the
contributions of all those separate components,
together with the opinions offered by our United
Nations colleagues in the field, that enabled my team
and I to respond promptly to the Secretary-General’s
request just over two months ago for a report, which
we entitled: “A comprehensive strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations”.
Before I turn briefly to the most recent
developments, where the work of the General
Assembly is concerned, and what lies ahead of us, I
would like, with your permission, Madam, to offer just
a few observations that I believe deserve specific
mention.
When we first began to take a close look at
sexual exploitation and abuse, what became obvious to
us was that sexual exploitation — predominantly
prostitution — in at least some United Nations
operations appeared to be widespread. The scale of

S/PV.5191

sexual abuse — that is, when the exploitation becomes
criminal — was somewhat more difficult to gauge. We
inferred, however, that given the apparent prevalent
nature of the exploitation, both by civilian as well as
by military personnel, the levels of abuse were
probably more serious than was previously thought.
Some of the possible reasons for why that has been so
are enumerated in detail in the report itself, and so I
will not repeat them here.
In reviewing all the information gathered for the
report, we also began to grasp the complexity of the
attendant legal questions — so much so that we were
concerned at how certain United Nations civilian
personnel could enjoy, by virtue of a specific set of
circumstances unforeseen at the time the United
Nations was created, complete impunity, even when
committing frightful offences, such as murder. We also
realized that, in the event that we could create the right
administrative and legal framework for addressing that
issue, we would solve many of the problems associated
not only with sexual exploitation and abuse
specifically, but also with other forms of misconduct.
Our growing understanding of sexual exploitation
and abuse led us also to ask the obvious question: Why
had we left this and other similar issues unresolved for
so long? It was well known to many in the Secretariat
in the early 1960s that the United Nations Operation in
the Congo faced difficulties relating to the illdiscipline of some of its personnel; and ever since the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group was
mounted in 1989, a steady stream of similar reports
have surfaced in relation to practically every
subsequent mission and were brought to our notice by
the Secretariat, humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and the press.
What must be emphasized, and is emphasized in
the Council’s draft presidential statement, is the
context into which we place all our words. United
Nations peacekeeping, in almost all theatres, is
dangerous, no matter how benign and peaceful
conditions may appear to be at certain times. It takes
courage for Member States to send their personnel to
participate in such an undertaking, and even greater
courage for the men and women nominated, military or
civilian, to actually go and serve. And we can rightly
be proud of what United Nations peacekeepers have
accomplished through the years. Moreover, in most
instances, whatever the abuses of United Nations
peacekeepers, they cannot compare to the viciousness

the parties to the conflict often invite on one another.
But that can hardly be the point. It would be offensive
for me to suggest that the United Nations should hold
itself to anything but the highest standards of ethical
conduct, and certainly we should never measure the
United Nations against those who would treat civilian
populations maliciously.
A peacekeeper who would exploit the
vulnerabilities of a wounded population — already the
victim of all that is tragic and cruel in war — is really
no different than a physician who would violate the
patient entrusted to his or her care or than the lifeguard
who drowns the very people in need of rescue. Actions
of that sort puncture, violently, the hope embodied by
the very presence of the person who is there to help
those in need. However rare they may be, therefore, not
only are abuses by peacekeepers repugnant to us, but
they strike at the very credibility of both the operation
in question and this Organization as a whole.
And we, the Member States, have refrained from
opening up that subject to public discourse over the
past 60 years because of what? Because sentiments of
pride, mixed in with a deep sense of embarrassment,
have often produced in us only outright denials. And
yet almost all countries that have participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations have, at one stage or
another, had some reason to feel deeply ashamed over
the activities of some of their peacekeepers.
If all of us are therefore guilty, so to speak, should
it not then be easy for us — each Member State — to
visit the transgressions of its own personnel openly,
with some measure of honesty and humility? Surely we
owe that to the victims of our abuse. Naturally, if one
is to propose such a change to the manner by which we
confront this problem, then one is obligated also to set
a good example.
I once served as a United Nations peacekeeper. I
have worked in the field with my compatriots —
military and police peacekeepers alike — and know
what good they do. I have seen them perform
extraordinary feats of courage and kindness, often in
the most trying conditions. And they, like many others,
have done so with an unswerving sense of dedication
to this world Organization. But I also recognize — and
now do so publicly in the Security Council — that on
occasion my Government has had to confront some
appalling cases of criminal conduct by a few of our
own peacekeepers, including, a few years ago, the

3

S/PV.5191

brutal rape of a local woman by a Jordanian in what
was then East Timor and, more recently, in Kosovo, the
murder by a Jordanian civilian police officer of a
fellow officer. While those are two of the worst cases,
sadly, there have been other allegations, and for those
reasons the Jordanian Government, and Jordan’s
military and police authorities, are completely
committed to seeing an end to this. Again, if we are to
overcome these difficulties, we the Member States
must resolve ourselves as best we can to recognize the
truth openly and be closer friends to it, however
painful that may sometimes be.
Only days ago, the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly examined and adopted a significant
number of the recommendations put forward by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for the posts submitted by the Secretariat
relating to sexual exploitation and abuse following on
from the adoption by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the first set of
recommendations contained in the comprehensive
report. This is all very encouraging. We expect the
Secretary-General to announce, soon, the appointment
of a group of legal experts required, by the Committee,
inter alia,
“To provide advice on the best way to
proceed so as to ensure that the original intent of
the Charter can be achieved, namely that United
Nations staff and experts on mission would never
be effectively exempt from the consequences of
criminal acts committed at their duty station, nor
unjustly penalized, in accordance with due
process”. (A/59/19/Add.1, para. 40 (a))
The expert group is invited to make available its
views to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
In the meantime, Jean-Marie Guéhenno and Jane
Holl Lute have worked with extraordinary
determination over many months to resolve the
difficulties on the ground, actions for which they must
be commended thoroughly. However, I would like to
repeat what both of them have said on previous
occasions: that, despite the progress we have seen, it
would be prudent for us to expect that further
allegations will emerge over the next year and beyond,
due to the Secretariat’s strengthening of the systems by
which complaints can be lodged in United Nations
operations.

4

As the weeks ahead of us unfold, we can also
expect that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
will continue to coordinate smoothly on developing a
standing procedure for how investigations are to be
launched. In due course, the relationship between the
OIOS and the troop-contributing countries on
investigations will also need further refinement.
Similarly, my hope is that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will next year take up those
recommendations
and
ideas
found
in
the
comprehensive report which were not addressed at the
Committee’s April session, either for lack of time or
because it was deemed more appropriate for us to visit
those items at a later date. In that context, I intend to
propose again the holding of in-mission courts martial
for the worst offences, and I will argue before the
Committee that, at the very least, we should encourage
those countries that can do so to, in fact, do so.
In conclusion, we will eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse from United Nations
peacekeeping operations only when we have put into
effect most, if not all, of the recommendations
contained in the comprehensive report, over the next
two years. However, that will not be possible as long as
there are colleagues in the general membership, as well
as in the Secretariat, who would have us believe that
the furore regarding sexual exploitation and abuse is an
exaggeration — a media-inspired public relations issue
and nothing more, which will surely soon lapse into the
past. With the adoption of the draft presidential
statement and the measures contained in it, the
Council’s position will be read as being equally clear:
such an opinion is profoundly mistaken. Sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations is a
most serious and tragic issue, especially for the
victims, many of whom are young women living in the
most difficult conditions. Sexual exploitation and
abuse would carry with it the most serious
consequences for the future of peacekeeping if we were
to prove ourselves incapable of solving this problem. I
therefore applaud you, Madam President, and the rest
of the Council for taking this decisive action today, for
you have brought us that much closer to removing this
dreadful stain on the reputation of the United Nations
generally and on United Nations peacekeeping in
particular.

S/PV.5191

The President: I thank His Royal Highness
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein for his
comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: I am grateful for the privilege of
addressing the Security Council on one of the
fundamental challenges facing peacekeeping today.
The problem of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel is an abhorrent
one. It represents a violation of the duty of care owed
by peacekeepers to the local population that they have
gone to serve.
Sexual exploitation and abuse threatens to tarnish
the very name of the United Nations and to undermine
our ability to implement Security Council mandates.
Indeed, it is precisely our image and reputation that
give us the credibility to work so effectively in wartorn countries and bring peace and stability to millions
throughout the world. Eliminating such misconduct is
therefore integral to the success of peacekeeping.
Stopping sexual exploitation and abuse will not
happen overnight, but I take courage from the shared
sense of urgency and determination to address it that
exists within the Secretariat and Member States. I
welcome the importance given to this issue by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
year. As a result of the Committee’s request, the report
(A/59/710) of the Secretary-General’s Adviser on
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel, Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid AlHussein, was released — a report which must be
commended. It provides a candid account of the
problem, as well as a clear framework for effective
action by both the Secretariat and Member States.
I also strongly welcome the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on sexual
exploitation and abuse which, once approved by the
General Assembly, will provide my Department with a
clear and comprehensive strategy for moving forward.
This will enable us to put in place a policy that meets
the highest standards of behaviour. This should be
accompanied, as is the case with all well-organized
armies, by adequate welfare and recreation measures
for all peacekeeping personnel, who are often deployed
in some of the most difficult and austere environments.

We have come a long way since the allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse against United Nations
peacekeepers surfaced in May of last year in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Department
treated this as an issue of the highest priority, and I am
pleased to report that we have made significant
progress in investigating allegations and putting in
place wide-ranging measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Since 1 December 2004, investigations have been
completed into allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse involving 152 peacekeeping personnel — 32
civilians, three civilian police and 117 military
personnel. So far, five United Nations staff members
have been summarily dismissed, nine more are
undergoing the disciplinary process and four have been
cleared. On the side of uniformed personnel, two
members of formed police units and 77 military
personnel have been repatriated or rotated home on
disciplinary
grounds,
including
six
military
commanders.
Over the past year, field missions have put in
place a wide array of measures to prevent misconduct
and to enforce United Nations standards of conduct.
For instance, on the prevention side, missions in Côte
d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia provide induction
training on United Nations standards of conduct
relating to sexual exploitation and abuse. My
department intends to make such training mandatory
for all members of peacekeeping operations on arrival
in a mission.
Late last year, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations issued a policy on human trafficking. This
is now accompanied by a resource manual on the issue,
which includes a training module and practical
guidance for peacekeeping operations on how best to
combat human trafficking. In early 2005, awarenessraising posters on sexual exploitation and abuse and
brochures on human trafficking were distributed to all
missions, and they are displayed in offices in capitals
and in the field, as well as military barracks.
With regard to enforcement of United Nations
standards of conduct, field missions in Côte d’Ivoire,
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Kosovo and Timor-Leste have established lists
of premises and areas frequented by prostitutes, which
are now out-of-bounds to all personnel. We have a
network of focal points on sexual exploitation and

5

S/PV.5191

abuse in all missions to facilitate receipt of allegations,
as well as telephone hotlines in Sierra Leone and
Liberia.
As was mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
letter to the Council of 9 February 2005 on the United
Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, this mission has put in place a number of
mission-specific measures to minimize misconduct,
such as a requirement that contingent members wear
their uniforms at all times. Our Congo mission is also
strengthening managerial accountability by requiring
regional heads of office to come up with concrete
workplans on how they will prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse.
At Headquarters, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has established a task force aimed at
developing guidance and tools for peacekeeping
operations to address sexual exploitation and abuse
effectively. For instance, we are developing a database,
in coordination with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS), to track and monitor allegations and
investigations, as well as follow-up action. The
Department is also developing internal communication
messages to remind peacekeeping personnel of our
duty to care, and why we serve.
In addition, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is co-chairing with the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
an inter-agency task force aimed at creating an
organizational culture throughout the United Nations
system that prevents sexual exploitation and abuse. It
is also developing common policies and guidance, for
instance on victim assistance.
The Department is cooperating closely with
OIOS, which, under General Assembly resolution
59/287, is in charge of investigating allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations. This collaboration involves developing
suggestions, for discussion with troop-contributing
countries, on how to facilitate their participation in
OIOS investigations involving military peacekeeping
personnel.
The problem of sexual exploitation and abuse is
likely to look worse before it looks better. In other
words, as we improve our complaints mechanisms in
the field, and as people start to trust that action will be
taken against those who violate United Nations
standards of conduct, the number of allegations of

6

sexual exploitation and abuse will probably increase,
not decrease.
The various measures that my department has
undertaken over the past year at Headquarters and in
the field have opened our eyes to the enormity of the
task that lies ahead of us. We need deep, systemic
change. I will do my utmost to implement such
recommendations with due haste, as will managers and
commanders in peacekeeping operations.
I commend the resolve that Council members are
showing through the presidential statement under
consideration today. I also welcome the reference in
the statement, to be read out by the President at the
close of this meeting, to the need for specific
provisions to be included in Security Council mandates
for peacekeeping operations to address misconduct by
peacekeeping personnel. Indeed, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations hopes to establish a dedicated
capacity to address conduct issues in the form of
personnel conduct units at Headquarters and in the
field. Those units will be an essential tool for
preventing misconduct, monitoring compliance with
United Nations standards and ensuring swift follow-up
on disciplinary cases. In an organization that aims
towards professional standards of the highest calibre,
this is no longer a luxury but a must.
Sexual exploitation and abuse do not occur in a
vacuum. Those acts take place where there is a general
breakdown in good conduct and discipline. My
department is ready to address the problem in a
comprehensive manner. However, my department
cannot solve this problem alone. We need to create a
culture and environment in peacekeeping operations
that does not permit sexual exploitation and abuse.
That requires joint action by both DPKO and Member
States. I look forward to our continued collaboration.
The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
statement.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recognizes the vital
role that United Nations peacekeeping operations
have played for decades in bringing peace and
stability to countries emerging from war. The
Council further recognizes that, with few
exceptions, the women and men who serve in

S/PV.5191

United Nations peacekeeping operations do so
with the utmost professionalism and dedication,
and in some cases they make the ultimate
sacrifice.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned
with the allegations of sexual misconduct by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel. The
distinguished and honourable record of
accomplishment in United Nations peacekeeping
is being tarnished by the acts of a few
individuals.
“The Security Council condemns, in the
strongest terms, all acts of sexual abuse and
exploitation committed by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel. The Council reiterates
that sexual exploitation and abuse are
unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the
fulfilment of mission mandates.
“The Security Council, while confirming
that the conduct and discipline of troops is
primarily the responsibility of troop-contributing
countries, recognizes the shared responsibility of
the Secretary-General and all Member States to
take every measure within their purview to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by all
categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions to enforce United Nations
standards of conduct in that regard. The Security
Council reiterates the importance of ensuring that
sexual exploitation and abuse are properly
investigated and appropriately punished.
“The Security Council underlines that the
provision of an environment in which sexual
exploitation and abuse are not tolerated is
primarily the responsibility of managers and
commanders.

“The Security Council welcomes the
comprehensive report on sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
(A/59/710) prepared by the Secretary-General’s
Adviser on this issue, His Royal Highness Prince
Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Permanent
Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan to the United Nations. The Council also
welcomes the report of the resumed session of the
Special
Committee
on
Peacekeeping
(A/59/19/Add.1).
“The Security Council urges the SecretaryGeneral and troop-contributing countries to
ensure that the recommendations of the Special
Committee that fall within their respective
responsibilities are implemented without delay.
“The Security Council will consider
including relevant provisions for prevention,
monitoring, investigation and reporting of
misconduct cases in its resolutions establishing
new mandates or renewing existing mandates. In
this regard, the Security Council calls on the
Secretary-General to include, in his regular
reporting of peacekeeping missions, a summary
of the preventative measures taken to implement
a zero-tolerance policy and of the outcome of
actions taken against personnel found culpable of
sexual exploitation and abuse.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/21.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

7
