Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
"(d) That the interna! controls, including the interna!
audit, are adequate in the light of the extent of reliance
placed thereupon;
"(e) That procedures satisfactory to the Board of Auditors have been applied to the recording of ali assets,
liabilities, surpluses and deficits.
"2. The Board of Auditors shall be the sole judge as
to the acceptance in whole or in part of certifications and
representations by the Secretary-General and may proceed
to such detailed examination and verification as it chooses
of ali financia! records, including those relating to supplies
and equipment.
"3. The Board of Auditors and its staff shall have free
access at ali convenient times to ali books, records and
other documentation which are, in the opinion of the Board
of Auditors, necessary for the performance of the audit.
Information which is classified as privileged and which the
Secretary-General ( or his designated senior official) agrees is
required by the Board for the purposes of the audit and
information classified as confidential shall be made available
on application. Toe Board of Auditors and its staff shall
respect the privileged and confidential nature of any information so classified which has been made available and shall
not make use of it except in direct connexion with the
performance of tht: audit. The Board may draw the attention of the General Assembly to any denial of information
classified as privileged which, in its opinion, was required
for the purpose of the audit.
"4. Toe Board of Auditors shall have no power to
disallow items in the accounts but shall draw to the attention
of the Secretary-General for appropriate action any transaction concerning which it entertains doubt as to legality or
propriety. Audit objections, to these or any other transactions,
arising during the examination of the accounts shall be
communicated immediately to the Secretiiry-General.
"5. The Board of Auditors (or such of its officers as
it may designate) shall express and sign an opinion in the
following terms:
"We have examined the following appended financia!
statements, numbered
to
properly identified, and relevant schedules of
[name of the body] for the year ended 31 December
19.
. Our examination included a general review of
the accounting procedures and such tests of the accounting
records and other supporting evidence as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. As a result of our examination, we are of the opinion that the financia! statements
properly ref!ect the recorded financia! transactions for the
year, which transactions were in accordance with the
Financia! Regulations and legislative authority, and present fairly the financia! position as at
19.
"
adding, should it be necessary:
"subject to the observations in our foregoing report".
"6. The report of the Board of Auditors on the financia!
statements should mention:
"(a) The type and scope of its examination;
"(b) Matters affecting the completeness or accuracy of
the accounts, including where appropriate:
"(i) lnformation necessary to the correct interpretation
of the accounts;
"(ii) Any amounts which ought to have been received
but which have not been brought to account;
"(iii) Any amounts for which a legal or contingent
obligation exists and which have not been recorded
or reflected in the financia! statements;
"(iv) Expenditures not properly substantiated;
"(v) Whether proper books of accounts have been keptwhere in the presentation of statements there are
deviations of a material nature from the generally
accepted accounting principies applied on a consistent basis, these should be disclosed;
"(e) Other matters which should be brought to the notice
of the General Assembly, such as:

123

"(i) Cases of fraud or presumptive fraud;
"(ii) Wasteful or improper expenditure of the Organiza-

tion's money or other assets ( notwithstanding
that the accounting for the transaction may be
correct);
"(iii) Expenditure Iikely to commit the Organization to
further outlay on a large scale;
"(iv) Any defect in the general system or detailed regulations governing the control of receipts and disbursements or of supplies and equipment;
"(v) Expenditure not in accordance with the intention
of the General Assembly after making allowance
for duly authorized transfers within the budget;
"(vi) Expediture in excess of appropriations as amended
by duly authorized transfers within the budget;
"(vii) Expenditure not in conformity with the authority
which governs it;
"(d) Toe accuracy or otherwise of the supplies and equipment records as determined by stock-taking and examination of the records;
"(e) lf appropriate, transactions accounted for in a previous year concerning which further information has been
obtained or transactions in a later year concerning which
it seems desirable that the General Assembly should have
early knowledge.

"7. The Board of Auditors may make such observations
with respect to its findings resulting from the audit and
such comments on the Secretary-General's financia! report
as it deems appropriate to the General Assembly or to
the Secretary-General.
"8. Whenever the scope of audit of the Board of Auditors
is restricted, or whenever the Board is unable to obtain
sufficient evidence, it shall refer to the matter in its report,
making clear the reasons for its comments, and the effect
on the financia! position and the financia! transactions as
recorded.
"9. In no case shall the Board of Auditors include
criticism in its report without first affording the SecretaryGeneral an adequate opportunity of explanation on the
matter under observation."

2886 (XXVI). Programme of recurrent publications of the United Nations

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the programme of recurrent publications of
the United Nations, 26 and of the preliminary observations thereon by the Secretary-General27 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;28
2. Requests the intergovernmental bodies concerned
to consider the specific rec0mmendations contained in
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit and to transmit
their observations, through the Economic and Social
Council where appropriate, to the General Assembly
in time for consideration at its twenty-seventh session;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to submit their observations and recommendations to the General Assembly at its twentyseventh session.
2030th plenary meeting,
21 December 1971.
2

ª See A/8362.

27 See A/8540.

28 A/8624.
