Reaolatlon1 adopted oa the reportl of the FOlll'th Co-lttee

2195 (XXDI). Question of Territorie1 under
Portugue1e admini1tration
The General Assembly,
Hmting considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Hcwing heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling i!s resolution 151~ (XV) of 14 De<;ember
1960 containmg the Declaration on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling alfo all the revelant resolutions <;01;1cern!ng
the Territor1es under Portuguese admm1stration
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council,
Expressing its profound concern over the _persistent
refusal of the Government of Portugal to tmplement
the relevant United Nations resolutions,
Gravely concerned about the deteriorating situation
in the Territories under Portuguese domination, which
constitutes a serious disturbance of international peace
and security,
Deefly dúturbed about the continued and intensi~ed
activittes of foreign economic, financia! and other mterests which impede the realization of the legitimate
aspirations of the African peoples in those Territories,
Deploring the aid which the Government of Portugal
continues to receive from its allies in the N orth
Atlantic Treaty Organization, and from other c<?untries, which enables it to pursue its military operat1ons
against the African population of those Territories,
Grooely concerned about that Government's constant
threats against and violations of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the independent African States
that border the Territories under its domination,
N oting with satisfaction the progress towards national independence and freedom made by the liberation
movements in those Territories both through their
struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples oí
the Territories under Portuguese domination to selfdetermination, freedom and independence, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and the
legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;
2. Condemns the persistent refusal oí the Government of Portugal to m1plement resolution 1514 (XV)
and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council ;
3, Calls upan the Government oí Portugal to apply
without delay to the peoples of the Territories under
its domination the principie of self-determination, freedom and independence in accordance with the •provisions and obJectives oí the Charter oí the United
Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the grave situation in the Territories under Portuguese domination, which has also aggravated the explosive situation in southern Africa ;
5. Appeals to all States to grant the peoples oí the
Territories under Portuguese domination the moral
and material assistance necessary for the restoration of
their inalienable rights ;
6. Reiterates its appeal to ali States, and in particular to members of the N orth Atlantic Treaty Organization, to withhold from Portugal any assistance

59

which enables it to prosecute the colonial war in the
Territories under its domination;
7. Condemns the collaboration between Portugal,
the minority racist régime of South Africa and the
illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia,
which is designed to perpetuate colonialism and oppression in southern Africa ;

8. Condemns the violations by the Government of
Portugal of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of independent African States ;
9. Urgently appeals to all States to take all measures
to prevent the recruitment or training in their territories of any persons as mercenaries for the colonial
war being waged in the Territories under Portuguese
domination and for violations of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the independent African States;
10. Deplores the policy of the Government of Portugal, which violates the economic and political rights
of the indigenous population by the arbitrary eviction
of the African population and the settlement of foreign
immigrants in the Territories, and calls upon Portugal
to cease those practices immediately;
11. Deplores also the activities of the financia! interests operatinJ in the Territories under Portuguese
domination, whtch obstruct the struggle of the peoples
for self-determination, freedom and independence and
which strengthen the military efforts oí Portugal ;
12. Calls upon the Government of Portugal, in view
of the armed conflict prevailing in the Territories and
the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the
application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment oí Prisoners of War of 12
August 1949 ;2
13. Expresses its appreciation to the Member States
concerned, to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and to the specialized agencies and other
international relief organizations concerned for the
help they have given so far and invites them to increase their assistance, including health and medical
facilities, to the victims of Portuguese colonialism ;
14. Invites the Secretary-General, in the light oí
General Assembly resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and in consultation with the specialized
agencies and the host Governments, to develop and
expand training _prowammes for the indigenous inhabitants of the Terr1tories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for cadres of
civil servants, technical and professional personnel to
assume responsibilities for the public administration
and the economic and social development of their own
countries;
15. Requests the Secreta-ry-General to take such
action as he may deem appropriate for the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session ;

16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue to keep the situation in the
Territories under review.
173fJth plenary meeting,
29 N ovember 1968.
2 !bid.
