S/PV.7620

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7620th meeting

Thursday, 11 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Pedros
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions
Working methods of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council
Letter dated 2 February 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/102)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-03494 (E)
*1603494*

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
General issues relating to sanctions
Working methods of the subsidiary organs of
the Security Council
Letter dated 2 February 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/102)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Central
African Republic, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Libya, the Sudan and Sweden
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/102, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 February 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, and His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Olguín Cigarroa, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Chile.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Venezuela for inviting me to speak and for taking the
initiative to organize this important meeting.
In the mid-1980s, Sweden introduced economic
sanctions against the apartheid regime of South Africa.
These sanctions were essentially unilateral in nature
at the time, but with strong political symbolism. Since
then, Sweden has been engaged in processes aimed
at making sanctions more effective and transparent,
including, most recently, in the high-level review of
United Nations sanctions, conducted together with
Australia, Finland, Germany and Greece.

2/30

11/02/2016

The legal basis for United Nations sanctions
derives from the Charter of the United Nations. The
sanctions instrument has evolved over time. Over the
past quarter of a century, the Security Council has
deployed sanctions with increasing regularity and
with increasingly broader aims. They have been used
to address evolving threats to international peace and
security, to counter terrorism, nuclear proliferation,
violations of human rights and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, to name a few. There are important
lessons to be drawn from experiences over the years.
First and foremost, sanctions can never be
successful in isolation. They must always be part
of a broader political strategy. To this end, closer
interaction between chairs of sanctions committees and
penholders of resolutions mandating sanctions should
be encouraged. Coherent overall political strategies that
include the various tools at the disposal of the Council
should be forged. In addition, further interaction
between sanctions committees and the Secretariat, to
coordinate activities and take into consideration input
provided by panels of experts and monitoring teams,
should also be considered.
Secondly, sanctions need to have clear objectives
and clear criteria for suspension or termination.
They have to be targeted and implementable, easily
understood and well communicated. They should be
designed to avoid unintended consequences, including
placing burdens on neighbouring States, limiting
legitimate trade and having any negative humanitarian
impact on civilian populations.
Thirdly, sanctions have to come with transparent
procedures and provisions for due process. In this
context, the sanctions committees are critical, being the
primary interface between the United Nations sanctions
system and Member States. A number of important
steps to increase transparency in the working methods
of the sanctions committees have already been taken.
There is now more active engagement with the principal
stakeholders. Committee chairs are conducting more
field visits to gain a more immediate understanding
of the situation. Reporting to the public has increased,
including with frequent press releases. These efforts
should be commended and strengthened.
In the high-level review, we identified a number of
additional actions for improving the working methods
of the sanctions committees. I should like to highlight
just a few.

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

Sanctions committees could present their reports
to the Council in a public meeting. This would
allow Member States to be kept informed and more
involved, and help relevant agencies in Member States
to better understand implementation requirements.
Chairs of sanctions committees with similar themes
or geographical scope could organize joint meetings,
including in the regions, to promote understanding of
similar issues and challenges. Similarly, the Secretariat
could organize targeted meetings with New Yorkbased regional groups on challenges to sanctions
implementation and to seek possible assistance.
Committees could routinely review individual and entity
designations to ensure that listings remain appropriate.
The Security Council and sanctions committees could
utilize standardized terms and guidelines to reduce
uncertainty and the potential for overcompliance with
United Nations sanctions, and each Committee could
indicate exemptions in clear and precise language on
the main page of its website.
Another issue for consideration is the appointment
of chairs of sanctions committees. Presidential note
S/2012/937, on Council working methods, states that
chairs should be appointed “in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way”. Increased transparency
in this process and broader consultation with Council
members would ensure a better balanced distribution
of chairs. Moreover, new chairs of sanctions
committees should be appointed as early as possible
after each election of non-permanent members of the
Security Council to allow for improved preparation.
Comprehensive and timely hand-over between outgoing
and incoming chairs should become established
practice. Earlier elections of non-permanent members
of the Security Council, which was introduced for the
first time this year, will be helpful in this regard.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s important
discussion and the recommendations on more
transparent working practices identified by the highlevel review on United Nations sanctions will add to the
efforts to make sanctions ever more effective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Olguín
Cigarroa.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to speak before the Council under
your presidency, Sir. This statement is being read out

S/PV.7620

on behalf of the Permanent Representative of Chile,
Ambassador Cristián Barros, the former Chair of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), concerning Côte d’Ivoire, and resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, who unfortunately
could not be with us today. We thank Venezuela for
allowing us to share some thoughts and proposals
about the working methods of the Security Council’s
subsidiary organs, and particularly the sanctions
committees.
This debate reflects the shared interest in improving
the sanctions regimes, as seen in earlier initiatives, such
as the meeting held by the Council in November 2014
on general questions relating to sanctions (S/PV.7323)
and the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
and the resulting compendium, circulated in June 2015
(S/2015/432, annex). We welcome the presence and
participation today of representatives of the States
concerned and interested in the subject, since their
opinion will help to improve the way these mechanisms
work.
The universal character of the United Nations
makes it the appropriate body for establishing and
monitoring sanctions. We welcome the fact that these
are a non-military response to addressing threats to
international peace and security that is preventive
in nature and adaptable to new challenges. Although
progress has been made in recent years, problems
still exist that affect the effective implementation
of sanctions by Member States. On the basis of our
experience in presiding over the aforementioned
subsidiary organs, we have identified some issues and
situations of concern to us.
First, the sanctions committees cover a broad range
of topics, including non-proliferation, terrorism, gross
and systematic violations of human rights, peaceful
political transitions, illegal exploitation of and unlawful
trafficking in natural resources, and the recruitment and
use of children for military purposes. The committees
have so far been using a variety of tools, such as travel
bans, assets freezes amd arms embargoes, paying
attention to proportionality and functionality.
In order to help the various players to understand
the complexity of the sanctions regimes and their
tools, we believe that it would be reasonable to
establish some common denominators and to identify
best implementation practices. We therefore suggest
that consideration be given to the preparation of an

16-034943/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

implementation assistance note for the application
of all Security Council sanctions to supplement the
consolidated sanctions list.
Secondly, criticisms about a lack of due process in
the establishment of sanctions regimes or the designation
process may undermine the legitimacy of the sanctions
and hamper their implementation. Due process is a
general principle of law that has a practical usefulness.
A lack of due process makes it difficult for some States
and regional political communities to implement the
sanctions. Therefore, the Council should strengthen the
mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson and extend
that mandate — currently applicable to the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) — to other sanctions
committees. The establishment, by resolution 1730
(2006), of a focal point for delisting from sanctions lists
was a significant development, although there is still
room for improvement.
Thirdly, with regard to transparency and outreach,
we should acknowledge that there has been progress in
that regard. However, the remaining shortcomings in
transparency and outreach are an obstacle to sanctions
implementation. We believe that the periodic reports
of the sanctions committees and other subsidiary
organs to the Security Council should, as a general
rule, be delivered in public. That would help to make
the committees’ work more transparent, enhance
understanding of the sanctions regimes and help to
emphasize that all of us should implement the sanctions.
Generally speaking, there is no reason to justify why
some sanctions committees, such as the one established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), should continue to
report to the Council in closed consultations. Moreover,
such briefings should be accompanied by press releases
from the sanctions committees — a tool that we believe
is underutilized. In addition, visits to Member States
by spokespersons in order to explain the entire United
Nations sanctions architecture could be useful.
Fourthly, I should like to turn to the dialogue
between the committees and Member States, especially
those directly affected by sanctions, neighbouring
States and States of the region. A number of resolutions
and committee guidelines call for measures to enhance
transparency and increase dialogue with the Member
States. However, in practice those efforts are limited.
In our experience, the working visit made by the
Permanent Representative of Chile to Côte d’Ivoire
in November 2014, in his capacity as Chair of the

4/30

11/02/2016

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), was important for his chairmanship, as it
improved channels for communication and cooperation,
provided a new perspective on the impact of sanctions
on the ground, narrowed perception gaps and relaunched
the relationship with the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire. There is therefore a need for improved
dialogue with affected States and, as far as the security
situation allows, to promote on-site visits by sanctions
committees and their respective Chairs to verify and
evaluate in situ the implementation and impact of the
sanctions, as well as to promote better coordination
with other United Nations organs and missions.
Fifthly, with regard to unintended consequences,
there is a possibility that certain sanctions, such
as those involving specific natural resources, may
adversely impact legitimate trade and artisanal
communities that rely on those resources for survival.
Moreover, it is imperative to prevent sanctions from
having humanitarian consequences. That is a point on
which questions continue to be raised; it is essential to
address it because it could undermine the overarching
interest of the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
the dignity and rights of individuals. We believe that,
before establishing sanctions, the subsidiary organs
of the Council should evaluate the legal frameworks
in a country and the region and anticipate potential
unintended negative consequences of a humanitarian
or socioeconomic nature.
Assistance and cooperation should enhance
national capacities and national ownership by the
States concerned, at their request, in areas such as
the exploitation of natural resources, including plants
and wildlife, and the control of small arms and light
weapons, while at the same time providing the requested
support for the implementation of instruments such as
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the Kinshasa
Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons.
Sanctions regimes are among the tools available to
the Security Council to deal with threats to international
peace and security. They are temporary tools and not
an end in themselves. The Council should therefore not
perpetuate sanctions committees indefinitely — some
have lasted for years and become anachronistic.
Against that backdrop, it is necessary to identify in
a more precise manner the goals to be achieved with

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

the establishment of a committee, while also assessing
regularly whether the objectives are being achieved.
With regard to working methods, we suggest
that concrete measures be adopted to facilitate the
management of committees. For example, once new
members of the Security Council are elected, they
should quickly learn the committee chairmanships to
which they are going to be assigned, in order to allow
incoming teams to prepare for their new and important
tasks. We also suggest improving the processing time
for applications and queries that are formulated to the
committees.
I conclude by calling for a reflection on modalities
for improving the sanctions architecture. In that
context, we believe in the need to continue considering
ways and means of improving the work of the Security
Council’s subsidiary organs. Sanctions are also related
to the effectiveness of the system. They have multiple
dimensions and effects, which makes it imperative to
follow up on the responsibility for implementing them
and on the duty to neutralize the negative unintended
consequences on the population. We therefore appreciate
the interest in promoting a process of reflection based
on realism and practicality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Olguín Cigarroa for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of Venezuela for its initiative
to convene this meeting. I also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of Sweden and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Chile for their briefings.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council should continuously improve
its procedures, increase its efficiency, enhance its
relevance and transparency and better implement the
mandate entrusted to it. That has a bearing on the role
of the United Nations and on the common interests of
the broader membership of the Organization.
With the joint effort of the membership of the
Security Council, there has recently been progress in
improving the Council’s working methods. The Council
has attached importance to improving transparency,
while there has also been a marked increase in the

S/PV.7620

number of open debates, as well as in the number
of timely briefings to non-members on the work of
the Council. In addition, under various formats, the
Council has increased its interaction with the broader
membership, regional organizations, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
bodies. China supports continued improvement in the
Council’s working methods and bringing its central role
in the maintenance of international peace and security
into full play. I wish to highlight the following points.
First, in the light of the mandate conferred on it by
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council should
focus its resources and energy on the major urgent items
concerning international peace and security. While
addressing thematic issues, the Council should abide by
its responsibilities, increase its communication with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to bring
their respective vantage perspectives and expertise into
full play, and strengthen coordination and the division
of labour to avoid redundancy.
Secondly, the Council should pay more attention
to preventive diplomacy and mediation. The Council
should advocate and promote the culture of peace;
increase the use of such means as mediation, good
offices and political processes to settle differences
and disputes and resolve crises; and refrain from the
threat or use of sanctions. The Council should pay
more attention to the views of the affected countries
in order to rationalize its own decision-making. In
the light of requirements under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the Council shall strengthen its coordination
and cooperation with regional organizations.
Thirdly, the Security Council should hold full
consultations and strive to secure broad consensus.
In decision-making, Council members should hold
full and thorough consultations and strive to secure
consensus. There is a need to refrain from forcing
through a draft text against the backdrop of serious
differences among parties, so that the unity of the
Council can be maintained and the authority of its
resolutions enhanced.
Fourthly, the Council’s subsidiary bodies need
to comprehensively implement their mandates. The
Council’s sanctions committees need to strengthen
their work on designation, delisting and review; conduct
regular reviews of the sanctions list; and implement
Council resolutions in a comprehensive and accurate
manner. The relevant panels of experts need to carry out

16-034945/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

their work in an objective, fair and reciprocal manner
in order to improve the impartiality and transparency
of the sanctions regime and maintain the authority and
efficacy of United Nations sanctions.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and other
subsidiary bodies need to provide technical guidance
and support in the light of their specific needs and
help Member States to enhance their capacity-building
efforts.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate under your
presidency on the working methods of the subsidiary
organs, in particular the sanctions committees. We
attach great importance to the proper functioning of the
sanctions committees, which are now at the heart of the
activity of the Security Council. With 16 active regimes,
sanctions have become a critical tool for the Security
Council that has proven its effectiveness. The pressure
exerted by the international community through the
sanctions regime established in 1977 on South Africa
gradually led that country to end apartheid, allowing
for the lifting of sanctions in 1994.
With regard to Iran, through five resolutions
adopted by the Council the international community
expressed its deep concern about the Iranian nuclear
programme. Ten years after the Security Council was
first seized of that matter, we have turned a new page
in relations with Iran by lifting the sanctions regime
following Iran’s implementation of its commitments in
accordance with the Vienna agreement. A new system
of restrictions and vigilance is now in force and will
be presented tomorrow to Member States. It is an
indispensable guarantee that the Vienna agreement will
be fully respected. The pressure exerted by sanctions
played a central role in creating the possibility to reach
an agreement.
We must not let those success stories lead us to
underestimate the complexity of this tool. Over the
years, we have succeeded in adapting it and focusing it
on each individual situation, lessening the consequences
for civilians, inasmuch as possible, while increasingly
ensuring human rights. Sanctions are a key tool in the
process of resolving crises. They can be a tool to support
States weakened by insecurity or the presence of armed
groups in their territory. Countries such as Somalia, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo come to mind. In the Democratic Republic
6/30

11/02/2016

of the Congo, for example, the sanctions regime changed
in line with the situation. Established in 2003, the arms
embargo has been continuously modified, and since
2008 has targeted only non-governmental entities. With
regard to individual sanctions against armed groups,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo itself has requested that the sanctions regime be
strengthened.
In Côte d’Ivoire, we were able to adapt the sanctions
regime in order to support the country on its path to
stability, which has been restored since the 2010-2011
crisis. In 2013, the rapid improvement of the situation
in all areas justified the Security Council’s decision to
lift the diamond embargo and ease the arms embargo.
Subsequently, certain individuals were removed from
the sanctions list in order to promote the political
process and national reconciliation. Those adaptations
have contributed to the recovery of the Côte d’Ivoire.
The scope of sanctions is also flexible as we seek
to ensure that sanctions target the individuals, entities
or sectors that directly pose a threat to the stability of
States. Accordingly, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources has become a criterion for designation in
several sanctions regimes. Sanctions aimed at charcoal
in Somalia, diamonds in the Central African Republic
and natural resources and the trafficking of endangered
species in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
just some examples of sanctions regimes that have
evolved in order to better target the resources that
armed groups use to finance themselves. Similarly, the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
which originally targeted Al-Qaida, has accordingly
evolved with the terrorist threat to include Da’esh.
More flexible and more targeted, sanctions regimes
must also offer tools that protect human rights. The
establishment of the Office of the Ombudsperson in
2009 concerning the Al-Qaida regime was a major
innovation that has largely demonstrated its usefulness
and effectiveness. That mechanism, which allows
individuals and entities subject to sanctions under the
1267 regime to seek recourse if they believe that the
decision is unjustified, represents an important step
forward in terms of transparency. While we seek to
adjust sanctions regimes to ensure that they are the most
effective possible, we must pursue efforts to improve
the working methods of the sanctions committees. The
Secretariat has undertaken noteworthy work in that
regard, and we must continue to pursue and reinforce it.

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

As pertains to transparency, we endorse the
proposals made in the concept note introduced by the
presidency (S/2016/102, annex), as they will promote
better understanding of the functions of the sanctions
committees. We believe, for example, that the panels
of experts mandated for the various sanctions regimes
produce very valuable reports, the publication of
which should not be called into question. We are
also in favour of convening meetings with countries
subject to sanctions regimes and the countries of the
region, in particular neighbouring countries, because
we hope that such meetings will allow for a better
implementation of sanctions. The field visits of chairs
of sanctions committees, where possible, are also useful
in promoting better understanding of sanctions regimes
by the countries concerned.
We know that chairing subsidiary organs is an
important responsibility that falls on the shoulders of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council.
As for the rest of the Council’s activities, the election
of new members earlier in the year will allow for better
upstream preparation. As penholder on numerous
sanctions regimes in Africa, we have always been and
remain available to the chairs of the committees as
they take up their functions along with the Secretariat,
which plays an essential role.
We read with interest about the work of the
Like-minded Group and that of the High-level Review of
United Nations Sanctions. Many of the recommendations
seem useful to us, namely, that of continuing to ensure
fairness, to which we are committed nationally as well
as in our capacity as a member of the European Union.
Sanctions are primarily a political tool at the disposal
of the Council to assist it in upholding its responsibility
to safeguard international stability and security, which
means that we must be all the more demanding with
respect to the effectiveness and smooth functioning of
the regimes that we establish.

S/PV.7620

We wish to express our support for the concept note
by the President on the work of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council (S/2016/102, annex) and
for the pertinent suggestions that you have offered
regarding improvements in the areas of transparency;
selecting and preparing committee Chairs; interaction
and coordination among the subsidiary organs and
the Council itself; and the need for the mechanism
to oversee the implementation of the proposals put
forward in the note.
Considering that the Security Council makes
extensive use of sanctions regimes in its attempts to
restrict, impose a change in behaviour or deter certain
States, individuals and entities regarded as threats
to international peace and security, the sanctions
committees play and will continue to play a substantive
role as a strong political tool of the Council. This implies
the permanent need to improve them, namely with
respect to the decision-making process, the adoption of
sanctions and their imposition, enforcement and lifting.
Transparency and outreach are identified in the
draft note as key issues to be carefully addressed by
the Security Council. It is the current perception of
the elected members and the wider United Nations
membership that the issue of transparency is closely
linked to the legitimacy of imposing sanctions due
to its extreme political sensitivity. Thus transparency
is crucial at all stages of the process leading to the
imposition of sanctions, starting from its design, through
the drafting of the ensuing decisions, its enforcement
by the international community and, finally, the
assessment of its effectiveness and compliance.

Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for having organized this debate
on the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, addressing and improving
transparency and efficiency in the work of these bodies,
in particular the sanctions committees.

Compliance by the international community
requires that information be provided to Member
States, which must reciprocate, implying a need to
increase understanding of the essence of sanctions
regimes, their objectives and the requirements for their
implementation. The draft note suggests substantial
changes in the way in which the sanctions committees
operate, so as to curtail the perception that much of
the committees’ work is carried out without the full
knowledge of all Council members, even though the
committees are normally chaired by elected members.
This issue, I think, has to be seriously addressed.

Since this is also the first time that I am taking
the floor under your presidency, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on having assumed the presidency and wish
you and your delegation much success in your work
for this month, as has been already demonstrated.

The holding of more frequent, open interactive
briefings by the Chairs of the sanctions committee with
non-Council members, as well as with the countries
under or affected by sanctions regimes, is therefore
strongly encouraged.

16-034947/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

Still on the topic of the implementation of changes
in the sanctions committees, we attach relevance to the
process of the selection and preparation of Chairs before
they assume their duties. While the Security Council
agreed that the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies should be balanced, transparent, efficient and
inclusive, in practice this has not materialized, as elected
members have consulted informally and separately,
being appointed on too short a notice to allow adequate
preparation for this important duty. As such, we are
of the view that the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies
should be appointed in a timely manner, allowing their
prior attendance at meetings of the subsidiary organs
concerned.
To conclude, we wish to reiterate our support for the
draft note and also hope that it will definitely be used as
a tool for improvement in and the better implementation
of our work on this issue. The proposals will surely
improve cooperation between Council members and
the sanctions committees, a relevant political tool of
the international community to force States, entities
and individuals to respect international law and abide
by the Security Council’s decisions.
Ambassador Skoog of Sweden refreshed the
Council’s memory concerning a significant sanctions
regime that contributed to the end of a regime that
had been regarded by the international community
as needing to be changed so as to bring about an
improvement in peace and the international order, not
just in southern Africa, but in the world at large. In times
of great threats and challenges, the Security Council
needs more than ever to maintain its clear stance by not
allowing political differences or particular interests to
undermine sanctions regimes. As such, it must ensure
that divisions among Council members do not have a
negative impact on the committees’ ability to fulfil
their mandates.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity today to discuss an important
and often overlooked aspect of the Council’s work. I
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden and the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Chile for their
very useful briefings.
There are 25 subsidiary organs of the Security
Council; more than half are sanctions committees.
Sanctions are one of the few tools we have, short of
force, to deal with situations that threaten international
peace and security. They can and do have a useful
impact, whether that is constraining the flow of arms
8/30

11/02/2016

into a conflict, incentivizing individuals to refrain
from activities that jeopardize prospects for peace, or
signalling to a belligerent State that its actions will not
be tolerated.
In the areas of counter-terrorism and non-proliferation,
United Nations sanctions form a central element of
the international community’s efforts to reduce the
capacity of relevant parties to do harm.
The implementation and overall effectiveness of
these measures rely on the effective functioning of
the sanctions committees. By that I mean timely and
informed decision-making, clear strategic direction
and flexibility to respond to changing circumstances.
It also means transparency through engagement
with key stakeholders to understand any unintended
consequences of the sanctions measures. While, in our
view, there is little evidence to suggest that unintended
consequences are prevalent, we need to be prepared to
respond to any such consequences in a flexible manner.
For 10 of us around this table, chairing such bodies
is part of our Council responsibilities. There are three
times as many committees now as when New Zealand
was last on the Council, in 1994, but there is no forum
to discuss them in any comprehensive way. For that
reason, New Zealand has welcomed the initiative of
Venezuela in organizing this meeting. In our view,
there are several questions we need to ask. Are the
frameworks that administer sanctions committees
working as effectively as they could be? Are they
sufficiently integrated into the Council’s wider
work? Are we satisfied that their measures are being
implemented properly and, if not, what should we do
about it? I wish to make three main points.
First, sanctions committees have allowed formal
process to get in the way of outcomes. Decisions that, 20
years ago, would have been within a Chair’s ambit are
now expected to be agreed by all committee members
by consensus. As Chair of two sanctions committees, I
am prevented from doing the simplest of tasks. I cannot
invite someone to a committee meeting, send a letter
or do due diligence on allegations of non-compliance
without the agreement of all 15 members. Being
unable to agree on the simplest of follow-up actions
on allegations of non-compliance is, quite frankly,
ridiculous. It is absurd that my predecessor, Sir Jim
McLay, was told he could not convene an open briefing
of the then Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee without
the Committee’s agreement, even though there was a

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

Chapter VII resolution requesting him to hold such a
briefing.
That prescription of process and the archaic
formalism of the committees frustrate efficiency and
strangle innovation. It also needlessly takes up valuable
time of ambassadors and experts. Process is important,
we agree, but we should not allow it to obstruct our
primary goal as a Council — maintaining international
peace and security. We must remember that sanctions
committees operate entirely in informal mode. There are
no rules of procedure, no records. They operate under
guidelines that have no formal status. Yet somehow we
have allowed them to become so constrained by their
working methods that they are in effect subject to 15
vetoes. That is nonsense.
Secondly, there needs to be greater coherence
between the work of the subsidiary bodies and the
related discussions in the Council’s broader work.
Sanctions are not imposed in isolation but, save for a
few formulaic briefings, if we are lucky, we discuss
them as if they were. That needs to change. We need
to include sanctions in our conversations on countryspecific situations. If not, we lose sight of their purpose.
Most of the committees have expert bodies that produce
excellent reports. Too often, though, those reports are
buried in the Committee and the valuable information
they contain never reaches the decision makers. We need
to find processes that enable those experts to present
their information to the wider Council and which will
allow for the Chair to provide honest assessments of the
effectiveness and continuing purpose of the committees
that they chair. Let us be frank: that does require the
permanent members to change their approach and to
stop trying to vet and censor everything a Chair says
or does.
Thirdly, we need to help elected members better
prepare for their participation in subsidiary bodies.
In my experience, it is the permanent members who
participate most actively in sanctions committees,
while it is the elected members who are saddled with the
administrative tasks and frustrations of chairing them.
Elected members do not campaign to be on the Council
to simply to make up the numbers. We see two key ways
to address the matter. For one, we believe the Council
should appoint committee Chairs, including perhaps
by spreading the burden to permanent members also,
through a transparent process, well before their term
commences. That would be fairer and more inclusive
and would promote a more positive atmosphere in the

S/PV.7620

Council. The change to the election of new members in
July provides an opportunity for this to be done. Early
appointment would also allow incoming members to
better prepare for their new responsibilities.
We also support convening regular informal
meetings for experts who support the committee
Chairs, in order to discuss cross-cutting issues and
assist with the passing on of expertise to incoming
members. That would help address the lack of
institutional knowledge for elected members and would
afford a smoother transition between Chairs. It would
also provide a forum for achieving greater coherence
among the subsidiary bodies and promote the use of
best practices. Ultimately, as with broader working
methods in the Council, such issues are unlikely to be
resolved overnight, or via a resolution or presidential
statement. Much of the practice of sanctions bodies
is unwritten. The main reform that we would like to
see is a change to the current culture of formality and
exclusivity. That is a simple matter of behaviour, which
can and must change.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow, me,
first and foremost, to thank you, Sir, for your initiative to
convene today’s public debate on the working methods
of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and
to congratulate your country on its accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. I
also warmly congratulate the Permanent Representative
of Sweden and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Chile on their high-quality briefings. Addressing such
an important issue deserves our utmost attention, as it
serves to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of
the Council.
The 2015 high-level review of sanctions comes
10 years after the Working Group on Sanctions made
important contributions to enhancing the effectiveness
of the sanctions committees. The key role played by
subsidiary organs, in particular the sanctions committee,
in implementing Security Council resolutions should
lead us to consider the best ways of ensuring that working
methods, as well as the appointment of committee
Chairs, are more transparent and inclusive, improving
the sharing and dissemination of information on their
work and strengthening interaction and consensus
among countries and subsidiary bodies, on one hand,
and between such bodies and the Council, on the other.
My delegation believes that the appointment of
the Chairs of subsidiary bodies should be subject to
an informal consultation process with all Council

16-034949/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

members that is balanced, transparent and inclusive. In
that regard, it would be appropriate for appointments
to be made at least three months before mandates
begin and that, as soon as appointed, for incoming
Chairs to attend all meetings of the relevant subsidiary
bodies. With regard to outgoing Chairs, they should be
encouraged to provide oral and written presentations
on the most noteworthy activities of their mandates.
Given the often technical nature of the issues addressed
by subsidiary bodies, the Secretariat should continue
to provide support to appointed Chairs and their
respective staff by providing access to the appropriate
methodological tools through briefings.
To improve transparency in the work of subsidiary
bodies, it is crucial for Chairs to hold briefings
followed by exchanges with non-members of the
Council, thereby giving States an opportunity to
contribute to the work of those bodies. In addition,
we might consider implementing regular consultation
mechanisms between Chairs of sanctions committees
and the penholders of relevant countries.
In the same connection, the committees might be
given the opportunity to inform the Council of the
content of their reports in an open meeting, taking
into account, wherever possible and as needed, the
requirements of the principle of confidentiality.
Furthermore, affected countries, their neighbours
and those directly concerned by sanctions should be
involved in the work of the committees by participating
in meetings, in particular those where panel of experts
reports are presented. Similarly, the translation of these
reports into all United Nations official languages is
imperative to facilitating their timely use by committee
members.
In paragraph 59 of resolution 2253 (2015) of
17 December 2015, on the financing of terrorism,
the Security Council requests the Secretary-General
to continue to strengthen the capacity of the Office
of the Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, in
particular by providing resources to allow the Office
to fill translation needs, among others. My delegation
believes that we could go beyond this recommendation
by institutionalizing the Office of the Ombudsperson
to ensure that it is effectively independent with respect
to the committees and the Security Council, and by
strengthening its ability to take decisions. The manner

10/30

11/02/2016

in which the Ombudsperson, who has the same contract
status as members of panels of experts, is appointed
hardly reflects the importance of the position’s
mandate and does not contribute to the independence
and legitimacy on which the effectiveness and even
the credibility of the Ombudsperson’s actions depend.
Similarly, we believe it crucial to bring the mandate of
the Ombudsperson into line with that of the Office, in
keeping with the conclusions of the high-level review
on sanctions of November 2015.
In practice, the Security Council must ensure that
sanctions serve international peace and security. Their
effectivenss depends on how the Security Council
uses them and how effectively they are implemented
by Member States, while upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Furthermore, review of the
implementation of sanctions in concerned countries
should be done in a regular, objective and transparent
manner. Evaluating the impact of targeted sanctions,
with their possible collateral effects on the security and
humanitarian situations, as well as the exploitation of
and trade in the natural resources of affected countries
should be accorded their rightful place in the mandate
of the panels of experts. In this regard, it is essential
that the panel of experts carry out their mandate with
full independence while upholding the sovereignty of
concerned States.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that, beyond our
discussion today, the Security Council will continue
to deepen its consideration of this matter with a view
to improving the methods of work of the subsidiary
bodies. Similarly, my delegation supports the draft
document proposed by the Venezuelan presidency to
improve the working methods and transparency of the
sanctions regimes.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I welcome the
comments of the representatives of Sweden and Chile.
As we have heard today, sanctions are a vital
part of the Council’s arsenal. Together with the other
tools at our disposal, they can help to prevent conflict,
slow the spread of weapons of mass destruction and
constrain the actions of terrorist groups. We have seen
them succeed across the world in response to all these
threats. In countries like Sierra Leone or Angola, they
played a part in establishing the peace and security
that endure to this day. In countries like Iran, they
helped restrict the development of nuclear weapons, an

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

important step towards bringing Iran in from the cold.
And against groups like Da’esh and Al-Qaeda, they are
choking off funding, disrupting activity and sending a
clear message that the Council will not stand idly by in
the face of their barbarism.
All these examples underscore the fact that
sanctions must be a tough measure — a measure that
we will not impose lightly or as a first resort. We do not
underestimate the unintended consequences that such
measures can sometimes bring, but let us recognize that
the United Nations has applied lessons from the past and
has worked hard to hone our approach, moving away
from broad trade embargoes to now target individuals
and specific sectors. We know our approach is working.
No third-party State has appealed to the United Nations
for assistance with the unintended consequences of
sanctions since 2003.
However, there is always more to be done to
improve the effectiveness of our sanctions work. I
note, Mr. President, the proposals you have made in
the concept note (S/2016/102, annex). We agree that
some improvements are needed to the machinery
underpinning United Nations sanctions. This morning
we have already heard several good ideas that we
support — for instance, on the earlier appointment of
new chairs of sanctions committees — and we welcome
those constructive contributions to this important
debate. There is certainly scope, too, for more openness
and transparency in the sanctions committees, while
respecting the confidentiality of their work, not least
because of the risk of asset flight by those being
targeted.
We also need to make sure that any proposals for
reform are in keeping with the high-level review of
United Nations sanctions. We should not duplicate
effort or try to reinvent the wheel. We welcome
and should use the work done by Sweden and other
sponsors on this issue. Their final compendium shows
that sanctions reform must be discussed in the round,
including looking again at the United Nations sanctions
machinery and how it works with other institutions,
and raising awareness of sanctions within and outside
the United Nations.
The compendium also found that
“effectively implemented Security Council
sanctions can and do play a critical role in promoting
peace and security” (S/2015/432, p. 11).

S/PV.7620

It is those crucial words “effectively implemented” that
we must not lose sight of today. Any effort to improve the
openness or efficiency of the United Nations sanctions
machinery will count for nothing if it does not address
how the sanctions are actually being implemented.
Sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII impose legally binding obligations on
all Member States, and it is absolutely crucial that all
States implement them fully. This is the only way that
sanctions can be effective and achieve their objectives.
In particular, States that serve on sanctions committees
must abide by the provisions set out in resolutions that
govern regimes. Only through States faithfully abiding
by these will we see proper implementation.
But we do recognize that implementation is
often challenging, so we see scope for sharing best
practice and learning lessons across all regions and
all regimes. One way is by arranging meetings and
visits of experts from capitals. This can contribute to
the debate by developing networks and identifying
capacity gaps. Sharing information on challenges to
effective implementation and sharing best practice
will help Member States in their own implementation.
Assistance on implementation should be made available
to those currently unable to comply. In short, we should
make sanctions as easy to implement as possible.
This includes making it easier for businesses, and we
welcome the call in resolution 2253 (2015) to make
progress on an enhanced data model for the United
Nations Da’esh and Al-Qaeda sanctions list.
Ultimately, to ensure that sanctions remain an
effective long-term part of our toolbox, we need to
use them in the most appropriate and most effective
manner. Our mandate is clear — it comes from Article
41 of our Charter — but to succeed in this effort we
need better implementation. With the right information
at our disposal, with the right targeting and with the
right coordination, I believe sanctions will continue to
encourage actors towards peaceful ends, and in doing
so they will continue to support the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Sweden
and the Deputy Permanent Representative of Chile for
their insightful briefings and very good ideas.
The topic chosen by you, Mr. President, is very
timely. The international community now faces serious
threats posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Its fourth nuclear test, conducted on 6 January,

16-0349411/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

and the ballistic missile launch on 7 February are
both clear and flagrant violations of Security Council
resolutions and the international non-proliferation
regime. Japan reiterates that the most urgent task
now for the Council is to expeditiously adopt a new
resolution with further significant measures in response
to those dangerous and serious violations, as we agreed
last Sunday.
The word “sanctions” has a punitive connotation.
Moreover, one cannot find that word in the Charter
of the United Nations. What we call sanctions are, in
fact, non-military measures stipulated in Article 41
of the Charter. They include a “complete or partial
interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea,
air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of
communication, and the severance of diplomatic
relations”. I wish to emphasize that those measures are
not a punishment, nor an objective, rather they are one
of the most important tools that the Security Council
has at its disposal to find a comprehensive solution to
the conflict in question.
The second point I wish to make is on compliance.
Article 25 of the Charter stipulates that all Member
States are obliged to implement Council decisions
irrespective of whether they are involved in the
decision-making or not. Last year’s report by the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1874 (2009) describes that issue very well.
“The Panel continues to observe Member
States’ lack of implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, noting that inaction and low
reporting levels may be due to lack of will, technical
capacity and/or issues within their domestic legal
systems. The resolutions ... are effective only when
implemented.” (S/2015/131, annex, p. 5)
I totally agree with the Panel’s opinion and observations.
I would like to remind all Member Governments of
the importance of implementing Security Council
resolutions by all Member States, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter.
The third point I want to touch upon is the
importance of expert panels. We currently have
11 expert panels with a total of 65 experts. I commend
all panel experts for their dedication. The Council relies
on those panels for their technical inputs of high value.
Therefore, it is indispensable that we select competent
experts in order to ensure the quality of services.
The independence of panels is also crucial. They are

12/30

11/02/2016

exposed to a lot of political pressure. In order to allow
them to perform their duty properly, we must respect the
independence and integrity of those technical bodies.
In that connection, the annual reports of individual
panels should be published without exception. Those
publications are also important to ensure transparency.
To further enhance transparency, I am ready to
provide non-Council members with briefings after the
formal meetings of sanctions committees, as some of
my predecessors as chairs of sanctions committees
have previously done. In that context, your decision,
Mr. President, to conduct this debate in an open format
is a very good one, because the wider membership can
hear how the Council members view sanctions and the
way they are being conducted. It also allows us to listen
to the views of non-members.
Before closing, I would like to make a few remarks
on the working methods of subsidiary bodies. I was told
in early December 2015 to preside over the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005)
concerning Lebanon and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) concerning
Yemen, as well as the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. One
month before assuming the membership of the Council
was not enough to carry our the necessary preparation,
including observing the meetings of those bodies.
Since the election of Security Council members will
now be held in June instead of October, I propose that
chairs be appointed no fewer than three months before
commencing their chairmanship and be able to observe
meetings immediately after their appointment. I note
that this point was also made by two briefers, as well
as the representatives of Angola, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom this morning. I am also of the view that
the duty and honour of chairing 23 subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council should not be monopolized by
the 10 elected members. Indeed, that pleasure, duty
and honour can also be shared by the permanent five
members.
Japan, as chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
2010, took the lead in compiling presidential note 507. I
would like to make a concrete contribution in that area
during my chairmanship of that Working Group with
the support of all Security Council members.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

convening today’s meeting. We note that the delegation
of Venezuela is making an important contribution to the
work of the Security Council in the area of sanctions.
We listened closely to the statements delivered by the
representatives of Sweden and Chile.
By definition, the goal of improving the effectiveness
of the working methods of the Security Council is
important, in particular as it pertains to the Council’s
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are open to proposals to increase the transparency
of the activities of the subsidiary bodies, but relevant
steps should be carefully balanced so as not to create
the opposite effect, which would reduce their flexibility
in carrying out their functions.
Given the heavy workload of the sanctions
committees, in our view it will be difficult to increase
the intensiveness of consultations with interested parties
and the frequency of the briefings by chairs, while
ensuring the dissemination of relevant information in
international media. A heavier workload should not
create an obstacle for Committees in carrying out their
primary responsibilities, which are to support the work
of the sanctions mechanisms.
In light of the specific focus of the sanctions
committees, we are not sure that convening open
briefings would enhance their effectiveness. That
matter will have to be carefully addressed so as to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of sanctionsrelated activities. We also question the proposals
to publish reports and even verbatim records of the
Committees’ meetings. That would essentially transfer
the Committees’ work into an open format, which could
negatively impact the effectiveness of their work and
turn sanctions into a tool for bringing political pressure
to bear. We insist that the consequences of sanctions
regimes must be carefully analysed as they are being
drawn up. It is crucial that we do not ignore the fact that
sanctions cannot be a means in and of themselves; they
have their own objectives, which are to ensure lasting
political solutions.
We think that talk about broadening the
Ombudsperson’s powers is dangerous. In our view, the
mandate of that Office, established by a unanimous
vote on resolution 2253 (2015), provides for an optimal
level of transparency and fairness, and that any
further measures would only end up watering down
the Security Council’s counter-terrorism sanctions

S/PV.7620

regime. We are prepared to give careful consideration
to any constructive ideas for optimizing the activities
of the Council’s subsidiary bodies, but we reiterate our
opposition to the creation of additional bureaucratic
layers, whether intergovernmental or at the level of the
Secretariat, not to mention the possibility of assigning
them the function of reviewing existing Security
Council committees. If that happens, it will result in a
great many administrative and bureaucratic obstacles
and very little effectiveness and efficiency.
Within the United Nations, as an intergovernmental
organization, the prerogative of making decisions must
rest exclusively with sovereign States. The business of
improving the working methods of its subsidiary organs
requires a professional approach. The parameters for the
functioning of each individual committee are unique
and specific to the issues it examines, and therefore we
should not attempt to universalize the principles of the
work of the sanctions committees. What is useful in
some areas could be counter-productive in others.
There can be no doubt that the Security Council
would benefit from a degree of democratization of
its work, which would produce a more equitable
distribution of duties for informal work on its
various dossiers through the so-called penholders.
Unfortunately, at the moment, some Council members
abuse that right, regarding various countries or even
regions as their property and themselves as mentors
on certain issues. We do not have to look very far to
find examples of that. The lines for yesterday’s vote on
resolution 2265 (2016)), on the Sudan, were drawn up
by the United States last week, and led to disagreement
in the Council.
We are ready for constructive discussion of ways of
increasing the effectiveness of the Security Council’s
subsidiary bodies. We think it would be helpful to turn
to the under-utilized and regrettably half-forgotten
mechanism of the Informal Working Group on General
Issues of Sanctions. There was a time when the
Working Group contributed significantly to increasing
the effectiveness of the Security Council’s efforts in the
area of political and diplomatic settlements of crises
around the world, and especially in the maintenance of
global security.
Ms. Pedros (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Today’s
debate is indeed relevant, as a large part of the Security
Council’s efforts is focused on its subsidiary bodies,
which account for much of the work done by the

16-0349413/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

Permanent Representatives of the elected members who
chair them, at any rate in Spain’s case. As the Council
is aware, Spain currently chairs two of them — the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) — and, until 17 January, we
also chaired the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Any improvement in those
bodies is therefore an improvement in the way the
Security Council itself functions.
I shall focus today on the three questions posed
by the presidency for this debate. However, allow me
to reiterate the obvious: each subsidiary body is a
world unto itself and the situations they cover are not
really comparable. A committee on non-proliferation,
such as the 1540 Committee, is not the same as a
sanctions body, such as the 1718 Committee. In each
of the sanctions committees, every situation requires a
case-by-case analysis. However, we should always be
guided by respect for the rule of law, and in particular
for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Transparency is an inescapable requirement in the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies in the
twenty-first century. Global society today, marked by
progress in the area of democracy, demands a Council
that act in a transparent manner. For the Security Council
and its bodies to enjoy authority, they must interact
properly with the whole host of Member States. That is
why we believe that open briefings by the Chairs of the
its subsidiary bodies should become the norm, together
with the publication of the reports of the panels of
experts that support the committees. Interactive public
briefings open to all Member States are also helpful,
although they should be carefully prepared in order to
avoid repeating information from Council briefings.
Rather than addressing formal issues, the Committees
should strive to ensure that meetings are useful and
substantive. Whenever possible, we should make better
use of informal meetings on the margins of formal
committee meetings — what is known as informal
informals. A lot of progress on highly controversial
issues can be made in such meetings.
In the era of the Internet, there is no better tool
than the web pages of subsidiary bodies. In that regard,
we should acknowledge the work being done by the
Secretariat. We would particularly like to highlight
the 1540 Committee’s web page, which is an excellent
source of information on this area.

14/30

11/02/2016

One issue that is much discussed is that of
interaction with the affected States. While that is an
unavoidable requirement, each case has to be considered
individually. Moreover, committees must be able to
count on the necessary confidentiality in discussing
what are often very difficult and controversial issues.
With regard to preparing future Chairs to assume
their functions, there is room for improvement. Starting
this year, the new members of the Security Council will
be elected in June. It is therefore logical to assume that
the new Chairs will also be appointed earlier. But let
us be practical. The non-permanent members serve on
the Council for two years. As a result, there is not much
sense in assuming that the Chairs’ transition process
will begin six months ahead of time. We think three
months is a reasonable period for that transition. As to
the training for Chairs, the Spanish delegation received
a great deal of support from the Secretariat for several
weeks before taking its seat on the Council — indeed,
perhaps more than we were really able to absorb. We
also had a lot of support from the outgoing Chairs from
South Korea, Luxembourg and Australia. We therefore
cannot but hope that our experience will serve as a
reference for others.
It is clear that sanctions are not an end in themselves.
They are imposed when other possibilities have been
exhausted, and always with the aim of guaranteeing
international peace and security while ensuring that
they do not have unintended consequences. We should
remember that sanctions are preventive, rather than
punitive, in nature. And they are increasingly being used
to support Governments and regions that are struggling
to establish peaceful transitions. However, some
measures are unavoidable in certain circumstances,
such as arms embargoes designed to avert an escalation
of violence and to save lives. Furthermore, experience
has shown that the adoption of coercive measures can
be an effective instrument for correcting or modifying
specific behaviours. However, to a great extent, their
effectiveness depends upon proper implementation by
all Member States, and that effect must be assessed as
part of a comprehensive strategy that should include all
instruments used in a particular context. Nor should
we forget that it is those committing the acts that the
Council is attempting to prevent through its imposition
of sanctions who, in the final analysis, are doing the
most harm to the people as a whole. The best way to
prevent undesired consequences is to implement the
Council’s resolutions.

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

Before I conclude, and speaking practically, I would
like to suggest some ways of improving the work of
subsidiary bodies. We should, for example, improve the
coordination among subsidiary bodies with situations
or subject areas in common, such as the excellent
collaboration among the 1540 Committee, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee. We
should also promote coordination among penholders
and the relevant subsidiary bodies working on
specific situations or topics, especially with regard to
sanctions, which are often a fundamental tool in the
implementation of measures instituted by the Council
in the case of serious threats to international peace and
security — as attested to by the Council’s own agenda.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
for the initiative you have taken to convene today’s
debate on the working methods of the subsidiary organs
of the Security Council, in particular its sanctions
committees, which we consider to be of great relevance.
We also thank you, Sir, for your substantial concept note
(S/2016/102, annex). Similarly, we would like to thank
Ambassadors Olof Skoog and Carlos Olguín Cigarroa
for their respective briefings.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, Uruguay sees accountability,
coherence and transparency as being of prime
importance in improving the working methods of the
Security Council, including its subsidiary organs.
Uruguay supports the flexible use of methodological
tools that promote greater involvement of the United
Nations membership, knowledge of the issues seized by
the Council and the courses of action it adopts. In this
regard, as it concluded its presidency of the Security
Council in January, Uruguay proposed using more open
discussion formats in Security Council debates on the
issues on its agenda and make consultations into real
action-oriented exchanges.
Given that all States Members of the United Nations
have a fundamental interest in the work of the Security
Council as a body that acts on their behalf pursuant to
the Charter, Uruguay believes that ongoing dialogue
with non-members of the Council is a commitment
and a key challenge, because only through transparent
and accurate information management will a good
relationship be established, leading to the complete
and satisfactory fulfilment of the Council’s mandate
for the benefit of all humankind. From this perspective,
Uruguay highlights the importance of sanctions regimes

S/PV.7620

taking steps to achieve greater transparency, coherence
and accountability, without violating the privileged or
confidential nature of certain documents handled by
sanctions committees. Uruguay believes that improving
current working methods could have a positive influence
on the achievement of desired objectives, thereby
improving the effectiveness of sanctions regimes. At
the same time, Uruguay believes that when sanctions
are imposed, unintended secondary effects should be
considered, as increased tensions could hinder dialogue
aimed at finding political solutions to conflicts or have
other negative impacts on the civilian population.
For Uruguay, it is important that sanctions regimes
comply with due process, which supports the proposal to
open discussion on the expansion of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to all the sanctions committees. Uruguay
also highlights its interest in greater transparency in the
allocation of chairmanships of subsidiary bodies and of
penholderships. Another aspect that could be improved
is the time allowed for different kinds of documents to
be distributed for consideration by Council members.
Uruguay fully supports the measures proposed by
Venezuela in the concept note with respect to, on the
one hand, the importance of having more frequent open
interactive briefings and consultations with countries
affected by sanctions regimes, greater dissemination
of information concerning the activities of sanctions
committees in the international media, regular
circulation of detailed summary records of sanctions
committees’ meetings, and greater and clearer
dissemination of information concerning the duration
of sanctions, including actions to be undertaken by
individuals and entities under sanctions in order to have
sanctions lifted, and, on the other hand, the preparation
of new members of the Security Council for assuming
chairmanships of the sanctions committees. I take this
opportunity to express the support of Uruguay for the
draft note of the presidency of Venezuela on improved
working methods.
In conclusion, Uruguay, as a member of the
Security Council and as a troop-contributing country,
cannot fail to mention the importance of improving
the working methods of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace, including of its subsidiary body,
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and
its far-reaching impact.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of Chile
and Sweden for their statements.

16-0349415/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

“Oh, there is no doubt.” Those are the words of the
late Nelson Mandela on the eve of black majority rule
in South Africa, describing the role that international
sanctions played in ending apartheid. Indeed, there
is no doubt that sanctions have also advanced the
Security Council’s goals on a range of issues, including
the prevention of conflict, protection of human rights,
protection of civilians, nuclear non-proliferation and
even responsible utilization of natural resources.
In Western Africa, the timely application of United
Nations sanctions, including asset freezes, travel bans,
arms embargoes and natural resource trade bans, helped
bring peace to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire
over a period of almost two decades.
These are flexible tools. In the case of Liberia, the
Council imposed measures at the height of violence
instigated by Charles Taylor that cost thousands of
lives. Then, as a democratic transition occurred, the
Council crafted the sanctions anew to target human
rights violators and those who continued to threaten the
peace, security and stability of the country. Over time,
the Council adjusted these measures to accompany
and encourage progress and stabilization and support
good governance of natural resources. In turn, this
spring, the Council is poised to terminate this sanctions
regime — a true testament to how far Liberia has come.
Today, the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities is helping to choke off the
sources of funding for the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and is working to mitigate the global threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is working to prevent the flow of sensitive nuclear and
ballistic missile technology to North Korea, to cut off
financial relationships and transactions that the fund
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s prohibited
activities and to freeze the assets of those involved
in violating sanctions. Targeted sanctions have also
helped to address crises in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, marginalizing spoilers and helping
address violations of international humanitarian law.
Sanctions can be one of the most effective tools we
have to prevent greater violence or change the calculus
of countries that violate serious rules of international
law, such as those that seek to develop nuclear weapons

16/30

11/02/2016

in violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, those that threaten to commit
genocide, those that abuse human rights or provide
support to terrorists. Most recently, robust enforced
United Nations sanctions helped resolve international
concerns over Iran’s nuclear programme, leading to
a historic deal between the five plus one group and
Iran — the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Under this deal, which will ensure that Iran’s
nuclear programme is and will remain exclusively
peaceful, we agreed to lift nuclear-related sanctions
on Iran, in exchange for the verified completion of a
series of steps to roll back its nuclear programme. As
demonstrated in this case, sanctions are not intended
to be permanent. Cooperation and dialogue can pave
the way for the lifting of sanctions. Sanctions, when
imposed judiciously and in concert with comprehensive
strategies, can produce diplomatic breakthroughs. We
have seen that, including in countries we will hear from
today.
Of course, sanctions cannot be and never are an
end in and of themselves. They must targeted, deployed
with purpose, and grounded with a clear strategy for
promoting international peace and security. Sanctions
have proven to be a tool that when used properly allows
bodies such as this one to advance our shared interests
in the protection of human rights, territorial integrity,
justice and other values central to the Charter of the
United Nations.
I note the representative of the Russian Federation’s
characterization of the United States role as penholder
for the Sudan sanctions regime. Let us be clear. When a
member of the Security Council blocks the publication
of a Panel of Experts’ report, they are not acting in
the interest of progress; they are frustrating it. It is
the opposite of transparency. Those who frustrate the
functioning of our sanctions regimes, whether in South
Sudan, Darfur or Yemen, are usually zealously guarding
prerogratives other than the values that animate the
Charter of the United Nations.
In the light of the contribution of sanctions to the
Council’s work, I should like to make three brief points
about sanctions committees.
First, the sanctions committees should do more
to ensure that their work is integrated with other
United Nations tools. For example, we support regular
meetings to assess the role of sanctions in the Security
Council’s overall political strategy towards a targeted

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

country or region. Such discussions should occur on
a rolling basis, perhaps joined by relevant Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, to ensure that
the sanctions are calibrated to evolving and changing
situations on the ground. To better integrate this work,
committee chairs and Special Representatives should
have regular dialogue to ensure that their work is
mutually reinforcing.
Secondly, we agree strongly with our Council
colleagues who insist on greater transparency in the
work of the committees. Too often, the committees are
opaque to the outside world. We need concrete ways
to improve transparency, such as through more open
briefings, the release of written background materials,
more travel by committee chairs to affected regions,
and further dialogue between communities and
affected States on implementation challenges. In this
vein, I would note again that United Nations sanctions
expert panels, which report to the committees, play a
key role in promoting this transparency. Their analysis
and findings help the international community to
understand the role of sanctions and how they must be
implemented.
When procedural steps are taken to block the
normal public release of these reports, our interests and
transparency are frustrated. Just yesterday, when we
adopted resolution 2265 (2016), on the Sudan Panel of
Experts, the resolution had no new elements informed
by the compelling data presented by the Panel because
the Panel’s report had been blocked from publication,
ensuring that Member States could not benefit from the
Panel’s findings and judge its reporting on its merits.
We should not create panels of experts and give them a
mandate to find facts, only to block their findings from
being published when the facts are inconvenient.
My third point is that the United States believes
that sanctions committees must significantly improve
their ability to respond to wilful violations of
Security Council resolutions. This point should not be
controversial, given that individuals and entities that
facilitate violations are obviously working to thwart the
will of the Council. Yet sanctions committees frequently
shy away from effective responses to violations. In
some cases, sanctions committees have been unable
to agree to take any action even when confronted with
unambiguous evidence of wrongdoing. Such inaction
undermines the international rule of law, not to mention
the Council’s credibility.

S/PV.7620

As stated at the outset, we welcome further
discussion on how to enhance the work of sanctions
committees. We particularly welcome any opportunity
for the Council and its subsidiary bodies to elevate
attention to sanctions and eliminate excuses for
non-compliance.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate, which
we consider to be pertinent and timely. We also thank
you for your helpful concept note (S/2016/102, annex),
which provides a useful guide for our discussion today.
We are also pleased to have Ambassador Carlos
Olguín Cigarroa of Chile and Ambassador Olof Skoog
of Sweden joining us today. We listened to their
respective briefings very carefully and with much
interest. They have certainly brought much insight to
the topic at hand.
We also appreciate the presidency’s reaching out
to States affected by sanctions for the purposes of
today’s debate. In this connection, we welcome the
participation of the delegations of the Central African
Republic, Côte D’Ivoire, Eritrea, Iran, Libya and the
Sudan. We believe that their participation could offer a
broader perspective to the discussion.
Malaysia takes this opportunity to reaffirm the
long-standing position of the Non-Aligned Movement
that the application of sanctions by the United Nations,
as authorized by the Security Council, must be fully in
accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Charter
and only as a measure of last resort.
Given the fact that the bulk of the Council’s
subsidiary bodies are sanctions committees that
undertake
important
functions
—
including
implementation, implementation monitoring and the
assessment of the various sanctions regimes — we
support the presidency’s focus on this theme with the
aim of making the work of such committees more
streamlined, coordinated and effective. Since much
ground has been covered by earlier speakers, I wish
to focus my intervention on Malaysia’s experiences
as Chair of two subsidiary bodies — the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya — in order to contribute to the
discussion.
At the outset, Malaysia wishes to acknowledge and
express appreciation to the preceding Chairs of the

16-0349417/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. They
have built a solid foundation for the promotion and
protection of the children and armed conflict agenda
in the Council, which has allowed us, as the current
Chair of the Working Group, to continue emphasizing
the centrality of that agenda as a key component of the
larger protection of civilians agenda in the Council.
Malaysia assumed the chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
keen interest in ensuring the buy-in and co-ownership
of concerned countries. To that end, we sought to
introduce certain innovations, such as reflecting the
views of the concerned States in their entirety in the
Working Group’s conclusions or outcome reports.
We firmly believe that such measures contribute to
the overall outcome, whereby interested partners are
afforded easy access to the views of all concerned
parties on any given situation. We are grateful that the
introduction of these measures has been supported and
accepted by all Council members.
Another aspect of innovation in the work of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict relates
to better coordination and cooperation between the
Working Group and the sanctions committees. Given
the cross-cutting themes addressed by the Working
Group and the sanctions committees, in 2015 we
worked with Lithuania to hold joint meetings between
the Working Group and the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and resolution 2127
(2013). We believe that such joint meetings provide
a wider perspective to the members of the Working
Group and the sanctions committees alike, which is an
important exercise, particularly when assessment has
to be made of the effectiveness of the sanctions regime,
including possible unintended consequences, especially
for children but also, more generally, for civilians in
conflict situations.
With regard to our work as Chair of the 1970 (2011)
Committee, we share many of the views expressed
by earlier speakers concerning their role as chairs of
sanctions committees. That said, we would emphasize
the role of the chair in undertaking outreach activities,
including the dissemination of information on the work
of the sanctions committees to as wide an audience
as possible. Better understanding of the work of the
committees could support better and more effective
implementation. On this note, we also see scope for
better coordination among the chairs of the subsidiary

18/30

11/02/2016

organs of the Council, especially those with related
themes or geographical scope.
With respect to the transparency and inclusivity of
the work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies, we share
the view that such principles must apply from the very
start of the process, including on the appointment
and selection process. This year presents an excellent
opportunity to revisit these and other procedural aspects
of the selection and appointment issue, given that the
General Assembly will be electing non-permanent
members of the Security Council in June. The lead
time afforded to delegations elected to the Council
should also be used to adequately prepare them for
their eventual role as chairs of the various subsidiary
bodies. In this regard, Malaysia supports the proposal
for consultations on chairs to start as soon as possible
in order to allow time for sufficient preparation, with
the full involvement of the newly elected members
and taking into account their views and preferences, if
any. Improving the transparency of the selection and
appointment process for chairs of subsidiary bodies
would greatly enhance the legitimacy of the process,
particularly in the eyes of the elected members.
On transparency in general, Malaysia welcomes
the proposals calling for more open briefings to wider
membership on the work of sanctions committees.
Nevertheless, we are equally mindful of the fine
balance between transparency and confidentiality.
In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation
to the presidency for initiating the draft note on the
working methods of the subsidiary organs. We look
forward to engaging constructively with other Council
members on it. We support proposals concerning
burden-sharing among all Council members on chairing
the subsidiary bodies. Additionally, we are also open
to consider reviving the 2000-2006 Informal Working
Group on General Issues of Sanctions, to review and
improve the effectiveness of sanctions committees.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Reforming the working
methods of the Security Council, especially those of
its subsidiary bodies, warrants our particular attention.
That process should be expedited. As one of the main
initiators of the Informal Working group on General
Issues of Sanctions in 2000, during our previous
membership in the Council, Ukraine welcomes your
initiative, Sir, to convene this thematic debate aimed
at lending new dynamism to our consideration of
this important matter. I would also like to thank

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

today’s briefers for their valuable insights, as well as
to welcome the results of high-level review of United
Nations sanctions. We believe that the following steps
should be taken in order to make the Security Council
subsidiary bodies more effective and efficient.
First, the process of the selection of the Chairs of
the subsidiary bodies requires our attention. The way it
is conducted presently can hardly be called balanced,
transparent, efficient or inclusive. Therefore, the
Security Council should stick closer to the formula
agreed upon in the presidential note S/2012/937, which
provides for an informal process with the participation
of all Council members. We look forward to a proper
review of that process.
Secondly, it goes without saying that the problem is
not in the vehicle but in the driver. Preparing incoming
Chairs to steer the subsidiary bodies therefore has a
direct impact on the committees’ effective functioning.
Efficient chairmanship requires considerable amounts
of time and efforts from respective delegations. In that
respect, we support the idea, mentioned earlier today
by a number of delegations, of appointing the Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies as soon as possible after
their elections to Council, but no earlier than three
months before commencing the chairmanship. We
commend the Secretariat for its efforts to provide the
newly appointed Chairs and their experts with relevant
training and expertise. We call for the enhancement of
that practice. That brings me to the issue of cooperation
between outgoing and incoming Chairs. We encourage
outgoing Chairs to provide extensive written and oral
briefings to incoming Chairs that highlight the current
challenges before them, as well as to share their insights
into the lessons learned. In our case, we encourage such
cooperation and are grateful to our predecessors, in
particular Lithuania.
Thirdly, the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council do not work in a vacuum. In order to be
effective, they require mutual dialogue and cooperation,
including among Chairs, in steering subsidiary bodies
with similar themes and geographical scope, as well as
with other United Nations bodies. Regular meetings to
discuss common concerns and best practices as part of
their coordinated efforts have proved to be productive.
The recent joint meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and
the Counter-terrorism Committee is a good example in
that respect. Of equal importance is the maintenance
of close interaction between the Chair taking the lead

S/PV.7620

on thematic issues or country-specific situations, in
particular penholders, in order to produce coherent
Council outcomes.
Increasing openness and transparency in the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council should be
at the top of our agenda. In order to ensure that the
broader United Nations membership has a better
understanding of the work carried out by the subsidiary
bodies, the Security Council could consider holding
briefings by the Chairs of those bodies, as a rule and in
an open format, and to encourage them to interact with
non-Council members on a regular basis so as to receive
their valuable input. That would also serve the purpose
of avoiding any misunderstandings and promoting the
proper implementation of the United Nations sanctions
and respect for them. For that reason, we also support
the participation of the concerned non-Council Member
States in meetings of the subsidiary organs, inter alia,
during the consideration of the relevant country or
thematic reports. That would definitely be effective in
terms of saving time and resources, while also ensuring
that the outcome documents include up-to-date and
accurate data and that the interests of those States are
duly taken into account.
Great things usually start small. In that regard,
we consider today’s debate to be an important element
of the ongoing process of the reform of the Security
Council’s working methods. The ideas expressed
today by Council members and interested delegations
will inform Ukraine’s chairmanship this year in the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1521
(2003) and 2127 (2013).
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency
of the Security Council for the current month for
having proposed this issue as the subject of a meeting
of the Security Council. We would also like to thank
the representatives of Sweden and Chile for having
contributed to our debate today.
The sanctions regime provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations is one of the most important
tools at the disposal of the Organization, and in
particular of the Security Council, in order to achieve
the clearly established purposes and principles, which
often concern the maintenance of international peace
and security. Given the fact that imposing sanctions
on States or regimes is not an end in and of itself,
we reiterate our rejection of open-ended sanctions.

16-0349419/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

Sanctions should be lifted as soon as the causes that
led to their imposition no longer exist. The role of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and that of
the sanctions committees in particular, is extremely
sensitive and important. Those bodies provide followup for the implementation of the sanctions regimes,
ensure the oversight for their implementation, provide
recommendations and make the appropriate decisions
that should lead to measures and practical action on the
ground. Each one, according to its area of expertise, is
in constant contact with the Security Council and the
Statesm Members of the United Nations. It is therefore
important that we ensure that the working methods of
subsidiary bodies and committees are appropriate and
expedient in ensuring the desired effectiveness of those
same bodies and committees and in strengthening their
credibility, which in turn strengthens the credibility of
the Security Council in the eyes of Member States.
Given that circumstances sometimes change, it
is important that the working methods be subject to
periodic review and updating to ensure that subsidiary
bodies and the relevant committees are able to
successfully carry out their functions with effectiveness
and transparency. The bulk of the Security Council’s
work is at the level of subsidiary bodies. We agree that
there should be increased transparency in the working
methods of subsidiary bodies, including the sanctions
committees, by, inter alia, increasing the number of
public briefings presented by the Chairs. There is a need
to increase consultations with the States concerned.
Non-Council members must receive periodic
summaries about the meetings held by the subsidiary
bodies and committees. There is therefore a need to
continue to translate sanctions lists into all official
United Nations languages and to update the information
published on those bodies’ and committees’ websites.
Egypt is in agreement with respect to the content of
the draft presidential concept note (S/2016/102, annex)
distributed by the Venezuelan delegation on the items
relating to the selection and training of new members of
the Security Council that are called upon to chair one of
the sanctions bodies or committees, particularly given
that there exist divergences and differences in methods
of work from one committee to another, sometimes
even an absence of clarity.
Regarding
improving
communication
and
cooperation among the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council, including communication between
those bodies and the Security Council, my delegation

20/30

11/02/2016

supports the content of the draft presidential note
encouraging the Chairs of subsidiary bodies on similar
issues to hold periodic meetings to discuss issues of
common interest as well as good practices, so as to make
headway in common cooperation. An example of this is
the joint meeting held recently between the CounterTerrorism Committee and the sanctions committee on
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida,
on the financing of terrorism.
There is a need to forge a common vision for
coordination among the Chairs of the sanctions
committees and penholder delegations. A study should
be conducted so as to draw a distinction between the task
of elaborating draft resolutions and that of managing
unofficial consultations on resolutions seeking to
extend sanctions. The President of the Security Council
should convene those types of consultations and
manage related discussions. That is why the success of
sanctions committees depends largely on constructive
cooperation between national authorities of the States
concerned, regional parties and neighbouring countries.
That is why Egypt reiterates the importance of
ongoing dialogue and constructive cooperation with
such parties, in particular during periodic joint meetings
and visits on the ground, given that sanctions are not
coercive measures but rather ones seeking to support
stability and combat spoilers. Sanctions committees
would benefit from hearing from a broad spectrum of
players, be it at the United Nations, in peacekeeping
operations or from the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as advisory
working groups such as the Working Group on Children
in Armed Conflict.
We might also add that sanctions committees would
benefit from hearing from parties external to the United
Nations, such as national experts from civil society,
in line with the appropriate mechanisms agreed upon
with the Chairs of sanctions committees. Proposals
to modernize the working methods of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council are the subject of a great
deal of research and high-quality studies, but what is
most important is the political will to take them into
consideration and the belief that updating their working
methods would give them added value. We hope that
the presidential note will be taken into account, as it
includes recommendations that are very important to
Egypt.

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
At the outset, I should like to express my gratitude
to the Permanent Representative of Sweden, Mr. Olof
Skoog, and to the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Chile, my dear friend Carlos Olguín Cigarroa, for
their respective briefings. I should like also to thank all
members of the Council for their statements, which have
made a very important contribution to the discussion on
this issue.
I would also note the presence here today, under rule
37, of the countries concerned by the various sanctions
committees. I have to say that only a few countries are
part of the problem involving certain members of the
Council bringing pressure to bear on others, and we
deem it very important to hear some of the experiences
of sanctions committees and the views of the countries
concerned.
When we speak of transparency, we believe that
meetings such as this are very important. I think that
this is the first time that we will all be hearing the views
of the countries affected by sanctions. We deem it very
important that the rest of the diplomatic community
at the United Nations hear from such countries, as it
will be possible for them to publicly air their views on
the sanctions, and to hear the national position of each
member of the Security Council on the very important
issue of sanctions committees.
Our intention here is, of course, constructive, and
our objective relates primarily to sanctions committees
on specific countries, not committees on terrorism
or other committees whose work is of a completely
different nature. We are speaking of committees that
involve entire countries and peoples.
In this respect, the Charter of the United
Nations indeed stipulates that certain actions may be
taken before any military action to avert threats to
international peace and security; it does not mention
sanctions, as Ambassador Yoshikawa said, only a set of
measures as set out in Article 41.
Venezuela, as a country that respects the norms
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, therefore embraces the provisions of Article
41. We should recall that the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council on the Government of South Africa
played a very important role, together with the struggle

S/PV.7620

waged by the people of South Africa and the wars of
liberation on the continent that led to the defeat and end
of the apartheid regime, which was a source of shame
to humankind.
We should also emphasize that while Article 41
establishes the Security Council as the guarantor of
international peace and security, my country rejects
as illegitimate and contrary to international law any
unilateral sanctions imposed by certain countries on
others to achieve political solutions or punish regimes
that they deem inconvenient.
The fact that the sanctions imposed by the United
Nations are legal does not, of course, mean that they
are perfect. We are all aware of the fact that sanctions
regimes can have unintended consequences and that in
certain cases they have led to greater destabilization
and suffering, the very thing they supposedly had
sought to alleviate. Let me give two concrete examples.
During the 1990s, Iraq was subject to the most
extensive sanctions regime in the history of the United
Nations. Iraq depended on oil exports for its revenues
and for practically all other needs of its society, and
sanctions blocked all of those exports. The human cost
of the sanctions imposed on Iraq between 1991 and 1998
involved more than 1 million people in that country.
Something similar occurred in Latin America and
the Caribbean. In 1994, the Security Council imposed
an economic embargo on Haiti; those sanctions
destroyed the country’s already weak economy and its
social structure. Long before the terrible earthquake
of 2010, sanctions imposed by the United Nations had
already severely jeopardized the future of the Haitian
people for generations to come. However, those two
examples have enabled the Security Council to change
its approach to sanctions, shifting from comprehensive
to targeted sanctions and from countries to individuals
and entities, seeking to reduce the negative impact of
sanctions on the populations of the affected countries.
However, sanctions regimes, in particular managed
and sectoral regimes, still have unintended consequences,
including an adverse humanitarian impact on civilians,
high economic costs for neighbouring countries and
the criminalization of economic activities. One issue
that we believe remains unresolved is that of the
discretionary imposition of sanctions. What countries
should be subject to sanctions and how is it decided?
There are sanctions that may prevent threats to the
national sovereignty of some countries and there are

16-0349421/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

others that threaten global security but are not subject
to sanctions because they are supported by the veto in
the Security Council.
Some issues require sanctions. There is much that
can be done to ensure that sanctions regimes work
and are more in line with the provisions of Article
48. In our view, the criteria for efficacy in sanctions
committees should be clearly defined. What is it that
makes a sanctions committee effective or not? It should
indisputably be linked to political objectives. Sanctions
cannot be imposed permanently on countries. They
should have an objective that has been agreed in the
highest political organ of the Organization — the
Security Council.
There are other issues of concern to us, such as
sanctions imposed on natural resource management.
We maintain that this violates the sovereignty of
States and their right to manage their own resources,
in accordance with the General Assembly resolutions,
as mentioned yesterday, and in particular resolution
1803 (XVII) on the inalienable right of countries to
manage their own resources. We maintain that for
most developing countries, one of their only sources of
income is natural resources; restricting countries in the
management of their own resources will therefore serve
only to exacerbate the economic and humanitarian
situation in the countries concerned.
Another issue of concern to us is the lack of due
process with regard to imposing sanctions on countries
and individuals. Although we acknowledge that the
Security Council has acted to address the issue of
due process, in particular as related to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, with the introduction of the post
of Ombudsperson, we believe that such a post should
be evaluated and extended to all committees, as we
propose in our concept note (S/2016/102,annex). The
guarantee of due process in sanctions committees
does not currently reach the minimum legal threshold
established in national or international legislation. It
is similar to an inquisitorial court. There is no way to
determine how a person or entity may end up subject
to a sanctions regime, other than through information
provided by or a proposal from one of the penholders
to the various committees. By way of example, more
than 50 per cent of sanctions appeals in courts in the
European Union have had successful outcomes. In other
words, this issue must be addressed with transparency,
in the absence of clear and just procedures to determine
the persons or entities subject to sanctions regimes.

22/30

11/02/2016

In addition, we must carefully study and resolve
the issue of the duration of sanctions regimes. Many
are established without clear steps or criteria to be met
by the sanctioned countries in order for sanctions to
be lifted. No one knows. A country is sanctioned but
has no idea how sanctions can be lifted. Very often,
the reasons for establishing a sanctions committee
vanish but are then promptly replaced by a completely
different set of reasons. This clearly demonstrates that
very often sanctions imposed by the Security Council,
under pressure from some of its permanent members,
are merely a way to punish some countries and not
others. That is why some sanctions regimes have been
in place for such a long time with no clarity about why
they have been extended. The oldest committees are
those concerning Iraq, which has lasted 26 years, and
Somalia and Liberia, each lasting 24 years.
Of the 16 sanctions committees, 62.5 per cent
concern African countries. The Security Council takes
an unusual interest in imposing sanctions on Africa.
Nine of the committees have been in place for more
than 10 years. The average life of committees that
have ended in recent years was 11 years. There are
at least five committees that no longer exist, which
demonstrates the challenge of ending sanctions
regimes once established and the prevailing injustice
that often prevents sanctions from being lifted. That is
why clear and comprehensible procedures and criteria
for the lifting of sanctions should be communicated
openly to affected States. That is imperative because
it is not uncommon for some countries to exploit the
ambiguous wording of texts drafted 10 or 15 years ago
in an effort to continue punishing countries that are an
inconvenience to them.
With regard to chairs of sanctions committees,
we maintain that they should be appointed through a
transparent, balanced, inclusive and timely process in
which all members of the Security Council, and not
just the permanent five, take part, as is currently the
case. As soon as they are appointed, they can begin
the process of thoroughly preparing and standardizing
working methods.
With regard to committee functions, as the
Ambassador of New Zealand noted, it seems that
committee chairs are simply spokespersons for
members, conveying information provided by the
panels of experts. At times, we have thought that this
position was given to elected members because chairs
of sanctions committees are politically innocuous. We

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

believe that it is important for elected members to chair
committees because they have no conflicts of interest.
In other words, it does not make sense for a member of
the permanent five to be a penholder or a committee
chair when there is an obvious conflict of interest, since
they have appointed themselves and have not vetoed
their own membership of sanctions committees in an
effort to impose sanctions on a specific country.
However, we believe that committee chairs should
exploit their position to share their own opinions,
thoughts and recommendations. Each report prepared
by chairs for the Security Council is extensively revised
by the panels of experts and the representatives of
various countries. When we wish to have a political
discussion in the Security Council, we find ourselves
seated behind the same ambassadors and experts who
impose their own criteria on sanctions committees.
This lack of flexibility does not allow a member
country holding the chairmanship or its ambassador to
be innovative or make a contribution that would assist
in meeting the objectives of the sanctions committees.
In that regard, we believe that the chairs of the sanctions
committees should at the very least be able to express
their views about the functioning of the committees and
how they can adjust to political situations that are often
fluid, as is the case in the Horn of Africa and in Libya
in North Africa. These are evolving situations and
committees need to adapt on the basis of discussions
held in the Security Council concerning the need to lift
or reduce sanctions or to take any decision against a
given country.
With regard to the panels of experts, we believe
that the experts are technically capable and skilled
individuals, whom we thank for their work, which they
frequently undertake in truly adverse circumstances. We
call on the panels of experts to be truly independent in
their assessments. That can sometimes prove difficult,
but no panel should demonstate political prejudice
towards the country to which they are assigned. The
information gathered by panels of experts is noted by
the national capitals of neighbouring countries, which
have an interest in whether sanctions are maintained
against a particular country. The panels’ reports
sometimes contain information that may be difficult
to source or verify. Such information may be reported
by civil society or non-governmental organizations and
there is no way to verify it.
The work of the panels of experts is very important,
and along with their reports serve as the bases for the

S/PV.7620

sanctions committees discussions. The panels often
engage in their own interpretation of the provisions
and mandate of the relevant resolution, and it can be
very difficult to change such assessments. Ultimately,
the panels of experts play a lead role in sanctions
committees, and may even have powers that carry more
political weight than those of the chair.
We believe that the sanctions committees need to
be more accountable. It should be an open mechanism;
we do not wish to see more bureaucracy. Those who
are responsible for the respective sanctions committees
need to be accountable to the Security Council
for their work; they must respect the committees’
political objectives and be able to express their views
concerning the lifting or modification of sanctions
and the committee’s goals. The work of the sanctions
committees should not be compartmentalized, given
the fact that many regional conflicts must be seen, in a
cross-cutting manner, to have problems similar to those
in countries of the same region.
We have made a number of recommendations
and look forward to receiving the support of all
members for a draft document reflecting the important
contributions expressed here today. We feel very
strongly that the work of the sanctions committees must
reflect more accurately the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Sanctions should not be punitive,
but an instrument to address and prevent threats to
international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): First
and foremost, I would like to thank Venezuela for its
initiative in organizing this debate and presenting the
concept paper (S/2016/102, annex), which we found
extremely useful. I thank the Ambassadors of Sweden
and Chile for sharing their insightful inputs. My
delegation is grateful for the opportunity to be able to
participate in this debate.
As a general comment, we believe that any
Security Council-imposed sanction should fall within
the purview of the Charter of the United Nations at
all times. This means that, first, sanctions should not
be imposed unless there exists a genuine threat to
international peace and security — not a perceived or
fabricated one — or in the case of an act of aggression.

16-0349423/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

Secondly, sanctions are not meant to punish the general
population or aimed at achieving political objectives.
Thirdly, sanctions should be considered as the last and
not the first resort, and imposed only after all means
of peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI
of the Charter have been exhausted. Fourthly, the
imposition of sanctions should be decided only after
a thorough consideration of their short-term and longterm effects on rights recognized under international
law. In this regard, the objectives of sanction regimes
should be clearly defined and based on tenable legal
grounds, and their imposition should be for a specified
time frame and lifted as soon as the objectives are
achieved. Transparency, strategic insight and the need
to deal with the humanitarian impacts of the sanctions
are also important elements that the Council and its
subsidiaries organs should have in mind when they
consider sanctions.
First, it is important to enhance the transparency of
the working methods of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, especially when they consider or deal with
sanctions. Transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures,
especially when they affect the lives of ordinary people
by imposing sanctions. In this regard, the working
methods of the sanction committees are one of the areas
where the Council needs to improve transparency.
Secondly, the terms and conditions that the State or
entity subject to sanctions should fulfil must be clearly
defined and subject to periodic review. We agree that we
should place emphasis on the need to support the chairs
of the sanction committees in their efforts to assess and
evaluate on a regular basis the role of sanctions and the
dire need to place Council-imposed sanctions in the
framework of an overall political strategy.
Thirdly, one of the most important and, at the same
time, most neglected aspect of a sanctions regime is
how to deal with its unintended impacts. I would like
here to concentrate on this aspect through the following
observations.
First, sanctions always have a negative impact on
the rights of nations recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as in the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in particular
the realization of the right to development. They often
interfere with the functioning of basic health and
education systems and undermine the right to work; in

24/30

11/02/2016

general, they are serious obstacles to the development
of targeted States.
Secondly, sanctions are a blunt instrument, the
use of which raises fundamental ethical questions of
whether the suffering inflicted on vulnerable groups
in the target country is a legitimate means of exerting
pressure. The utmost care should be taken by sanctions
committees to protect against the victimization of
innocent civilians. Sanctions committees must be
vigilant of the negative humanitarian impact on the
civilian population, the economic effects on third
parties and the criminalization of basic economic
activities that may occur under sanctions regimes.
Thirdly, it is equally important that the sanctions
committees monitor and scrutinize the imposition of
unilateral coercive economic measures to determine if
they are in conflict with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the international law.
We fully agree with the recommendation in concept
note to include in the mandate of the expert groups of
sanctions committees a review of the impact of selective
or sectoral sanctions on affected countries, civilian
populations and the activities of the humanitarian
actors on the ground, as well as the proposal to request
that the Secretary-General establish a reporting line to
that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this important meeting on the
working methods of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, in particular the sanctions committees.
Sanctions regimes are among the means established
in the Charter of the United Nations to safeguard
international peace and security. Undoubtedly, sanctions
can contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security, if used appropriately and focused
solely on the objectives for which they are imposed and
if the do not lead to collateral damage to the population
of the country concerned or to other countries.
Today I will not talk about the general framework
of sanctions or the working methods of the various
sanctions committees. Much has been, and will be said,
by my colleagues and by the members of the Council. The

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

concept note circulated by the presidency (S/2015/102,
annex) addresses all of our concerns, and we support
the recommendations contained therein. Instead, I will
focus on Libya’s experience with sanctions and with
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.
The objective of the sanctions imposed on Libya
differs from that of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council on other States. The Libya sanctions
are not imposed against the legitimate Government.
They were imposed under circumstances that differ
from those of the country’s current situation. They are
still in effect and are aimed at helping the Government
avoid a de-stabilization of the situation and a worsening
of the problems, as well as to safeguard the wealth of
the Libyan people and restore their plundered assets.
Sanctions on Libya are imposed under numerous
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolutions 1970
(2011), 1973 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2095 (2013), 2146
(2014), 2147 (2014) and 2213 (2015). The sanctions are
limited to four areas, namely, an arms embargo, travel
bans, the freezing of assets and proscribing illegitimate
trafficking in oil and fuel. All those sanctions were
needed to control specific situations inside the country
in the absence of a strong central Government. Libya
has no objection to them. Regretfully, however, many
problems have occurred in their implementation.
We cannot accept sanctions being used to prevent
the legitimate Government from extending its full
authority over the entire Libyan territory, even if that
is an unintended consequence. Nor can we accept their
being imposed in a manner that serves to promote
radicalism and terrorism. Sanctions should also not lead
to the Libyan people’s loss of billions of dollars. We
indeed need an arms embargo against the armed factions,
but we cannot prevent the army and the police from
obtaining weapons. The Sanctions Committee should
therefore have engaged seriously and transparently in
consultations with the legitimate Government of Libya
to agree to a mechanism for facilitating the acquisition
of weapons by the Libyan army while also prevening
access to them by the radical militias that are fighting
the Government and destroying public and private
property.
Unfortunately, that did not happen. The flow of weapons
from well-known States to militias — including Da’esh,
Ansar Al-Sharia and Al-Qaida elements — continued.
Those weapons helped those groups to occupy a

S/PV.7620

number of Libyan cities, which our Government has
been unable to fully retake. We hope that the Security
Council has learned the lesson and that the Sanctions
Committee will facilitate the acquisition of weapons by
the anticipated Governmnet of national reconciliation
upon taking office, without putting forward pretexts
to prevent the army from acquiring weapons to fight
terrorism and radicalism.
The freezing of assets is another form of sanctions
imposed on Libya. There are two kinds: first, an assets
freeze against the Al-Qadhafi family and officials of his
regime and, secondly, an assets freeze against Libyan
financial institutions and their African portfolios.
Despite the clear provisions in Security Council
resolutions concering freezing the assets of certain
individuals and supporting the Libyan Government’s
recovery of plundered funds, we have not received
a single notification from any State concerning
compliance with the resolutions or the freezing of the
assets of the persons referred to in those resolutions.
We have also not received any information from
the Panel of Experts that could be useful in helping our
authorities to track and recover funds. It is noteworthy
that the Panel’s reports lack certain important names
and information. Those reports have therefore become
dead letters and of no use to us. Simply put, States
are not implementing the Council’s resolutions on the
freezing of assets, while the Panel of Experts is also not
providing us any information in that regard. In addition,
the Security Council is not taking sufficient steps to
follow up on its resolutions. Of what use is the Panel of
Experts if it does not give Libya any information, and if
most of the information it does have is available to the
public through the media?
With regard to the assets freeze against the Libyan
Investment Authority, despite its importance, the lack
of adjustment to the freeze to enable the Authority’s
governing body to manage its funds profitably has led
to losses for the Libyan State amounting to billions of
dollars in interest and service charges that we have been
unable to collect. We hope that the Security Council
will rectify the situation as soon as possible so that
Libya does not sustain further unintended losses.
Libya’s experience with the Sanctions Committee
indicates that there is a need to differentiate between
the sanctions imposed on Governments as a punishment
aimed at changing their behaviour and those used
to spare States worse consequences. My country’s

16-0349425/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

relationship with its Sanctions Committee should be
one of cooperation, coordination and constant exchange
of information within a framework of full transparency.
In that context, we find it strange that Libya’s
delegation is treated like any other Mission to the
United Nations, with the information collected by the
Panel of Experts withheld from it. It is ludicrous that
the Panel’s report to be issued as a final document
by the Security Council and made available to all
Member States and the media is not transmitted to the
Libyan delegation in advance. The Committee makes it
available to us only in its offices and only a few days
before official publication, and after discussing it in the
Committee with no annexes, as if it were a dangerous
classified document. As a matter of fact, it contains
no confidential information at all, and classified
information that would actually be useful to the Libyan
Government is not included — and not just confidential
information, but even data available through other
documents and on social media are not referred to at
all in case they might be intended to serve illegitimate
interests. Tha all leads us to question the usefulness
and benefit of the Panel of Experts.
Regrettably, this is not a moment to cite examples,
because this issue has been overtaken by events. In
Libya we are awaiting the formation of a Government of
national reconciliation. We hope the Security Council
will treat it differently once it is in office and that it will
be able to lead the country to a stage where there will
be no need for sanctions.

11/02/2016

Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to thank you for the informative concept
note (S/2016/102, annex) you have circulated to inform
our discussion on the working methods of the Security
Council’s subsidiary bodies. I would also like to
thank the delegations of Sweden and Chile and their
Permanent Representatives for their contribution to
today’s deliberations on a very important subject.
There can be no question of the importance of
listening to the points of view of non-members of the
Council in such public debates, especially those countries
that are suffering from conflict or have emerged from
conflict into a reconstruction phase, and that are dealing
with the imposition of sanctions regimes in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. The Sudan is one of
those States. Sanctions have been imposed on part of our
territory through the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), which was set up 10 years
ago and which you chair, Mr. President. In the 10 years
since the establishment of the Informal Working Group
on General Issues of Sanctions, practice has shown that
the working methods of the Committee and its Panel of
Experts should be looked at and studied in depth, as we
are trying to do today.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
that transparency, cooperation, coordination and
information-sharing between sanctions committees
and the States concerned are the pillars that make the
sanctions machinery positive and effective.

Among the most important aspects that we should
focus on and review are the issues of transparency
and impartiality in the sanctions committees’ working
methods. Based on our practical experience with the
1591 Committee, we have come to believe firmly that in
most cases the basic problem is a lack of transparency
on the part of the Panel of Experts in gathering and
analysing information. That leads to mistakes on the
part of the Committee and affects its ability to evaluate
the reality of the situation objectively and fairly. In
most cases, the Panel’s reports to the Committee are
based on sources that are either affiliated with the
insurgents, and therefore biased, or simply unknown
or with clear, specific agendas. That is why we
reiterate how crucial it is to ensure that the Panel of
Experts maintains transparency and impartiality in
its gathering and presentation of information, and
that interactive dialogues continue to be held with the
Governments of the countries concerned on any subject
before information is included in a report to a sanctions
committee.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.

We also want to see regular reviews of the
importance and effectiveness of the role played by the

In the case of Libya, assets freezes and arms
embargoes cannot be effective if our delegation and
the Sanctions Committee are not sharing information,
and right now that is not happening. My delegation
was surprised that a number of exemptions were made
without informing us, which could lead to undesired
exemptions or circumventions of correct procedure. We
hope that in the future the Sanctions Committee will
share with our delegation all the exemption requests
that reach it, as well as any steps that are taken as a
result.

26/30

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

panels of experts in promoting the political process
and achieving stability in the countries concerned.
By their very nature, there is a danger inherent in the
Security Council’s sanctions regimes whereby they can
become supervisory, and Member States have a special
responsibility to see that the Council’s mechanisms
are not exploited in order to achieve private political
agendas. While that may seem somewhat unnecessary,
we should not forget that the United Nations was
created for the purpose of achieving collective security,
and that the members of the Security Council represent
every State Member of the Organization, not just their
own Governments.
Recourse to sanctions as one of the methods
available to the Security Council in certain cases
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations should
not be the norm. First and foremost, the Council should
focus its efforts on stepping up the role of sanctions
committees in strengthening and building peace. The
Council must be strict with those who reject peace and
must resist the temptation to impose sanctions against
economic entities or institutional sectors such as, in
some countries, the management of natural resources,
as that has a direct impact on the economy of a country
that is tantamount to sanctioning people and depriving
them of their sovereign rights. We emphasized this
point yesterday: people have a sovereign right to enjoy
their country’s natural resources (see S/PV.7619).
We would like to reiterate that country visits
by the Chairs of sanctions committees constitute an
important element because they allow the Chair to see
the reality of the situation on the ground and compare
that information with that provided in the reports of
panels of experts.
I also said in the Council yesterday that a plethora
of procedures and mechanisms in a country can result
in contradictions that lead to a dispersal of resources
and efforts and increase administrative and financial
corruption. We hope that the process of reforming
the working methods of the Security Council will be
objective and judicious, and ultimately crowned with
success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): I would like to thank the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in particular
Ambassador Rafael Darío Ramírez Carreño, for
organizing today’s important and timely debate on

S/PV.7620

the working methods of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.
Given the complex and dynamic global environment,
improving the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council is of paramount importance.
Eritrea strongly believes that a transparent and credible
process in the Security Council is not an option but
a necessity. For the sake of brevity, I would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, with respect to ensuring a comprehensive
assessment of the impact of sanctions regimes, once the
causes for sanctions are proved not to exist and their
implementation is negatively affecting regional and
international peace, security and development, as well
as people’s lives, the Security Council is duty-bound to
immediately and unconditionally lift sanctions. Legal
and factual issues must be separated from politically
and diplomatically motivated agendas. Oranges and
apples should not be mixed.
It has been six years since the Security Council
imposed unjustified and politically motivated
sanctions against Eritrea. To continue to impose the
unjust sanctions against Eritrea despite the fact that
the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group (SEMG) has
reported that the grounds for imposing sanctions do
not exist is not only a travesty of justice, iit constitutes
collective punishment against the people of Eritrea.
However, more important, with the current political
and security realities in the Horn of Africa and the Red
Sea region, maintaining unjustified sanctions against
Eritrea undermines and limits the capacity of a State
Member of the United Nations to implement Security
Council resolutions to combat global extremism and
terrorism or to meaningfully contribute to maintaining
regional and international peace and security.
Secondly, with respect to transparency and
information sharing, sanctions committees, especially
those dealing with country-specific sanctions, need to
regularly interact and share information and allegations
with the country concerned. Countries under sanctions
have every right to receive in a timely manner the
full contents of draft and final reports compiled
by experts and monitoring groups. That will allow
sanctions committees to hear the views of the country
concerned, which is consistent with the legal principles
of “equality of arms” and “the accused is innocent until
proven guilty”. Such methods will definitely ensure
transparency. It must be underlined that Eritrea, as a

16-0349427/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

country concerned, continues to be denied access to the
monthly assessments and the draft and final reports of
the Monitoring Group.
Thirdly, with regard to rigorous examination by
experts and monitoring group reports, which is an
important aspect of the work of sanctions committees,
Eritrea strongly believes that sanctions committees
must ensure that the reports of experts and monitoring
groups meet the highest evidentiary standard, as
stipulated in the report of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on General Issues of Sanctions,
which, inter alia, underscores the need for expert
panels to rely on verified information and documents
and ensure that
“their assertions are corroborated by solid
information and that their findings are substantiated
by credible sources” (S/2006/997, annex, para. 23).
Furthermore, the sources of the reports must be
clearly identified and known. Sweeping statements
such as “information gathered from reliable sources”
or “information gathered from former officials” and so
on must be rejected and cannot be the basis upon which
the Security Council takes its decisions. Sanctions
committees must ensure that the contents of the reports
of panels of experts are within the purview of the
mandate and that experts strictly respect and adhere to
the mandate. Whenever experts overstep the mandate,
they should be instructed not to do so by the committee.
In the same vein, when information provided by experts
is found to be false, it must be corrected publicly and as
soon as possible.
Again, that has not been Eritrea’s experience. In
addition to overstepping its mandate, the Somalia/
Eritrea Monitoring Group has been making baseless
allegations collected from nameless and faceless
sources. In the context of maintaining regional and
international peace and security, the Group is clearly
solely mandated to look into whether Eritrea supports
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and into how the border
dispute between Eritrea and Djibouti is being handled.
However, overstepping its mandate, the Somalia/Eritrea
Monitoring Group continues to routinely deal with the
Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict, and does so in a manner
that ignores context and ramifications. Another equally
important aspect is, at least in Eritrea’s experience, the
fact that the Monitoring Group has routinely reported
uncorroborated allegations and refused to rectify them
when those allegations were found not to be true.

28/30

11/02/2016

As the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group has
clearly stated that it has found no evidence of Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab and as the Djibouti-Eritrea
issue is being handled by the Government of Qatar, with
Qatari forces being deployed at the common border
between Eritrea and Djibouti, there is no imagined
or real threat to international peace and security in
which Eritrea is involved. The Security Council must
therefore immediately and unconditionally lift the
sanctions against Eritrea.
Secondly, given the current fight against global
terrorism and extremism, lifting unjust sanctions will
enhance peace and security in the Horn of Africa and
the Red Sea region. On the other hand, we emphasize
that maintaining sanctions can only be a recipe for
disaster and chaos.
Thirdly, the unjust sanctions imposed against
Eritrea are not linked to the Eritrean-Ethiopian
conflict. However, in a manner that disregards context,
perspective and ramifications, and in violation of the
SEMG mandate and in an attempt to move the goal
post, the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group has started
to deal with the Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict. Once
again, Eritrea underlines that the conflict between
Eritrea and Ethiopia is an issue between occupied and
occupier. Ethiopian officials’ constant military threat
against Eritrea must be also taken into consideration.
For example, on 7 July 2015, the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, speaking to his Parliament, said that,
“Ethiopia will be forced to take appropriate action
against Eritrea.”
On 9 August 2014, during an interview with Ethiopian
Tsenat Radio, based in Washington, D.C., the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia clearly stated that,
“The no-war/no-peace situation with Eritrea is
over. Ethiopia from now on is ready to take military
action against Eritrea.”
On 17 April 2012, speaking to the Ethiopian Parliament,
the late Prime Minister of Ethiopia Meles Zenawi stated
that,
“The Ethiopian Government has now decided
to carry out a more active policy, taking actions
against Eritrea. The actions will involve using
all means at Ethiopia’s disposal to change the
Eritrean Government. The other major area where
Ethiopia will further strengthen its activities is in

16-03494

11/02/2016

General issues relating to sanctions

supporting Eritreans in their campaign to change
their Government.”
In conclusion, the use or threat of force against any
country, big or small, is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law that should
be condemned by the Security Council. If the Somalia/
Eritrea Monitoring Group and the Security Council
want to be involved on this issue under the current
agenda item, their option is one and only one: to urge
Ethiopia to unconditionally and immediately withdraw
from sovereign Eritrean territories, including the town
of Badme.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency for this month
and to assure you of my delegation’s support. I also
have great pleasure in expressing our appreciation to
the President of the Security Council for the month of
January, the Permanent Representative of Uruguay, His
Excellency Mr. Elbio Oscar Rosselli, and his team for
their excellent work, when the positive changes in the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire, inscribed on the Security
Council agenda, were the subject of a resolution
authorizing a reduction in the military component of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. My
congratulations also go out to the representatives of
Sweden and Chile for their outstanding briefings.
As the representative of a country subject to
Security Council sanctions regime, I take a keen
interest in taking part in this debate on the working
methods of the Council’s subsidiary bodies, so as to
share experiences and use this opportunity to make
several recommendations.
Following the events of September 2002 in Côte
d’Ivoire and the subsequent developments, the Security
Council placed my country under a sanctions regime
by virtue of resolution 1572 (2004). Three types of
sanctions were implemented: an arms embargo against
Côte d’Ivoire, individual sanctions involving the
restriction of movement and the freezing of assets,
and an embargo on diamonds originating from Côte
d’Ivoire. The political context that prevailed in Côte
d’Ivoire during the first six years of the sanctions
regime impeded the achievement of real progress.
Since 2011, with the swearing in of His Excellency
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of the Republic,

S/PV.7620

significant changes have taken place in the political
and security arenas that have led to great progress
towards a return to the peace and stability in the
country. Those positive developments led the Security
Council to gradually ease the embargo regime on arms.
Similarly, in April 2014, with the ongoing improvement
of the management of natural resources, the Security
Council, in resolution 2153 (2014), lifted the embargo
on diamonds originating from Côte d’Ivoire. Following
the smooth conduct of the presidential election and the
outcomes achieved in the areas of security
​​
and stability,
Côte d’Ivoire now awaits the total lifting of the arms
embargo, following the Secretary General’s report
expected at the end of March.
As I said earlier, cooperation between my country
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) has been marked
by a spirit of frank cooperation over the past five
years. The Group of Experts and the relevant Ivorian
authorities, including the Permanent Mission in New
York, have held working meetings on several occasions.
The Ivorian Government has always been committed
to providing the best possible working conditions for
carrying out the mission of the Group of Experts during
its periodic visits to the country. A striking illustration
of that outsanding cooperation was the field visit made
by the Ambassador of Chile, then Chair of the 1572
Sanctions Committee, to Côte d’Ivoire in 2014. During
that visit, the Committee was able to appreciate not only
developments on the ground, but also the readiness on
the part of the Ivorian authorities to make themselves
available. It is appropriate to note that the Committee
was received by the Head of State.
However, the willingness of a country under a
sanctions regime to cooperate effectively with the
sanctions committee may sometimes be hampered by
deadlines — sometimes just two or three weeks — that
often are insufficient in order to furnish the information
requested, above all owing to the difficulty of gathering
certain information. In that regard, my delegation
believes that more time should be allowed for States to
respond efficiently to the requests on the part of a group
of experts or committee, especially when the subject
entails complex issues.
The partially confidential nature of the reports
of groups of experts is a practice that deserves equal
mention. Providing reports to the countries concerned
should enable them to become familiar with experts’
observations in a timely manner. As one might infer,

16-0349429/30

S/PV.7620

General issues relating to sanctions

that should endow those reports with a sheen of
transparency and balance.
One of the key components of a committee’s
effectiveness is its thorough knowledge of the subjects
that are the object of the sanctions. My delegation notes
that the time allotted to new committee Chairs for
mastering the subject matter is at times too short. To
that end, mechanisms should be devised to allow new
Chairs to become familiarized with their case files.
A periodic review of the impact of a sanctions
regime is also an essential component that should
receive all of the attention that it deserves. It is a matter
of adapting a sanctions regime to the changing needs on
the ground. In my country’s case, the sanctions regime
was established to put a halt to ongoing hostilities and
establish conditions for lasting peace. With the return
of peace and renewed stability, the arms embargo, for
example, should be lifted to allow Côte d’Ivoire to
confront domestic challenges, such as those related
to public safety, border security and the fight against
terrorism.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to reiterate
the gratitude of my delegation to you, Sir, for the honour
that has been bestowed upon my country in having been
invited to take part in this debate. I have high hope that
the conclusions of this debate will help to improve the
working methods of the Council’s subsidiary bodies
and, in particular, those of the committees and working
groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Central African
Republic.
Mr. Koyma (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate, which gives States under
sanctions regimes an opportunity to express their views
with regard to problems linked to respecting Security
Council sanctions, the implementation of which are
ensured by the committees of the Council, established
by various resolutions. My thanks also go to the
representatives of Sweden and Chile for their important
contributions to this debate. As 22 delegations have
already discussed issues relating to transparency,

30/30

11/02/2016

regime length and procedures, my delegation will limit
itself to listing the problems facing the Central African
Republic.
Regarding the fight against the proliferation
of weapons, all it takes for a sanctions regime to be
rendered ineffective is for a neighbouring State to
support a rebellion or a listed entity or individual.
That is why, among other measures aimed at ensuring
effectiveness, strong political and diplomatic pressure
must be brought to bear when needed on the States
neighbouring the State under sanctions.
With respect to the travel-ban issue, it so happens
that recently in the Central African Republic a person
under sanctions was moving about freely, going in and
out of the territory at will. Since that person’s identity
was no secret during border crossings, we have to
question the role of INTERPOL in the implementation
of sanctions regimes, as well as the monitoring by the
panel of experts of the implementation of the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. This raises once
again the issue of the binding nature of the resolutions
of the Security Council with respect to Members of the
Organization that deliberately violate the provisions
and principles of the Charter.
Turning to the arms embargo, one of the challenges
facing the effective implementation of the arms
embargo on the Central African Republic is the fact
that it shares its north-eastern and eastern borders
with Sudan and South Sudan, which are dealing with
rebellions of their own as well as the Lord’s Resistance
Army, which flout not only the sanctions regime but
also the treaty governing the uncontrolled circulation
of and trade in arms, despite the political goodwill of
those brotherly States.
To be effective, the embargo must be complemented
by border control. However, the Central African
Republic faces the issue of vetting, which is a process
of reform of the defence and security forces that is very
lengthy and costly for this fragile country.
These are some of the challenges facing the Central
African Republic with respect to the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

16-03494
