S/2019/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 August 2019
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2434
(2018), covers political, security and economic developments in Libya, provides an
overview of the human rights and humanitarian situation and outlines the activities of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my
previous report on 7 January 2019 (S/2019/19).

II. Political, security and economic-related developments
2.
On 4 April, forces of the Libyan National Army under the command of General
Khalifa Haftar launched an offensive to seize control of Tripoli, triggering a
mobilization of armed forces operating under the command of the Govern ment of
National Accord to defend against the attack. The offensive brought the political
process to a halt. The attack took place days before the planned United Nations facilitated National Conference was to have been held, from 14 to 16 April. Since the
outbreak of fighting around Tripoli, my Special Representative has been engaging
with a wide range of national, regional and international actors to reach an agreement
on the cessation of hostilities and resume political talks.
3.
The fighting, which has been concentrated mainly in and around southern
Tripoli, has resulted in at least 395 civilian casualties, including 106 fatalities, and
has damaged critical civilian infrastructure. The conflict has aggravated humanitarian
needs and forced displacement while hindering access to food, health care and other
basic services.
Implementation of the United Nations action plan and the political process
4.
The objectives of the National Conference were to reach agreement between
participants on a national charter in which unifying principles were defined, with a
view to bringing together the Libyan constituencies, and to adopt a road map aimed
at concluding the transitional period through parliamentary and presidential elections,
which would include recommendations on ways to address the constitutional
proposal.
5.
On 9 April, my Special Representative announced the postponement of the
National Conference as a result of the conflict, mostly to the south of Tripoli, and the

19-13886 (E)

270819

*1913886*

S/2019/682

difficulty of holding political talks in such an uncertain climate. He reiterated his
commitment to the convening of the Conference as soon as possible, once conditions
enabling it to be held are re-established. To maintain the momentum in the political
process, UNSMIL has twice hosted track-two diplomatic events with invitees to the
National Conference in Hammamet, Tunisia, to hear their views on how to end the
violence and to address the root causes of the conflict through a return to the political
process. Women were strongly represented at the events.
6.
The conflict around Tripoli has further polarized an already fragmented political
landscape. On 13 April, a group of 30 members of the House of Representatives met
in Benghazi in support of General Haftar’s offensive on Tripoli. Following a first
meeting on 5 May, a group of about 40 members of the House who support the
Government of National Accord and some electees to the House who had not yet been
sworn in started to meet regularly in Tripoli, establishing four committees to
operationalize their activities. A smaller group of members of the house who support
the Libyan National Army holds sessions in Tobruq, but lacks a legal quorum to take
decisions. On 13 May, that group met in Tobruq and voted, without a quorum, to
criminalize the Muslim Brotherhood organization in Libya, further adding to the
polarization within the House. On 17 June, the group of members meeting in Tripoli
voted to abolish the position of General Commander of the Libyan Army, which
General Haftar has held since 2015. On 13 July, a large group of members met in
Cairo to discuss the prospect of re-unifying the House of Representatives.
7.
Support for an end to violence and a return to the political process remained
strong and widespread among the Libyan population. Anti -war demonstrations have
been organized regularly since April, including, notably, in Tripoli, Misratah,
Benghazi and Zawiyah. On 22 May, a delegation of tribal elders from the eastern
region met Prime Minister Faiez al-Serraj and representatives of the international
community in Tunis to discuss the possibility of a ceasefire. Since the eruption of the
conflict, both sides have been engaged in efforts to garner international support.
8.
Attempts to stop the violence and resume the political process followin g the
eruption of fighting in April have so far been unsuccessful. On 16 June, Prime
Minister Serraj announced a political initiative entailing the formation of a Libyan
forum to agree on a political road map, decide the constitutional basis for presidenti al
and parliamentary elections to be held before the end of 2019 and appoint a legislative
committee to draft proposals for elections. The Prime Minister requested the Security
Council and the international community to support the implementation of the
forum’s decisions, including those regarding decentralization measures. General
Haftar subsequently stated that the control of the Libyan National Army over Tripoli
was a precondition for the formation of a national unity government, the holding of
elections and the drafting of a new constitution.
9.
On 4 April, the High Council of State re-elected Khaled al-Meshri as its
President. Following the offensive on Tripoli, the President reaffirmed the support of
the Council for the Government of National Accord and stated that there could be no
military solution to the Libyan crisis.
Regional and international engagement
10. Prior to the fighting in April, efforts to support the political process for
concluding the transitional period had been progressing positively, with continued
regional and international work in support of a political agreement between Libyan
stakeholders. On 27 February, my Special Representative facilitated a meeting
between the Prime Minister and General Haftar in the United Arab Emirates, at which
both reiterated their commitment to the holding of elections in the second half of 2019
and reached an understanding on several issues, including the principle of civilian
2/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

oversight of the armed forces during the final transitional period, the formation of a
Government of national unity and the unification of key institutions.
11. On 12 and 13 March, my Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, Smaїl Chergui, undertook a joint visit to Tripoli and
Benghazi to demonstrate united support for the political pro cess. On 30 March, on
the margins of the 30th summit of the League of Arab States in Tunis, I participated
in a meeting of the Quartet on Libya, consisting of the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union and the League of Arab States. The repr esentatives of the
three regional organizations reiterated their support for the United Nations action plan
for Libya. On 2 and 3 April, UNSMIL supported a visit of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, to Libya, the first such visit since
the 2011 revolution, and from 3 to 5 April, I visited Libya to show my support for the
political process at a critical phase for the country. During my meetings with the
Prime Minister in Tripoli, the President of the House of Representativ es, Agila Saleh
Essa Gwaider, in Tobruq, and General Haftar in Benghazi, I reiterated that only a
political process could resolve the crisis in Libya.
12. Since the beginning of the offensive on Tripoli launched by the Libyan National
Army, the international community has struggled to come to an agreement on a
unified position on Libya. On 4 April, France, Italy, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America issued a joint communiqué urging all parties to de-escalate the fighting. On
9 April, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union issued a statement
calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities and reaffirming that there was no
military solution to the Libyan crisis. On 11 April, the European Union issued a
statement warning against the risk of escalation for Libya and the wider region.
13. On 23 April, the African Union troika of the Presidents of Egypt, Rwanda and
South Africa met in Cairo to discuss the situation in Lib ya under the auspices of the
Chairman of the African Union, President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi. The troika advocated
a more active role for the African Union in addressing the crisis in Libya and called
upon all parties to recommit to the political process. On 12 June, the foreign ministers
of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia called for a ceasefire in Libya and reiterated that a
political solution is the only way to end the conflict.
14. My Special Representative intensified his engagement with regional and
international stakeholders to enlist support for a political solution to the Libyan
conflict. On 13 May, the European Union called for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and urged all parties to recommit to the United Nations -facilitated political
dialogue for a comprehensive political solution to the crisis. On 28 June,
representatives of Egypt, France, Italy, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom and the United States welcomed the proposal of my Special Representative
for de-escalation and the resumption of the political process. Briefing the Security
Council on 29 July, my Special Representative proposed a three -step initiative to end
the conflict that involved: (a) establishment of a truce between the parties;
(b) convening of an international meeting in preparation for a Libyan meeting; and
(c) convening of a Libyan meeting.
Situation in the western region
15. The security situation in the western region deteriorated seriously during the
reporting period. Prior to the start of the offensive on the capital, there had been a
build-up of Libyan National Army forces in several areas in the region, with
corresponding reactions from other forces. On 10 March, Libyan National Army
forces moved towards Abu Hadi, around 25 km south of Sirte. They reportedly
19-13886

3/17

S/2019/682

withdrew to Jufrah shortly after the Sirte Protection Force declared a state of
emergency and joined the existing forces in Sirte.
16. On 3 April, General Haftar moved his forces from Jufrah towards the capital.
Following the entry of the Libyan National Army into Gharyan, forces affiliated with
the Government of National Accord withdrew to the north of the city. The Prime
Minister declared a state of emergency and a general mobilization in western Libya.
On 4 April, the central military zone force in Misr atah announced the deployment of
units to defend both Tripoli and Sirte.
17. Since June, the conflict in southern Tripoli has undergone a dangerous escalation,
with intensified air strikes by aircraft and armed unmanned aerial vehicles and the
increasing use of heavy weaponry alongside ground attacks.
18. On 26 June, forces affiliated with the Government of National Accord regained
control of Gharyan, where the Libyan National Army had established an operations
room. Forces operating under the Government of National Accord captured large
amounts of advanced weapons, vehicles and ammunition, including some supplied in
apparent violation of the arms embargo. There were allegations of the summary
execution of 41 injured Libyan National Army-affiliated fighters and some civilians
by forces of the Government of National Accord at the hospital in Gharyan. On
26 July, the geographical scope of the conflict was broadened when Government of
National Accord aircraft targeted a Libyan National Army base in the Jufrah r egion.
On 27 July, Libyan National Army forces launched air strikes on the Government of
National Accord airbase in Misratah.
19. On 7 May, two individuals at a detention centre in Tajura were injured during
an air strike. On 2 July, during air strikes, 53 migrants held in the same detention
centre were killed and 130 others were injured, including women and children. On
3 July, a United Nations team visited the site to document the incident and provide
humanitarian assistance. I issued a statement condemni ng the attack and calling for
an independent investigation.
20. There have been unconfirmed reports that mercenaries have been active on the
battlefield in and around Tripoli. On 7 May, an aircraft affiliated with the Government
of National Accord, reportedly operated by a pilot with foreign citizenship, was shot
down and detained by Libyan National forces. The pilot was repatriated on 25 June.
21. There was a reduction in violence during the period of the Eid al -Adha truce.
However, violations were reported to the Mission on 11 and 12 August in the
Salahaddin and Wadi Rabia areas, and in southern Tripoli, around Tripoli International
Airport. The truce was not observed in the southern town of Murzuq. Moreover,
overflights by unmanned reconnaissance aircraft over the city of Misrata continued
during the day.
Situation in the southern region
22. In February 2019, Libyan National Army forces, supported by local armed
groups, asserted their presence in south-western Libya, including in key towns and at
the Sharara and Fil oilfields. These developments exacerbated local tensions and led
to a deteriorating security situation in the region.
23. Libyan National Army forces entered Sabhah on 15 January following
negotiations with local actors proceeding towards M urzuq; the forces and affiliates
met with resistance from local Tebu groups. During clashes on 22 February,
approximately 50 people were reportedly killed and 200 houses damaged. Since
March, there have been intermittent clashes in the southern region, and in early June,
15 people were reported killed in clashes in Murzuq. Attempts by Libyan National

4/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

Army forces to create parallel local authorities further increased tensions between
local Ahali and Tebu communities.
24. The defunct, parallel “interim government” based in eastern Libya instructed
authorities in Sabhah not to participate in municipal elections organized by the
Government of National Accord. This may have contributed to a low turnout at those
elections on 27 April and to the non-recognition of the results by the incumbent
municipal council. The elections were subsequently declared void by the court of
appeal.
Situation in the eastern region
25. The situation in the eastern region remained relatively calm, although there were
reports of kidnappings, forced disappearances and assassinations. In Darnah, the
Libyan National Army gained control of the remaining part of the old city on
12 February, following intense fighting between Army forces and remnants of the
Darnah Protection Force. Over 100 bodies have reportedly been recovered in the area,
including those of women and children.
26. On 15 March, security forces arrested two Libyan National Army elements
suspected of involvement in the assassination of a police officer in Benghazi. On
16 March, armed individuals attempted to assassinate the head of the local
anti-corruption unit. In Suluq, south of Benghazi, the head of the oil workers union,
who had reportedly been abducted near his home by an armed group in late April, was
released on 30 May.
27. On 10 August, there was a car bomb explosion in Benghazi, which resulted in
five fatalities, including three United Nations staff members, and additional civilian
injuries, including two United Nations staff members. No one has claimed
responsibility for the incident and investigations are under way by the United Nations.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya
28. Following the offensive of the Libyan National Army against Tripoli in early
April, there was a significant increase in the number of attacks by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in southern Libya. During the reporting period, ISIL
claimed responsibility for attacks near the southern villages of Fuqaha ’, on 8 April
and 3 June, and Ghudwa, on 25 March and 9 May. ISIL also claimed attacks on a
Libyan National Army military camp in Sabhah on 4 May and on a military
checkpoint in Zillah on 18 May. From 12 to 15 June, clashes were reported between
ISIL and local units of the Libyan National Army in the Haruj desert area, east of
Sabhah.
29. At least 22 people were killed by ISIL in the south during attacks or in clashes
between local units and ISIL cells. In eastern Libya, ISIL claimed responsibility for
a car bomb attack on 2 June against Libyan National Army forces in D arnah, which
reportedly injured 11 people.
30. It is estimated that ISIL has between 500 and 700 fighters in Libya, including
Libyan and foreign nationals. Both Libyan National Army forces in the south and
forces affiliated with the Government of National Accord in the west have continued
to disrupt ISIL cells and arrest suspected affiliated individuals. On 7 July, ISIL
released a video showing armed elements, allegedly led by the ISIL commander in
Libya, Mahmoud al-Barassi, renewing allegiance to the group and vowing revenge
against the Libyan National Army.

19-13886

5/17

S/2019/682

Economic situation
31. During the reporting period, oil production continued largely uninterrupted, at
approximately 1.2 million barrels per day. The Central Bank of Libya continued to
apply the economic measures approved in September 2018 that allowed greater access
to foreign exchange at the price of 3.9 Libyan dinars to one United States dollar. This
allowed the currency to remain relatively stable at 4.4 Libyan dinars to one United
States dollar. It also cushioned liquidity stress and provided the Government with
over 1 billion Libyan dinars in revenue per month. Absent the prospects for a direct
currency devaluation, however, disadvantages of the foreign exchange fee have begun
to appear, including compact stress for eastern banks.
32. Despite the increased budget revenue and increased oil prices, Libya was
expected to have a budget deficit of up to $10 billion in 2019, owing in part to the
diversion of resources to sustain the conflict. Additional revenue created by the
foreign exchange fee added an additional 15 billion Libyan dinars in projected
spending to the 2019 budget. The budget of 56 billion Libyan dinars included two
supplementary budgets for debt relief and additional development spending. It did not
include the supplementary budget utilized by the parallel, defunct “interim government”,
which ranged from 7 to 9 billion Libyan dinars and was largely financed through
unrecognized debt and the printing of a parallel dinar, including 3 billion Libyan
dinars printed during the reporting period.
33. Time-intensive administrative and procurement processes and low tariff
collection rates by service providers have resulted in the erosion of vital civilian
infrastructure. Loss of capacity in the delivery of water, electricity and other s ervices
has been exacerbated by the ongoing conflict, which has damaged a number of vital
installations, including the headquarters of the Great Man -Made River. There were
likely to be significant shortages of electricity and drinking water during the summ er,
which would further exacerbate the humanitarian situation.
34. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2434 (2018), UNSMIL continued to
collaborate with the leadership of the Central Bank of Lib ya and its parallel branch
in eastern Libya on the selection of a firm to conduct a comprehensive audit review
to promote transparency and create the conditions for the eventual unification of
Libyan financial institutions.

III. Constitution-making process
35. In January, consultations between the House of Representatives and the High
National Elections Commission in Tobruq resulted in amendments to the referendum
law originally issued by the House on 26 November 2018. On 5 February, the
Commission received a revised referendum law that, according to the Commission,
included all of the amendments that it had proposed. Despite the non -disbursement of
requested funds by the Government of National Accord, the Commission made
technical preparations for a referendum process, as stipulated in the amended law.
Nevertheless, a lack of political consensus persisted on the validity of the referendum
law and the associated amendments to the Constitutional Declaration.
36. The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court remained closed and
therefore unable to rule on the mounting number of appeals filed at the court.

6/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

IV. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
37. In February, the High National Elections Commission relocated to new
headquarters in Tripoli, built after the attack on its old offices by ISIL in May 2018.
The building of the new headquarters was made possible by emergency funding of
the Government of National Accord and the support of the international community
through the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) project entitled
“Promoting Elections for the People of Libya”.
38. On 7 January, the Presidency Council amended the October 2018 regulation on
municipal elections. The Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections
prepared and conducted elections in 22 municipalities in the western and southern
regions in March and April, although one was cancelled and is now awaiting final
judgment following an appeal. The elections were held in a largely peaceful
atmosphere, albeit with modest voter turnout and low participation by women and
young people. All newly elected councils were sworn in and began serving their new
mandate, except in Sabhah, where election results were challenged and ultimately
annulled by a court ruling.
39. At the present time, both the Central Committee for Municipal Council
Elections and the High National Elections Commission lack sufficient funding. The
annual budget of the Government of National Accord allocated insuffici ent resources
to the Commission, threatening its ability to continue its daily operations.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
40. Civilians, including children, continued to bear the brunt of the escalation of
fighting and violence. From 1 January to 31 March, UNSMIL documented 110
civilian casualties, comprising 28 killed and 82 injured. Leading causes of such
casualties included shelling, gunfire and explosive remnants of war. Fighting in
Tripoli in mid-January and in Darnah and Murzuq in April resulted in a number of
civilian casualties, mainly as a result of the reckless use of weapons in residential
areas. In March, there were unconfirmed reports of a mass grave in Murzuq,
containing 17 unidentified bodies that were found with bound hands and feet and
visible signs of gunshots. On 17 March, 13 dead bodies were found on the roadside
between Ghudwa and Murzuq, with their hands tied behind their backs and their faces
covered by plastic masks.
41. As of 29 July, 111 civilians had been killed and 289 injured in the fighting in
and around Tripoli that began on 4 April. An estimated 120,000 people were internally
displaced during the period, with many more adversely affected. Unofficial figures
indicated that a much higher number of people had been displaced but not formally
registered. Approximately 5,000 migrants and refugees were arbitrarily detained in
detention centres in Tripoli. There were continued reports of the systematic looting
of property by combatants in areas where the population had been displaced by the
fighting.
42. There are allegations that all parties have been involved in conduct which could
amount to serious violations of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law during the fighting. Indiscriminate explosive attacks on residential
areas, including Abu Salim, Ghrarat, Suq al-Jum’ah and Hadbah, resulting in civilian
casualties and damage to civilian property early in the fighting, have since been

19-13886

7/17

S/2019/682

replaced by targeted air strikes, with unexploded ordnance continuing to put civilians
at risk. Health-care workers and facilities have been targeted, with 19 ambulances and
four health facilities struck, six health-care workers killed and 12 others injured.
Attacks on water supplies that affected the Tripoli and Misratah regions constitute
conduct which could amount to war crimes. There were also allegations regarding the
use of child soldiers and the forced conscription of migrants in detention, in particular
for logistical tasks. Social media have been increasingly used to incite hatred and
violence, and images of people committing war crimes have frequently been posted
online. There has been an increase in cases of the arbitrary arrest and detention,
abduction, and enforced disappearance of officials, activists and journalists since the
outbreak of the fighting in Tripoli. In April, UNSMIL documented the arbitrary
detention or kidnapping of seven officials in eastern and western Libya.
Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
43. During the reporting period, an estimated 8,813 individuals were held in 28
official prisons under the authority of the Ministry of Justice, of whom an estimated
60 per cent were in pre-trial detention. In total, 278 women were detained, including
184 non-Libyans, and 109 juveniles and children were also being held in prisons in
judicial police custody. Others were detained in facilities nominally under the control
of the Ministry of the Interior or the Ministry of Defence, as well as in facili ties
directly operated by armed groups. Those held had little opportunity to challenge the
legality of their detention or to seek redress for violations suffered.
44. In relation to detention facilities under the control of the Ministry of the Interior,
UNSMIL continued to receive credible reports of prolonged and arbitrary detention,
torture, enforced disappearances, poor detention conditions, medical neglect, and the
denial of visits from families and lawyers by those in charge of prisons and other
places of deprivation of liberty. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
expanded tripartite cooperation with Algeria and Libya to support the prison reform
efforts of the Ministry of Justice and the judicial police.
45. UNSMIL continued to highlight the need to end arbitrary and prolonged pre-trial
detention and the importance of ensuring that all prisons operated by the Ministry of
Justice would be under the control of professional and trained judicial police career
staff only. Regular meetings were held with Ministry of Justice officials to follow up
on the screening process and enhance the Ministry’s supervision of official prisons.
46. In Darnah, serious human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law have reportedly been perpetrated by affiliates of the Libyan National
Army, including summary executions of both combatant and civilian detainees.
Moreover, the Libyan National Army affiliates reportedly launched a broad intimidation
campaign inside the city, targeting the families and perceived associates of members
of the Darnah Protection Force. Arbitrary arrests and the forced displacement of
civilians continued to be reported.
47. UNSMIL has continued to receive reports of the prolonged detention of, and
denial of family visits to, civilians held in the Granada detention centre in eastern
Libya since May 2018. Those concerned have included medical professionals, civil
society activists and religious figures.
48. UNSMIL continued to face difficulties in obtaining permission to vi sit prisons
under the control of the Ministry of Justice and the judicial police, particularly in the
east. In a meeting with UNSMIL in early July regarding visits to Kuwayfiyah prison,
east of Benghazi, and the Gernada prison in Bayda’, General Abdul Razek al-Naduri,
the chief of staff of the Libyan National Army, instructed the military prosecutor in
Benghazi to facilitate visits according to formal procedures.

8/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

Judicial screening of detainees
49. UNSMIL followed up on the judicial screening of detainees after the issuance,
in September 2018, of decrees 1301 and 1304 by the Presidency Council, which
established a committee to screen detainees at Mitiga prison and conditions for the
release of certain detainees held beyond a period set down in law, resp ectively, and
decree 129 of the Supreme Judicial Council, which established another committee to
review the cases of arbitrary detention in Mitiga prison. The committees commenced
the review of detainees at the prison, which was believed to hold more than 3,600
detained persons. According to the Investigations Office of the Office of the
Prosecutor General, an estimated 800 detainees have been screened, with around 300
detainees released and others transferred. UNSMIL continued to encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor General to regularly provide public updates on progress in the
screening process. That Office reported, in February 2019, that the committee had
concluded its work and that a final report would be submitted to the Government.
Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants and refugees
50. There are 4,900 refugees and migrants currently held in detention centres run
by a government agency. Of that number, an estimated 3,500 are exposed to, or in
close proximity to, the fighting in and around Tripoli. An additional unknown number
of persons are reportedly held in other informal detention facilities in insecure
situations.
51. Migrants and refugees continued to be vulnerable to: loss of liberty and arbitrary
detention in official and unofficial places of detention; torture, including sexual
violence; abduction for ransom; extortion; forced labour; and unlawful killings.
Migrants continued to be detained in overcrowded, inhuman and degrading
conditions, with insufficient food, water and medical care and very poor sanitation.
Perpetrators of violations included State officials, members of armed groups,
smugglers, traffickers and members of criminal gangs. The number of detainees rose
as a result of an increase in interceptions at sea and the closure of sea routes to
migrants, preventing their departure. On 25 July, up to 150 migrants reportedly died
at sea after their vessel capsized.
52. There were ongoing incidents of violence and the use of deadly force against
migrants in detention, including after protests by migrants against detention
conditions. UNSMIL monitored reports of deadly incidents in official detention
centres at Tariq al-Sikkah, Qasr Bin Ghashir, Zawiyah and Sabhah. On 29 July, given
the apparent absence of measures to address the conditions, my Special
Representative called for the closing of all detention centres.
53. Serious concerns continue with regard to the transfer of migrants rescued or
intercepted at sea by the Libyan Coast Guard to unofficial detention centres in Khums.
Hundreds of rescued migrants who were reported to have been sent to detention
centres were later listed as missing, and it is believed that they may have been
trafficked or sold to smugglers, while others disappeared on their way to nearby Suq
al-Khamis. On 7 June, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights called upon the Government of National Accord to immediately launch
an independent investigation to locate the missing people.
54. With a view to strengthening the capacity of the criminal justice system in Libya
to combat trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has provided targeted training workshops and support for
the development of anti-human trafficking legislation.

19-13886

9/17

S/2019/682

Journalists and civil society activists
55. Journalists and other media professionals continued to be subjected to
intimidation and arbitrary detention. Since the beginning of 2019, UNSMIL has
reviewed one case of unlawful killing and more than 10 cases of the arbitrary arrest
and detention of journalists. Two journalists were imprisoned in the east of the
country. UNSMIL also reviewed three cases of intimidation and threats, including of
female journalists. The journalists were reportedly targeted on the basis of either their
media work or other factors, including their tribal affiliation. Numerous human rights
defenders and activists fled the country as a result of threats received either on social
media or in text messages.
56. UNSMIL documented restrictions imposed by the Foreign Media Department at
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which seriously affected the work of journalists in
Tripoli. Threats, including death threats, were made against numerous civil society
activists because of their human rights activities. At least three activists have sought
sanctuary abroad.
Women and girls
57. On 17 July, Siham Sergewa, an elected member of the House of Representatives,
was abducted from her home in Benghazi by an armed group amid continued concerns
about attempts to silence women and exclude them from political institutions.
58. Migrant women and girls continued to be particularly vulnerable to rape and
other forms of sexual violence. UNSMIL continued to collect accounts from migrant
women and girls who had been victims of sexual abuse by smugglers, traffickers,
members of armed groups and officials during their journeys through Libya and in
migrant detention centres. Libyan and foreign women in prisons continued to be at
risk of being sexually abused by prison guards.
Non-governmental organizations
59. On 7 March, the Presidency Council issued new regulations concerning civil
society organizations, pursuant to Decree No. 286. The regulations contained
improvements over previous regulations on such organizations in Libya, including
the introduction of a simplified registration system for domestic civil society
organizations and faster processing and approvals by default in the absence of a
government decision. For foreign organizations, however, the regulations incorporated
burdensome registration and notification requirements, including the provision that
all documents must be inspected by the Civil Society Commission, which could
cancel the registration and work permission of an organization on seven broad
grounds. Those provisions appeared to be inconsistent with the country’s
international human rights law obligations regarding freedom of association.
Reconciliation and transitional justice
60. Activities initiated in 2017 under the UNSMIL national reconciliation project
continued. A draft reconciliation strategy elaborated in the fourth quarter of 2018 was
reviewed with a view to presenting best practices and recommendations to enhance
the effectiveness and legitimacy of future reconciliation efforts in Libya. Projects to
provide support for local dialogues between communities with grievances in southern
Libya to underpin United Nations system-wide stabilization efforts were assessed.
Training, peer-learning and capacity-building activities were also initiated to support
the establishment and training of a national network of local mediators to actively
engage in future dialogue and reconciliation efforts throughout Libya. On 24 and
25 June, 45 mediators from southern Libya, including three women, came together in

10/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

Tunis to share best mediation practices and identify candidates for future training on
conflict resolution and mediation. The meeting also provided an opportunity to update
conflict analysis and the mapping of local and regional dynamics.
Corruption
61. On 7 February, the Investigations Office of the Office of the Prosecutor General
issued arrest warrants for the owners of 103 fuel stations across Libya who were
accused of involvement in smuggling and the illegal disposal of fuel. In addition, the
Investigations Office ordered the confiscation of 115 fuel stations to prevent them
from supplying fuel and derivative products. The National Oil Corporation welcomed
those actions, stating that the Libyan State had been deprived of more than
$750 million annually as a result of corruption of the activities and that more than
1,200 fuel stations had failed to comply with technical conditions and general
planning controls.
Human rights due diligence policy
62. The United Nations system in Libya continued its efforts to implement the
human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United Nations
security forces (see A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex). UNSMIL and the United Nations
country team continued to provide advice and support to Libyan security forces, with
a view to mitigating the identified risks of grave violations of international
humanitarian law, human rights law or refugee law by non-United Nations security
forces that have been recipients of United Nations support.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements and the
unification of security forces
63. On 17 January, UNSMIL facilitated a capacity-building conference with the
participation of the Ministry of the Interior, a delegation of the heads of all Tripoli
police directorates and representatives of the international community in Libya. At
the meeting, participants highlighted the need for a road map to unify and empower
State security institutions, with the support of the international community, including
through the development of a strategy for reorganizing, restructuring and equipping
the Ministry of the Interior to improve its efficiency and effectiveness.
64. During the reporting period, UNSMIL continued to provide support for security
sector reform throughout Libya, both directly and through collaboration with Member
States and international organizations, including the provision of advice on:
governance and technical support to the police; border management; aviation and
airport security; women’s empowerment in the security sector; the rule of law; and
justice.
Arms and ammunition management
65. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to assist Libyan authorities
in addressing the uncontrolled proliferation of arms and ammunition and contamination
from explosive hazards. Construction to secure a missile fuel storage facility near
Gharyan, in preparation for the future disposal of highly toxic liquid fuel propellant,
neared completion during the reporting period, although additional resources are
needed for the second phase of the project. In Misratah, the Mine Action Service
completed the second phase of a project to clear and destroy hundreds of tons of
explosive remnants of war. To mitigate the threat from improvised explosive devices,
the Mine Action Service provided training to 16 Libyan forensic police officers on

19-13886

11/17

S/2019/682

device scene incident management. With support from the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the training
included a focus on gender mainstreaming to increase national capacity and help to
identify the gender impact of the use of improvised explosive devices. In June, the
Mine Action Service commenced a project to begin the mapping and emergency
clearance of explosive hazards in Benghazi.
66. Explosive hazard contamination in the greater Tripoli area has increased
considerably since the onset of conflict in April. Authorities received hundreds of
reports about unexploded ordnance from communities in direct proximity to areas of
heavy fighting. In the second quarter of 2019, most humanitarian mine action
operations were suspended in areas affected by the hostilities. The removal of the
items was severely limited by the unstable security situation and capacity constraints.
67. During the reporting period, the Mine Action Service completed a six -month
project to clear explosive hazards in Tawurgha and provided explosive hazard risk
education for internally displaced persons in preparation for their anticipated return
to the city. In March, the Mine Action Service hosted a workshop on victim assistance
in Tripoli in collaboration with the Libyan Mine Action Centre and with the
participation of national and international stakeholders.

D.

Women’s empowerment
68. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) continued to support the
protection and empowerment of women and girls through the provision of psychosocial
support and life skills training in four women’s community centres in Benghazi,
Tripoli, Misratah and Sabhah, reaching a total of 943 women and girls. UNFPA held
several discussions with the Ministry of Social Affairs concerning the roll-out in
Libya of the essential services package for women and girls subject to gender -based
violence as well as the review of laws affecting gender equality and protection against
gender-based violence.
69. UN-Women supported the participation of the Women’s Support and
Empowerment Unit of the Presidency Council in the sixty-third session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, held in March 2019. In June, UN -Women and
partners convened Libyan women for a workshop on gender equality and v iolent
extremism, at which participants elaborated advocacy priorities for the increased
involvement of women in decision-making about preventing and countering violent
extremism in Libya. From 8 to 10 July 2019, UN -Women gathered 36 Libyan women
from civil society and academia for a conference on mobilizing women for
peacebuilding in Libya. Participants identified common priorities as part of a strategy
to enhance the role of women in peacebuilding and decision-making in the country.
An initiative to establish a joint network for Libyan women was presented to the
international community.

E.

Young people, peace and security
70. On 2 May, UNFPA facilitated a virtual meeting between six young Libyan
activists leading the “Fasting for peace” movement and representatives of Member
States and United Nations agencies. The movement, supported by the Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Youth, was sustained by approximately 350 young Libyans
fasting every Thursday to promote peace and requesting at least one 24 -hour
humanitarian truce every week.

12/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

F.

Coordination of international assistance
71. On 24 March, the Joint Technical Coordination Committee was convened for
the first time in 2019 with participants from UNSMIL and national and international
partners. They reviewed the work of the technical working group covering migration,
access to services, governance, economic recovery, human rights and the rule of law
for 2018 and examined planning for 2019, while also emphasizing the need for
national leadership and ownership.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
72. Since the outbreak of fighting on 4 April, some 104,875 individuals have fled
their homes, half of whom were believed to be children. While the rate of displacement
has decreased since the beginning of the crisis, armed conflict continued to drive
families from their homes. Local authorities established 47 collective shelters, housing
some 4,000 people. More than 100,000 civilians remained in immediate frontline areas,
with over 400,000 more in areas directly affected by clashes.
73. The armed conflict in and around Tripoli has compounded the vul nerabilities
and humanitarian needs resulting from eight years of instability and insecurity. In
2019, before the April conflict, 823,000 persons were estimated to be in need, with
552,000 targeted for humanitarian assistance. Moreover, up to 500,000 child ren could
be affected by the increased conflict in western Libya. In response to the Tripoli crisis
and in support of local efforts, humanitarian actors have provided approximately
75,000 conflict-affected people, including refugees and migrants, with need ed
assistance, where access was allowed; some 28,000 people have received medical
help through humanitarian partners; more than 18,000 have received water, sanitation
and hygiene services; 21,000 people have received food parcels; and 7,000 people
have benefited from protection services.
74. In April 2019, humanitarian actors launched the Tripoli Flash Appeal,
requesting $10.2 million to assist around 100,000 highly vulnerable people affected
by the conflict. In addition, the Libya Humanitarian Response Pla n for 2019 was
being revised to incorporate continued responses to meet the needs resulting from the
armed conflict. However, funding remained low even as needs continued to increase,
with only 10 per cent of the funds called for under the Tripoli Flash Ap peal and less
than 29 per cent of the $202 million requested under the Libya Humanitarian
Response Plan received.
75. The International Organization for Migration (IOM), UNFPA, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food Programme (WFP) established a rapid
response mechanism to assist 25,405 conflict-affected people in western Libya.
UNICEF provided support in various forms, including health supplies to 155,000
people, food supplies to 17,790 people and water, sanitation and hygiene suppl ies to
15,800 people. UNFPA distributed dignity kits and baby kits to 3,572 displaced women
and girls, including for the care of newborn children, in and around Tripoli. Through
local partners, it also deployed psychosocial workers to provide first aid psy chosocial
support and counselling to 3,241 internally displaced persons in the same area.
76. In early June, flooding displaced more than 5,000 people and affected more than
20,000 people in Ghat. Humanitarian partners, including UNICEF and WFP, provided
food and core relief items in conjunction with local actors, and efforts were made to
ensure the availability of safe drinking water. WFP regularly provided food assistance
to vulnerable populations in Ghat.

19-13886

13/17

S/2019/682

77. Conditions in detention centres remained characterized by severe overcrowding
and insufficient access to health care, food, clean water and sanitation facilities. An
estimated 4,900 refugees and migrants were held in detention centres, of which 3,500
individuals were exposed to, or in close proximity to, the fighting. On 24 and 25 April,
UNSMIL and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs facilitated a
humanitarian corridor allowing UNHCR and IOM to evacuate all 655 refugees and
migrants from a detention centre at the centre of armed clashes, following an incident
in which an armed group stormed the facility, injuring at least 12 people.
78. There are currently 53,410 refugees and asylum seekers registered with
UNHCR, including 5,550 individuals registered to date in 2019. The vast maj ority of
refugees and asylum-seekers faced the risk of detention and arbitrary arrest. So far in
2019, 4,023 refugees and migrants have disembarked in Libya. UNHCR and partners
have provided more than 13,400 medical consultations and distributed more than
8,850 non-food items to refugees who disembarked in Libya or were being held in
detention centres or living in urban areas.
79. During the reporting period, UNHCR supported the evacuation or resettlement
of 1,297 refugees out of Libya and 1,465 refugees transited through the gathering and
departure facility in Tripoli. In addition to implementing 12 quick -impact projects,
UNHCR supplied more than 8,855 internally displaced persons and returnees with
shelter kits and another 11,500 internally displaced persons with non-food items.
80. As of July, it was estimated that there were at least 641,398 migrants in Libya,
of whom 13 per cent were women and 9 per cent were children. IOM continued to
provide individuals with assistance at disembarkation points, inclu ding medical and
protection screening and humanitarian assistance. During the reporting period, IOM
provided assistance to 4,936 persons in voluntarily returning to 41 different countries
of origin.
81. Overall, IOM provided direct assistance distributions for 26 detention centres
and 12 migrant urban areas or disembarkation points, reaching a total of 14,341
migrants. So far in 2019, IOM has reached 20,900 internally displaced persons across
33 internally displaced person and returnee communities, includi ng in Benghazi,
Kufrah, Qatrun and Sabhah.
82. As part of the efforts to prevent and respond to gender-based violence, UNFPA
continued to support vulnerable women and girls through psychosocial support and
life skills training sessions in four women’s community centres in Benghazi, Tripoli,
and Sabhah. UNFPA and UNICEF also conducted inter-agency training-of-trainers
sessions in case management on gender-based violence.
83. In partnership with the Tripoli Health Services Department and the Tripoli Crisis
Management Team, UNFPA rehabilitated and equipped the Waryamah maternity ward
in eastern Tripoli. It also supplied medical equipment, emergency reproductive health
kits and human resources for reproductive health services in Tajura’ and Suq al Jum’ah.
84. With local partners, UNICEF provided specialized support to 2,034 children
(1,082 girls and 952 boys) who were survivors of violence, including gender -based
violence, and trained 369 child protection social actors and staff in Benghazi, Sabhah
and Tripoli. Also with a local partner, UNICEF continued to support 120 adolescents
who had been released from armed groups in 2017.
85. An emergency response to the conflict in Tripoli has been implemented by
UNICEF, in partnership with local government counterparts, in addition to national
and international non-governmental organizations. UNICEF has provided life-saving
hygiene kits, psychosocial support to conflict-affected children, life-saving maternal
and child health supplies to health facilities, and catch-up classes to school-aged
children whose schooling was interrupted by the crisis.
14/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

86. Health sector actors and the World Health Organization (WHO) took milestone
steps, including the development of a three-year strategy, capacity-building for health
professionals, the creation of a minimum health service package and the formulation
of emergency response and contingency plans. Two subnational health sectors
operational in Benghazi and Sabhah were established to cover the eastern and
southern regions, respectively. UNFPA and UNICEF, in coordination with the
Ministry of Health, WHO and IOM, provided support to health-care facilities for the
delivery of maternal, reproductive and obstetric care for women and infants in
municipalities across Libya.
87. WFP provided food assistance to 118,000 people in need and, as part of a school
project that started in June, food snacks to 2,200 school children in southern Libya.
WFP also provided training for feeding focal points in 59 schools and support to the
Ministry of Education to develop a national school feeding strategy.
88. On 3 January, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN -Habitat)
signed an agreement with the Libyan Urban Planning Agency in Tunis to mobilize
technical support and expertise at the global and regional levels for institutional
support, capacity-building and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. As part of
the “Stronger for Libya” project of the Stabilization Facility for Libya, UNDP
supported the renovation of schools in Tajura’ and Sirte and transferred one sewage
suction truck and seven submersible water pumps to Bani Walid.

V. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
Operational environment and return to Libya
89. In January, UNSMIL relocated its headquarters from Tunis back to Tripoli, and
its international staff members with positions at headquarters wer e reassigned to the
Libyan capital. A small office with 23 international staff was retained in Tunis. The
United Nations hub in Benghazi became fully operational.
90. Owing to the deterioration of the security environment in the western region of
the country following the offensive on Tripoli on 4 April, the United Nations
designated official decided, in consultation with the Senior Management Team, to
temporarily lower the international civilian staff footprint in Tripoli to a level of 70.
Considering the necessity for continuous political efforts, as well as the growing
humanitarian needs, and on the basis of ongoing security assessments and analysis of
the fighting between the two sides as well as the threat level against the United
Nations, the number of United Nations international personnel was constantly
adjusted in Tripoli, while a temporary rotational presence was established in
Benghazi. All international staff in Tripoli were accommodated at the main United
Nations compound, and at times a reduced number of staff were deployed in other
locations in the city in support of national staff at the UNSMIL Oea village compound
in Janzur. Ground movements were based on case-by-case assessments. UNSMIL, in
close coordination with relevant actors in the Unite d Nations security management
system, has continued to evaluate and revise security arrangements, based on
developments on the ground.
91. From 17 to 30 March, UNSMIL carried out the rotation of the 230 -strong United
Nations Guard Unit from Nepal. A chartered aircraft transported the troops in two
groups between Kathmandu and Tunis. Incoming and outgoing personnel were
transported on United Nations aircraft between Tunis and Tripoli, with sufficient
guard strength to ensure that compound security was maint ained at all times.

19-13886

15/17

S/2019/682

VI. Observations and recommendations
92. The descent of Libya into political uncertainty and armed hostilities during the
reporting period is deeply alarming. I am particularly concerned about the impact on
civilians of the shelling of residential areas and about the reports of targeted attacks
and the destruction of vital infrastructure. I am also concerned by repeated incidents
affecting humanitarian personnel and facilities, in particular health -care workers and
facilities that are at risk of being hit by air strikes and shelling.
93. Those who commit crimes under international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. I remind all parties that indiscriminate attacks are strictly prohibited
under international humanitarian law. I urge all parties to stop using explosive
weapons, including by aerial bombardment or shelling, in populated areas because of
their likely indiscriminate effects. I remind all parties of their obligations to spare
civilians as well as medical personnel and assets.
94. I reiterate that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya, and
I urge the warring parties to cease all hostilities and return to a process of political
dialogue. I welcome the initiative of Prime Minister Serraj to resume the political
process, and I encourage all efforts that will lead to a resumption of dialogue, whic h
can reunify all State institutions and pave the way for durable security and stability
as part of a democratic process.
95. I welcome the commitment of both parties to a humanitarian truce on the
occasion of Eid al-Adha and the following reduction of violence in the Tripoli area.
The United Nations, through my Special Representative, continues to stand ready to
use its good offices to transform what was accomplished during the period of the
truce, which should be accompanied by confidence-building measures between the
parties, into a ceasefire. In this regard, I encourage all parties to respond positively in
good faith to the three-step proposal of my Special Representative, including the
international and national meetings. I reiterate further my serious concern that, unless
action is taken in the near term, it is highly likely that the current conflict will escalate
into full civil war.
96. I condemned in the strongest terms the car bomb attack in Benghazi on
10 August in my statement of the same date and extended my deepest condolences to
the bereaved families. I also called on the Libyan authorities to spare no effort in
identifying and swiftly bringing to justice the perpetrators of the attack, which was
echoed in the press statement issued by the Security Council on 11 August 2019.
97. I welcome the continued support of Member States for the efforts of UNSMIL
to host track-two dialogue meetings through the political dialogue project and to
promote grassroots reconciliation initiatives through the proje ct on national
reconciliation. I strongly encourage the continuation of such efforts and I recognize
the commitment and courage of Libyans in coming forward to participate in such
meetings under the difficult and uncertain conditions in the country. Those efforts
underpin the continued determination of the United Nations to facilitate an end to the
violence and return to the political process to see unified institutions and the future
of the country decided through elections held under an agreed constitutio nal framework.
98. A political solution to the Libyan conflict requires the full and united support of
the international community. I am concerned by the presence of foreign fighters and
mercenaries being employed by parties to the conflict in Libya as we ll as by the influx
of weapons to the country. I remind Member States of their obligations not to sell or
supply arms to Libya, and I call upon them to implement all measures related to the
arms embargo, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2473 (2019). The full

16/17

19-13886

S/2019/682

implementation of the arms embargo is paramount for the protection of civilians and
the restoration of security and stability in Libya and the region.
99. It is imperative that the rule of law be restored throughout Libya, with a State
monopoly on the use of force through a holistic security strategy that entails the
building of professional, accountable and unified security institutions. The proliferation
of arms, fuelling the conflict, and the continued interference by armed groups in the
country’s sovereign institutions is of particular concern.
100. The humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict in Libya and the
increasing inability of the State to meet the basic needs of the population are
increasing the hardship borne by the Libyan people. Another serious concern is the
situation of migrants in Libya, especially those being held in detention centres, who
are facing grave conditions of mistreatment and little to no access to basic amenities.
101. Refugees and migrants in Libya should be released and provided with safe
shelter until their asylum claims can be processed or they can be provided with safe
repatriation assistance for reunification with their families. Libya is in no way a safe
port of disembarkation for refugees and migrants and I urge States to revisit policies
that support the return of refugees and migrants to Libyan shores. It is imperative to
investigate the alleged systematic violation of international hu man rights law and
international humanitarian law with respect to the treatment of migrants and refugees,
including children, in detention, and to hold accountable the perpetrators of those
violations in order to avoid impunity.
102. To date, less than 20 per cent of the appeal for $202 million under the 2019
Libya Humanitarian Response Plan has been funded. If no additional funding is
received, humanitarian partners will not be able to respond to the immediate
humanitarian needs of the people who have recently been affected by the clashes in
Tripoli and reach people in need throughout Libya.
103. I welcome the successful conclusion of the 21 democratic municipal council
elections held in March and April 2019 to renew the expired municipal council
mandates. I note major concerns regarding: the decision by the parallel, defunct
“interim government” to establish a parallel electoral authority to conduct municipal
elections in eastern Libya; continuous threats to hinder municipal elections processes;
and the active appointment of parallel mayors. Libya should have only one national
institution for the conduct of council elections. I call upon the Government to ensure
that the High National Elections Commission and the Central Committee for
Municipal Council Elections receive adequate and timely budgetary resources to
enable them to cover their running costs and facilitate credible electoral processes.
104. UNSMIL has been operating in Libya under difficult security circumstances
following the conflict in and around Tripoli. The Mission has re-established its
presence in the east through measures that include the reopening of a political office
in Benghazi. I reiterate my commitment, security conditions permitting, to continue
to consolidate the permanent presence of the United Nations in Libya while reviewing
security risk assessments and arrangements, in order to intensify engagement with
national interlocutors. In that regard, I recommend a 12 -month extension of the
UNSMIL mandate.
105. I reiterate my sincere appreciation to the Government of Nepal for providing the
personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit. I also wish to express my gratitude to
my Special Representative for Libya, Ghassan Salamé, and to the staff of the United
Nations system in Libya for their dedication and hard work in support of peace and
security in Libya.

19-13886

17/17
