VIII.

Resolutiona adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

plaining the reasons for the delay and setting a firm date for
the submission of the definitive comments;
(f) The executive heads of the organizations concerned
shall inform the Unit of all decisions taken by the competent
organs of their organizations on reports of the Unit.
5. Notes and confidential letters shall be submitted to
executive heads for use by them as they may decide.
Article 12
Executive heads of organizations shall ensure that recommendations of the Unit approved by their respective competent
organs are implemented as expeditiously as possible. Such implementation may be subject to verification by the competent
organs of the organizations, which may also request the Unit
to issue follow-up reports. The Unit may also prepare such
reports on its own initiative.
CHAPTER V
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

Article 13

For the purpose of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,75 the Inspectors shall have
the status of officials of the United Nations. They shall not be
considered to be staff members.
Article 14
I. The Inspectors shall receive the salary and allowances
payable to United Nations staff members at the Director (D-2)
level, step IV.
2. Compensatory and insurance arrangements for the Inspectors shall be equivalent to those of a United Nations staff
member at the D-2 level, including provision for:
(a) Compensation under the terms of appendix D to the
United Nations Staff Rules for service-attributable death, injury or illness;
( b) Compensation for death or disability while in office,
or in receipt of disability benefits, comparable to the benefits
payable in respect of participants in the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund under provisions for disability benefit,
widow's benefit, widower's benefit, child's benefit and secondary
dependant's benefit of the Regulations of the Fund;
(c) Participation in health insurance arrangements of the
United Nations on the same basis as staff at the D-2 level.

Article 18
The Unit shall elect each year from among the Inspectors
a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Chairman shall play a
co-ordinating role in respect of the Unit's programme of work
for the year. The Chairman shall be the formal channel of
communication with the competent bodies and the executive
heads of the organizations. He shall represent the Unit, as
necessary, at meetings of the organizations and perform on
the Unit's behalf such other functions as it may decide.
Article 19
I. The Unit shall be assisted by an Executive Secretary and
by such staff as may be authorized in accordance with article 20 of the present statute.

2. The staff, selected in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, shall be appointed by the Secretary-General after consultation with the
Unit and, as regards the appointment of the Executive Secretary, after consultation with the Unit and the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination. The staff of the secretariat of the
Unit shall be staff members of the United Nations and the
Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United Nations shall
apply to them.
Article 20

The budget of the Unit shall be included in the regular
budget of the United Nations. The budget estimates shall be
established by the Secretary-General after consultation with
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination on the basis
of proposals made by the Unit. The budget estimates shall be
submitted to the General Assembly together with the report
thereon by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
and with the comments and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The
Unit shall be invited to be represented at meetings when its
budget estimates are being discussed.
I.

2. The expenditures of the Unit shall be shared by the
participating organizations as agreed by them.
CHAPTER VII
OTHER ARRANGEMENTS

Article 21

The present statute may be amended by the General Assembly. Amendments shall be subject to the same acceptance
procedure as the present statute.

3. The Inspectors shall be entitled to such post-retirement
benefits as may be determined by the General Assembly.
4. The Inspectors and their dependants shall be provided
with the same standards of accommodation for all travel on
official business (including appointment, home leave and repatriation) as staff members of the United Nations at the D-2
level.
5. Each Inspector shall be entitled to annual, sick and
home leave on the same basis as staff members of the United
Nations holding fixed-term appointments of the same duration
as the Inspector.
Article 15
The Inspectors shall not accept other employment during
their term of office; nor shall an Inspector be appointed or
serve as an official or consultant of an organization while in
office as an Inspector or within three years of ceasing to be
a member of the Unit.
CHAPTER VI
ADMINISTRATIVE, BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 16

The Unit shall be located at Geneva.
Article 17
The Secretary-General shall provide such office and related
facilities and administrative support as the Unit may require.
75 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. I, No. 4, p. 15.

165

Article 22

An organization may not withdraw its acceptance of the
statute unless it has given to the Secretary-General two years'
notice of its intention to do so. The Secretary-General shall
bring any such notice to the attention of the General Assembly
and, through the executive heads concerned, to that of the
competent organs of the other organizations.

31/193.

Joint Inspection Unit 76
A

PENSION COVERAGE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
JOINT INSPECTION UNIT

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the question of pension coverage for members of
the Joint Inspection Unit, 77 the observations of the
Unit thereon, 78 the relevant paragraphs of the report
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board79 and
76 See

also sect. X.B.6 below, decision 31/424.

77 A/C.5/ 1697, A/C.5/31/30.

78 A/31/89/ Add.I, annex.
79 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 9 (A/31/9), paras. 89-91.

166

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

--------------------

the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 80
Approves the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its report.
I 07th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
B
SALARIES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR
MEMBERS OF THE SECRETARIAT

The General Assembly,

I
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on some aspects of the strike at the United Nations
Office at Geneva from 25 February to 3 March 1976,81
the joint comments of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination82 and the comments of the SecretaryGeneral on recommendations 3 and 4 in the report of
the Joint Inspection Unit, 83
Convinced of the need to re-examine the methodology for salary surveys and the system of job classification of the General Service category at Geneva,
Noting the requests of the World Health Organization
and the International Labour Office to the International
Civil Service Commission to assume as soon as possible
the functions described in paragraph 1 of article 12
of its statute, 84 particularly with respect to the salary
scales of the staff in the General Service category at
Geneva,
Further noting with satisfaction the decision by the
International Civil Service Commission to advance
the assumption of its functions under article 12, paragraph 1, of its statute in response to these requests, 85
Recognizing the importance of maintaining harmony
with the agencies and organizations located at Geneva
in the management of personnel services,
Observing that the degree of responsibility and authority delegated by the Secretary-General to the United
Nations Office at Geneva should be sufficient to ensure
the satisfactory management of personnel services and
conduct of staff relations in that Office in accordance
with the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United
Nations,
1. Requests the International Civil Service Commission, as a matter of urgency, to establish, under the
authority of article 11 (a) of its statute, the methods
by which the principles for determining conditions of
service in the General Service category at Geneva should
be applied and, on the basis of such methodology and
under the authority of article 12, paragraph 1, of its
statute, to have a survey made of local employment
conditions at Geneva, to make recommendations as to
80 A/31/417.
81 See A/31/ 137.
82A/31/137/Add.l, annex.
83 A/31/137 / Add.2.
84 Resolution 3357 (XXIX), annex.
811 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/31/3O), para. 337.

------------------

the salary scales deemed appropriate in the circumstances and to inform the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session of the actions taken in this regard;
2. Further requests the International Civil Service
Commission, in its examination of conditions of service
of the General Service category at Geneva, to examine
the basis on which recent substantial salary adjustments
of staff in that category were determined and to take
them fully into account in its consideration of the salaries of that category of staff and the methodology for
future salary adjustments, in so far as they affect General Service staff at Geneva;
3. Urges the International Civil Service Commission, in carrying out these tasks, to take into account
all aspects, especially paragraph 29 of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on some aspects of the strike at
the United Nations Office at Geneva from 25 February
to 3 March 1976, the joint comments on the report
received from the Administrative Committee on Coordination and the comments of the Secretary-General
on recommendations 3 and 4 of the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and invites its comments;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
International Civil Service Commission in the first half
of 1977 with job descriptions for the General Service
category at Geneva, grouped according to common job
functions, in order to enable the Commission to carry
out its survey task;
5. Decides that all financial implications of a decision to raise salaries at Geneva should be covered by
savings in the implementation of the United Nations
budget for 1976-1977, including reductions in General
Service posts, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session on such reductions as may have been made;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to develop, in the course of 1977, job classification standards for the General Service category at Geneva and,
based upon them, to introduce a job classification system, including a structure of occupational groups and
a classification of posts;
7. Urges the Secretary-General, after completing
the current review of relevant factors and making any
upward interim salary adjustments appropriate for General Service category employees as at 1 January 1977,
to refrain from making any further upward interim
adjustments and from entering into any further commitments as to emoluments of General Service category
employees at Geneva until the report and recommendations of the International Civil Service Commission
requested in paragraph 3 above have been submitted;
8. Reaffirms its expectation that the Secretary-General will fully exercise his authority to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of administrative instructions concerning the delegation of responsibility
and commensurate authority to the United Nations
Office at Geneva;

II
Decides that no salary shall be paid to staff members
in respect of periods of unauthorized absence from
work unless such absence was caused by reasons beyond
their control or duly certified medical reasons.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
