United Nations

A/RES/57/163

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 97

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/544)]

57/163. Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen
from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving
social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Reaffirming that the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the
Programme of Action 1 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session 2 constitute the basic
framework for the promotion of social development for all at the national and
international levels,
Also recalling and reaffirming the commitments made at major United Nations
conferences, special sessions, summit conferences and their follow-up processes,
including, in this context, the recognition of the contributions of the outcomes of
recent United Nations conferences and summits, such as the International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to
22 March 2002, the special session of the General Assembly on children, held in
New York from 8 to 10 May 2002, and the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September
2002, and the principles expressed in relevant United Nations declarations,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 3 and the development
goals contained therein,
Welcoming the outcome of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, held in
Madrid from 8 to 12 April 2002, and stressing the importance of the implementation
_______________
1
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
3
See resolution 55/2.

02 54897

A/RES/57/163

of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 4 which focuses on three
priority directions: older persons and development, advancing health and well-being
into old age, and ensuring enabling and supportive environments,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the implementation of the outcome of the
World Summit for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for an integrated and coordinated follow-up to major
United Nations conferences, special sessions and summits in the economic, social
and related fields,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 5

2.
Reaffirms the commitments made by heads of State and Government at
the World Summit for Social Development, contained in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action,1 which
established a new consensus to place people at the centre of the concerns for
sustainable development and pledged to eradicate poverty, promote full and
productive employment and foster social integration so as to achieve stable, safe and
just societies for all;
3.
Also reaffirms the decisions on further action and initiatives to accelerate
social development for all, adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
special session and contained in the further initiatives for social development;2
4.
Recognizes that many of the goals and commitments contained in the
outcomes of the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly have been successfully incorporated in the
outcomes of subsequent international conferences and summits, including those of
the Millennium Assembly, 3 the International Conference on Financing for
Development, 6 the Second World Assembly on Ageing 4 and the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, 7 and that the integration of social development objectives
in these many spheres demonstrates a continuing firm commitment to achieving the
goals of the World Summit for Social Development;
5.
Calls for the speedy implementation of the goals and commitments
contained in the outcomes of the World Summit for Social Development and the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly;
6.
Recognizes that, while action taken to implement the outcomes of the
major United Nations conferences, special sessions and summits in the economic,
social and related fields held during the past ten years will further promote social
development, strengthened and effective international and regional cooperation and
assistance for development and progress towards increased participation, greater
social justice and improved equity in societies will also be required;

_______________
4

Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5
A/57/115.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolutions 1 and 2.

2

A/RES/57/163

7.
Reaffirms the need for effective partnership and cooperation between
Governments and the relevant actors of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations and the private sector, in the implementation of and follow-up to the
Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of Action and the further initiatives for
social development, and the need to ensure their involvement in the planning,
elaboration, implementation and evaluation of social policies at the national level;
8.
Invites the Secretary-General, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission for Social Development, the regional commissions, the relevant
specialized agencies, funds and the programmes of the United Nations system and
other relevant intergovernmental forums, within their respective mandates, to
continue to integrate into their work programmes and give priority attention to the
commitments and undertakings contained in the Copenhagen Declaration and the
Programme of Action and in the further initiatives for social development, to
continue to be actively involved in their follow-up and to monitor the achievement
of those commitments and undertakings;
9.
Welcomes the contribution of the Commission for Social Development in
the follow-up to and the review of the further implementation of the commitments
made in Copenhagen and the further initiatives agreed upon in Geneva, reaffirms
that the Commission will continue to have the primary responsibility in this regard,
and encourages Governments, the relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system and civil society to continue to support
its work;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly”,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on this question to the General
Assembly at that session, taking into account, among other things, the need for an
integrated and coordinated follow-up to all major United Nations conferences,
special sessions and summits.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

3
