S/2018/903

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 October 2018
Original: English

The situation with respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2383 (2017), in which the Council requested me to provide an annual report
on the situation with respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.
2.
Following my previous annual report on the situation ( S/2017/859), the present
report covers major developments from 1 October 2017 to 30 September 2018. It is
based on information provided by the United Nations system, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), as well as Member
States and regional organizations, including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the European Union, the European Union Nava l Force (EU
NAVFOR) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

II. Main developments, trends and considerations regarding
piracy off the coast of Somalia
Major developments and trends during the reporting period
3.
During the reporting period, significant efforts to minimize acts of Somali
piracy continued, thanks to the combined achievements of the international
community through the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia; the
ongoing contributions of individual Member States (see annex I); the continued
enforcement measures of international naval forces; and the work of UNSOM,
together with several United Nations and non-United Nations agencies, to foster
governance and the rule of law in Somalia. Those measures, along wit h the
observance of Best Management Practices by all vessels, have sustained efforts to
reduce the number of piracy incidents overall (see annex II). Piracy activities that
have occurred since my previous report continue to point to root causes that still need
to be fully addressed.

18-16521 (E)

111018

*1816521*

S/2018/903

4.
During the period, five significant piracy incidents occurred in the regional
waters around the Somali coastline, in the Somali Basin and the Gulf of Aden,
involving the Sameer (24 October), the Ever Dynamic (15 November), the Galerna
III (16 November), the Leopard Sun (22 February) and the Kriti Spirit (31 March).
No ships were successfully hijacked for ransom nor were any hostages taken. The
maritime incident involving the Alpha Kirawira (22 July) was assessed as an
Al-Shabaab event rather than piracy, demonstrating the fluid nature of the maritime
security space in Somalia.
5.
In November 2017, attempts to attack the Ever Dynamic and the Galerna III
failed after exchanges of gunfire with the privately contracted armed security
personnel on board. On 18 November, the Italian navy dispatched a SH -90 helicopter
from its vessel, the Virginio Fasan, that located the pirate action group 1 responsible.
That led to the capture of six suspects, who were directly transferred to the Regional
Fusion and Law Enforcement Centre for Safety and Security at Sea (Seychelles Piracy
Prosecutions Centre) to await trial.
6.
The continued piracy attempts demonstrate that the underlying conditions
fuelling piracy have not yet changed and that piracy networks are still very much
active. Four pirate action groups remain ready to resume attacks should the
opportunity present itself. Those groups remain opportunistic, given the r elative ease
with which operatives may source weapons and skiffs. In 2017, several attempts on
vessels occurred during the normally quiet monsoon season. In 2018, the high -risk
area was extended further afield, pointing to the capability and intent of pira tes to
project attacks as far across the Indian Ocean as possible to ensure a successful
hijacking. Recent incidents have been notable in that the attackers were not dissuaded
by the failure of their first attempt, who soon afterwards carried out a second attempt
in the same vicinity, demonstrating their determination and commitment to achieving
their objectives.
7.
In several of the incidents, the pirates came very close to successfully hijacking
the ships. Those attempts serve as a reminder that piracy has been suppressed but not
eradicated. The lack of success in 2018 highlights the fact that the measures put in
place by industry remain fit for purpose, but only if they are fully employed. All ships
are strongly encouraged to adhere to the fifth version of Best Management Practices,
released June 2018, and maintain a high speed while transiting through the high -risk
area. It is likely that the criminal networks behind piracy will continue to seek
opportunistic targets. Flag States need to continue to monitor the threat to ships flying
their flag and set appropriate security levels in accordance with the International Ship
and Port Facility Security Code. In addition, the presence of privately contracted
armed security personnel and international naval forc es in the region are critical to
deterrence.
8.
In its report entitled “The state of maritime piracy 2017: assessing the economic
and human cost”, Oceans Beyond Piracy noted that a total of 54 incidents occurred
in the western Indian Ocean region in 2017. This indicates an increase of 100 per cent
over 2016. The number of seafarers affected by incidents of piracy and armed robbery
at sea also rose, from 545 in 2016 to 1,102 in 2017. With an economic cost of
$1.4 billion attributed to piracy in the East Africa maritime region, piracy also results
in higher insurance premiums for all merchant ships transiting off the coast of
Somalia, with additional premiums, including war risk area premiums
($41.6 million); kidnap and ransom premiums ($9.0 million), and hig her cargo
insurance premiums (no estimated cost available), which may be passed on to
consumers. For 2018, spillover effects from the conflict in Yemen increased the
__________________
1

2/18

A pirate action group is a group organized by its members to conduct acts of piracy and robbery
at sea, usually within a specific geographic maritime area.
18-16521

S/2018/903

number of incidents occurring off the coast of Yemen, affecting the major shipping
lanes located between Yemen and Somalia.
9.
In its report entitled “Stable seas: Somali waters”, issued in 2017, the One Earth
Future Foundation noted the increasing complexity of the region, with multifaceted
and cross-over issues, including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, coastal
violence and human trafficking, intersecting to create a uniquely insecure maritime
environment in Somali waters. Regional conflicts have shifted human migration
flows, further accelerating the smuggling of both trafficked persons and arms across
the Gulf of Aden. It was observed in the report that poverty, a lack of jobs, a lack of
markets and poor management of fisheries were factors that had contributed to the
re-emergence of Somali piracy in 2017. In addition, piracy t ends to exacerbate
underlying tensions, foster political instability and erode national security while
degrading legitimate economic opportunities — in a country already struggling with
corruption and terrorism. Poor governance and weak economic conditions in Somalia
have also contributed to the emergence of violent non-State actors like Al-Shabaab
and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which have further undermined political
stability and economic recovery systems in the Horn of Africa. Maritime insecur ity
enriches those non-State actors, which creates and sustains a cycle that further
weakens governance on shore.
10. In their industry releasable threat assessment 2 dated 1 September 2018, the
Combined Maritime Forces and EU NAVFOR concluded that piracy networks seemed
to be meeting their financial objectives by pursuing lower-risk activities such as the
smuggling of people, narcotics, weapons and charcoal. It also noted that, with respect
to other significant maritime incidents in the Maritime Security Transit Corridor-Red
Sea area, there were four attempted attacks that were attributed to Houthi rebels
launching long-range rockets on Saudi-flagged ships off the coast of Yemen, which
may pose an even greater threat to the region’s stability. Fishing vessels and yachts
travelling too close to the Somali or Yemeni coastlines may be caught up in attempted
attacks by Somali pirates or Houthi rebels on commercial vessels.
11. The array of threats in the region makes clear the need for a comprehensive
maritime security approach, and a key priority for the international community is to
secure Somalia’s maritime sovereignty and suppress piracy and other threats
emanating from Somalia. The long-term solution for countering piracy lies in creating
a secure maritime region off the coast of Somalia — from “Somaliland”, around the
Horn of Africa and down to the border with Kenya. However, efforts to that end are
often hindered by political indecision within the Federal Government of Somalia, lack
of funding for Somali maritime security, lack of access to key parts of the Somali
coast, and the need for a whole-of-security approach that addresses maritime threats
as a concomitant part of land-based security concerns. As long as those external and
internal conditions remain, so will the risk of further acts of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia.

III. Development of counter-piracy efforts in Somalia
A.

National legal and policy frameworks
12. The Federal Government of Somalia has been developing a pol icy framework
for the Somali Coast Guard, with technical assistance from UNSOM, UNODC and
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, under the Somali

__________________
2

18-16521

Written by the Combined Maritime Forces and EU NAVFOR with the intent to inform
participants in a conference of the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction initiative.
3/18

S/2018/903

Maritime Resource and Security Strategy (2013). That process is being overseen by
the Maritime Security Coordination Committee, now under the Office of the Deputy
Prime Minister, and supported by IGAD under its regional programme for maritime
security. The Maritime Security Coordination Committee is a joint Somali decision making body comprising representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia and
federal member states, meetings of which are convened with support from IGAD and
other international partners. It aims to strengthen national maritime legislation by
coordinating maritime capacity-building at the technical level in areas of mutual
interest, including coastal and maritime security, fisheries management, international
trade and customs.
13. The Federal Government of Somalia, federal member states and “Somaliland”
held a meeting of the Maritime Security Coordination Committee with international
partners in Nairobi from 9 to 10 July 2018, after a year-long hiatus. The federal
member states and “Somaliland” briefed participants on current projects and capacity
requirements in their regions. There was agreement that clarification was needed on
the Somali requirements and the ability to fund and support maritime policing and
naval capacity. It was agreed that an appropriate rhythm should be identified for
interaction between the National Maritime Coordination Committee, under the
Federal Government of Somalia, and the Maritime Security Coordination Committee.
Participants urged the National Security Council to agree on a delineation of the roles
and responsibilities of the Somali maritime forces by August 2018, as stipulated in
the Transition Plan, 3 and called for enhanced cooperation in strengthening Somalia ’s
maritime security as a key priority for both the Federal Government of Somalia and
federal member states.
14. With technical and financial assistance from IMO, UNSOM and IGAD, the
Federal Government of Somalia has also been working towards a revision of its
Maritime Code (1959) and the establishment of a maritime administration
department, under the Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport. The revised Maritime
Code was finalized for translation in 2018. The establishment of a maritime
administration department will enable the Federal Government of Somalia to
undertake its flag, port and coastal State maritime responsibilities. 4 Following the
above-mentioned meeting, with the support of IGAD, and under the guidance of the
National Maritime Coordination Committee, the Federal Government of Somalia has
committed to updating information on its current practices, procedures and laws
concerning ports, flags and coasts; 5 signing or ratifying related international
instruments and existing regional coordination mechanisms; and developing a
national action plan for the management of ports and offshore natural resources. There
is increasing interest from the private sector, including the oil and gas industry, in the
development of the country’s port infrastructure and in potential international
investment towards those efforts.
__________________

The Federal Government of Somalia developed a security transition plan in early 2018 through
an inclusive process that laid out the strategic guidelines to facilitate detailed planning on
national security in coming years, in which the country seeks to establish its own path towards
assuming full responsibility for its stability. The Transition Plan is complementary to Somalia’s
National Development Plan.
4
A flag State is one in which a vessel is registered or licensed, under whose national laws the
vessel operates. A port State is one which holds internationally agreed jurisdiction to inspect
foreign ships operating outside national ports to verify their compliance with international
conventions. A coastal State is one that is not landlocked and is responsible for territorial waters
or a territorial sea out to 12 nautical miles, as defined by the United Nations Co nvention on the
Law of the Sea.
5
Somalia is party to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing.
3

4/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

B.

Capacity-building
15. During the reporting period, the Federal Government of Somalia and regional
administrations continued to build their maritime security capacities, with assistance
from international partners and the trust fund to support initiatives of States
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. In coordination with the European Union
Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia and UNODC, UNSOM carried out a maritime
security operational readiness assessment at the end of 2017 to evaluate the maritime
security situation in Somalia, including details regarding the capacities, legislation,
equipment, personnel and state of training in each federal member state and
“Somaliland”. That document serves as the benchmark for making progress on further
capacity-building initiatives.
16. UNSOM, UNODC and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in
Somalia have played a significant role in developing a capacity -building plan to train
and equip the Somali Coast Guard and the related Maritime Police Units under the
Transition Plan, as well as in developing options papers for the Federal Government
of Somalia to integrate existing maritime security forces into the Somali Coast Guard
or the related Maritime Police Units, as agreed in the National Security Architecture
and maritime substrand 2b of the Comprehensive Approach to Security. With a view
to facilitating a political decision around the delineation of roles and responsibilities
of the proposed Somali maritime security forces, UNSOM and the European Union
Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia developed a specific maritime security options
non-paper, which encouraged discussion regarding the development of the Somali
maritime security sector among Somali actors, partner countries and international
organizations. That resulted in an agreement to develop a federal coast guard that
would work with the maritime police units of federal member states.
17. The creation of the federal coast guard is a necessary goal to properly address
piracy and other maritime crimes. The Global Maritime Crime Programme of
UNODC supported the delivery of maritime policing in key Somali ports in Berbera,
Boosaaso and Mogadishu, with further work planned for Hobyo and Kismaayo. The
Global Maritime Crime Programme remains engaged in developing coast guard
capabilities across Somalia, with the Federal Government of Somalia, federal member
states, UNSOM and donor partners. It is critical that those long -standing needs, as
identified in the Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy, be addressed, given
that 50 per cent of the country’s borders are maritime and located in a geostrategic
area of international importance that is also rich in a diverse array of natural
resources.
18. The Global Maritime Crime Programme also continued to deliver its multi -year
training and mentoring programme to Somali maritime law enforcement authorities
during the reporting period. It extended that support from the Mogadishu Maritime
Police Unit, the Boosaaso Port and Maritime Police Unit, and the “Somaliland” Coast
Guard to the Galmudug Coast Guard in Hobyo. The training was funded by Denmark,
the European Union, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the trust fund. Two maritime police training courses
were conducted for 30 officers (including 9 women) from the Galmudug Coast Guard
at the UNODC-constructed headquarters building of the Boosaaso Port and Maritime
Police Unit, and in the waters surrounding Boosaaso. The training focused on
maritime law enforcement, seamanship, communications and engine maintenan ce and
repair, at which time uniforms and maritime safety equipment were issued to the
officers.
19. In Puntland, the Boosaaso Port Police interdicted several vessels this past year,
capturing those involved in operations to smuggle people and weapons, al ong with

18-16521

5/18

S/2018/903

illegal fishing vessels. In “Somaliland”, the coast guard and maritime security
services updated their sea operations to reflect emerging maritime threats other than
piracy. In Hobyo, a coastal town in the Galmudug region, UNODC assisted the federal
member states in establishing coast guard services to patrol the extensive waters from
the border with Puntland down to the Somali Basin. On 28 August 2018, the
“Somaliland” Parliament approved a coast guard bill. The maritime law enforcement
authorities in “Somaliland”, Puntland and other coastal regions across Somalia
continue to develop their maritime security and justice sectors with assistance from
UNODC and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia.
20. The Boosaaso training and mentoring programme continued during the period
2017–2018, through which the Boosaaso Port and Maritime Police Unit acquired the
ability to conduct numerous complex maritime policing and interdiction activities
targeting boats suspected of maritime crime activities. New boats procured and
funded by UNODC have improved the search and rescue capabilities of the Boosaaso
Port and Maritime Police Unit by enabling the coxswains to receive training on
various patrol craft platforms and to develop familiarity wit h the requirements for
maritime engineering on different vessels. The boats extended the operational reach
of the Boosaaso Port and Maritime Police Unit, allowing it to conduct deliberate and
responsive operations with greater speed and at greater distance s from Boosaaso.
Under the Maritime Communications Initiative, jointly implemented by UNODC,
Oceans Beyond Piracy and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in
Somalia, an operations rooms was developed at the headquarters of the Boosaaso Port
and Maritime Police Unit, and operations staff subsequently received training.
21. In Mogadishu, UNODC mariner and engineer trainers have been engaged in
training and mentoring under several projects. Visit, board, search and seizure
training was delivered to 30 officers (including 8 women) in late 2017, while in early
2018 there was a focus on the maintenance and repair of several boats that had become
unserviceable. During that period, surveys were conducted of all boats of the
Mogadishu Maritime Police Unit, and four previously unserviceable boats were made
operational. That was achieved with the on-the-job training of three of the Unit’s
officers, who assisted in all maintenance and repairs, thereby laying the groundwork
for the establishment of an engineering department in the Unit in 2019. A training
needs assessment was conducted prior to the implementation of the European Union
project to train Unit personnel. The project commenced in August 2018 with a
crewmanship course for 20 Unit officers and is expecte d to continue into 2019.
22. In Berbera, visit, board, search and seizure training was conducted by UNODC
for 12 officers of the “Somaliland” Coast Guard to prepare them to conduct more
complex vessel interdiction operations. Building on that investment, the
“Somaliland” Coast Guard has conducted several successful operations targeting
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, as well as the smuggling and trafficking
of contraband, people and wildlife, along with search and rescue operations. In late
2017, a Berbera operations room was set up under the Maritime Communications
Initiative. However, in mid-2018, a cyclone destroyed the room’s roof and most of
the equipment. UNODC is working to assist the “Somaliland” Coast Guard in
sourcing a new facility for the operations room and in replacing all damaged
equipment. UNODC also completed stores and inventory management training to
coincide with its handover of the UNODC-funded engineering storage areas.

C.

Community issues
23. The Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources of the Federal Government of
Somalia continues to identify fishing activities in its exclusive economic zone (EEZ),
with assistance from FAO. During the reporting period, EU NAVFOR shared

6/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

information with the Ministry that had been collected from sightings of fishing
vessels operating illegally in the country’s EEZ. That information-sharing has
enabled the Ministry to pursue the capture and prosecution of suspects and to appeal
to those countries where illegal fishing vessels are re gistered, in order to combat and
eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities off the Somali coast.
The Federal Government of Somalia still has work to do to put in place an adequate
legal framework with enforcement capacities and regio nal agreements to enable it to
take effective action against those who are apprehended.
24. The “Caught Red-Handed” programme, created to combat illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, completed a second round of workshops in July 2018, with
technical support from UNODC, the naval forces of the United States of America and
the secure fisheries arm of the One Earth Future Foundation. Nine capacity -building
workshops were originally planned to help East African countries to combat illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, together with the creation of guidelines for
collecting information on fishing vessels. The programme has leveraged regional
coordination bodies such as the FISH-i Africa task force, the regional information
coordination centres in Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania, and the regional
fusion centres in Madagascar and Seychelles, to improve maritime domain awareness
and information-sharing and to increase compliance with laws on regional fisheries.
Partners include the Governments of the Comoros, Djibouti, Kenya, Madagascar,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles, Somalia and the United Republic of Tanzania.
25. The creation of a maritime-oriented blue economy, a key feature of the Somali
Maritime Resource and Security Strategy, will require increased policing and security
in coastal towns and the continued suppression of piracy. Peace and economic
recovery will be difficult to achieve without improving maritime security. Yet the goal
of maritime security will continue to be elusive as long as the region remains unstable.
The threat of piracy and the influence of pirate kingpins and their militias continue to
undermine coastal development efforts.

IV. International cooperation
A.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
26. The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia held its twenty -first
plenary session at the United Nations Office at Nairobi from 11 to 13 July 2018. It
was attended by representatives of the following countries: Australia, China,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Madagascar,
Mauritius, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United States. The Somali delegation included
representatives from the Federal Government of Somalia, federal member sta tes and
“Somaliland”. Representatives of many other international, regional and private sector organizations also attended. It was hosted by the Indian Ocean Commission
and chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius. The plenary was chaired
by Mauritius as Chair of the Commission, with the Commission co -hosting the
plenary as the secretariat to the Contact Group.
27. The Contact Group remains a vital mechanism and point of contact for the
international coordination of all States, international and regional organizations and
non-State actors involved in addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia, in line with
Security Council resolution 1851 (2008). The plenary of the Contact Group reiterated
its commitment to the objective of “zero seafarers and zero ships” in the hands of

18-16521

7/18

S/2018/903

Somali pirates, through the continued efforts of the international community. It
commended its working groups and others that implemented the objectives of the
Contact Group for helping to reduce the incidence of pirate attacks in the region.
28. The plenary was preceded by a meeting of the Maritime Security Coordination
Committee, in which representatives of the international community, donors,
implementing agencies, the National Maritime Coordination Committee and
“Somaliland” took part, to discuss priorities and progress with respect to the Somali
Maritime Resource and Security Strategy. Members of the Contact Group appreciated
the continued efforts undertaken to enhance Somali capacities. The plenary noted that
the process for coordinating Somali capacity-building had given rise to a fully
functioning National Maritime Coordination Committee, through which the Federal
Government, its ministries and federal member states meet to assess their collective
priorities.
29. The Contact Group took note of the main outcomes of the high-level workshop
on the implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct and its Jeddah Amendment
of 2017, convened by IMO and hosted by Saudi Arabia in Jeddah from 7 to 10 May
2018. The Contact Group confirmed, as stated at the Jeddah workshop, that piracy off
the coast of Somalia was contained but remained a threat that required a long -term
comprehensive solution. The solution should be based on a mechanism yet to be
agreed upon by Member States in the region to help to build regional capacities,
pursuant to the objectives of the Jeddah Amendment.
30. The plenary commended the trust fund for its response to the immediate, shortterm needs for the detention, prosecution and repatriation of pirates. It also
commended the trust fund for helping Somalia to develop the capacity to deter piracy
over the long term, including through the provision of alternative employment and
revenue streams for Somali coastal communities and investment in building up the
country’s legal, governance and maritime infrastructure, with a view to addressing
the specific issues at the root of piracy. The plenary acknowledged the importance of
the trust fund and reiterated its continued support, while expressing its concerns over
the trend of decreasing funding and the possible closure of the trust fund by the end
of 2018 if donor support were not increased.

B.

United Nations trust fund to support the initiatives of States
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
31. The trust fund to support the initiatives of States countering piracy off the coast
of Somalia, established on 1 January 2010 under the auspices of the Contact Group,
continued to provide Somalia and other Indian Ocean regional States with financial
assistance to strengthen their judicial capacity to combat piracy through prosecutions
and detention. The members of the Board of the trust fund for the period from July
2016 to July 2018 were Djibouti, Germany, the Netherlands (with Norway), Japan,
Kenya, Seychelles, Somalia, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Observers included IGAD, the European Union Capacity-Building
Mission in Somalia, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), EU
NAVFOR, the Indian Ocean Commission and M&C Saatchi World Services.
32. On 11 July 2018 in Nairobi, the Board held its 20th meeting, which was chaired
by the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat. During the meeting, the
Board approved UNODC Project No. 90 ($149,055) to freeze and recover assets and
funds gleaned through piracy ransoms, conducted under the Contact Group’s Law
Enforcement Task Force; and UNODC Project No. 91 ($155,049), to be partially
funded at $65,000, which will provide live training of Somali piracy prosecutors, with

8/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

the support of UNODC. The total expenditure for these new p rojects is $214,055. A
further top-up of $50,000 was also given to the Expedited Facility.
33. While the Board approved all four projects presented to it, the disbursement of
funds for the remaining projects will not take place until enough new contrib utions
have been received. The Board also discussed whether to continue the trust fund,
given that the administrator, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office of the United
Nations Development Programme, had advised that there must be a balance of
$1 million in the account by 31 December 2018 to avoid financial closure by default.
For the past two years, the account has not met the requirements for United Nations administered trust funds. The Board decided to keep the trust fund in operation and
intends to seek new donor support.
34. Since 31 December 2012, the trust fund has received a total of $14,689,760 from
20 donors. The current total balance of the trust fund after all expenditures for new
and current projects is $6,250. For 2017, the delivery rate o n project expenditures by
participating organizations was 87.15 per cent, which was notably higher than the
75.25 per cent delivery rate in 2016. Trust fund achievements reported in 2017 include
the registration and roll-out of 200 vessels in the Automatic Identification System for
Somali fishers under FAO Project No. 80, and the detention and transfer of several
piracy suspects, including UNODC repatriation exercises for 29 Somalis who had
been released from prisons in regional prosecuting countries (Kenya , Seychelles and
the United Republic of Tanzania).
35. At a meeting held on 11 July 2018, trust fund Board members noted that piracy
had continued to occur albeit unsuccessfully, and there remained a real need to capture
and prosecute those engaged in acts of maritime piracy in order to facilitate the work
of the trust fund. The Board heard from the Government of Seychelles that a few
skiffs containing Somali pirates and equipment on board to conduct attacks had been
rescued while floating adrift in Sri Lankan and Maldivian waters. The Board
considered those developments to be an indication that the significant progress made
in addressing piracy still remained too easily reversible.

V. Strategic maritime security activities
A.

International capacity-building
36. During the reporting period, the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs provided a gap analysis of the Somali legislative
and policy framework for oceans to the Federal Government of Somalia and delivered
a second briefing for Somali parliamentarians in Mogadishu to raise awareness of the
legal framework under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Those
activities completed the Division’s Somalia capacity-building programme under trust
fund Project No. 61, under which it also delivered a briefing in Mogadishu for Somali
parliamentarians, a training programme for Somali government officials and regional
representatives on the Convention and training in New York for two Somali officials
under a special strategic fellowship for Somalia. The Division is currently working
with the Federal Government of Somalia and UNSOM to deliver an advanced training
programme designed to reinforce the outcomes of Project No. 61, w hich will provide
customized technical assistance to reinforce the capacity of Somalia to address
legislative barriers in developing its maritime sectors and the sustainable
development of its maritime resources by the end of 2020.
37. Working groups of the Contact Group assisted with regional coordination and
capacity-building by bringing together countries of the region. The regional capacitybuilding working group, at its first meeting of 2018, decided to form a closer alliance

18-16521

9/18

S/2018/903

with the IMO Djibouti Code of Conduct team to achieve greater synergies, as several
countries are represented in both mechanisms. Kenya is the national Co -Chair, with
the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa now the regional Co -Chair and
the One Earth Future Foundation serving as the secretariat. Meetings of the regional
capacity-building working group will be held alongside coordination meetings of
signatories to the Djibouti Code of Conduct.

B.

Naval activities off the coast of Somalia
38. NATO remained committed to the active enforcement of peace, security and
stability in the region, despite the termination of its counter-piracy task force,
Operation Ocean Shield, in December 2016. NATO continued its engagement in the
area by lending its support to the international community’s efforts to combat piracy
off the coast of Somalia. It retains its maritime situational awareness and close
partnerships with other international counter-piracy actors, including the NATO
Shipping Centre in the United Kingdom, which regularly interfaces with the global
shipping community. NATO also remained active in counter-piracy forums such as
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
39. The Combined Maritime Forces are a global maritime partnership of 33
countries aligned in common purpose to conduct maritime security operations that
promote security, stability and prosperity across approximately 3.2 million square
miles of international waters in this region. The Combined Maritime Forces are
organized into three task forces, with Combined Task Force 151 (established in 2009)
specifically focused on the disruption of piracy and armed robbery in the maritime
environment off the coast of Somalia. Combined Task Force 151 aims to build
capacity and improve the relevant capabilities of regional partners to secure freedom
of navigation and protect global maritime commerce. Together with EU NAVFOR
and independent deployers, Combined Task Force 151 helps to patrol the Maritime
Security Transit Corridor, acting as a deterrent to attacks.
40. EU NAVFOR has a dedicated multinational counter-piracy force called
Operation Atalanta, which comprises up to two warships, two maritime patrol aircraft
and up to 800 personnel. It spans from the southern Red Sea into the western Indian
Ocean and as far south as Madagascar. Now in its tenth year, EU NAVFOR has
successfully protected humanitarian supply ships delivering more than 1.75 million
tons of World Food Programme assistance to Somali ports and to support vessels of
the African Union Mission in Somalia. This is occurring as the Horn of Africa
continues to experience high levels of food insecurity. In July 2018, the European
Union extended Operation Atalanta until 31 December 2020.
41. The Maritime Security Centre-Horn of Africa is an integral part of Operation
Atalanta. It provides around-the-clock regional maritime domain awareness to naval,
coastguard and law enforcement agencies around the world. It also maintains details
of transiting vessels through voluntary registration, as recommended in the fifth
version of Best Management Practices, in conjunction with the United Kingdom
Maritime Trade Operations; categorizes convoy and protection requirements in the
newly established Maritime Security Transit Corridor; and acts as a conduit for
periodic (EU NAVFOR-Combined Maritime Forces) threat assessments and incidentrelated threat bulletins issued to global shipping industry counterparts.
42. EU NAVFOR and the Combined Maritime Forces presented their latest threat
assessment to shipping industry bodies and military representatives at the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction initiative conference held in Bahrain in April 2018, and
to government representatives at the Contact Group meeting held in Nairobi in July
2018. The main assessment was that there are no tactical indicators or warnings to

10/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

point to a resurgence in piracy off the coast of Somalia. However, former pirate
kingpins still live with impunity inside Somalia, where their various networks remain
relatively intact and opportunistic. There is no federal Somali law against piracy, and
the ease with which coastal communities may source weapons and skiffs makes piracy
an easy entry-level activity, often justified by the illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing narrative among some Somali and diaspora communities.
43. In addition to EU NAVFOR and the Combined Maritime Forces, the naval forces
of individual Member States (independent deployers), such as China, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Russian Federation, continue to participat e in the
Shared Awareness and Deconfliction initiative and maintain maritime security off the
coast of Somalia by protecting and escorting commercial vessels. The next Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction conference will be hosted by the Combined Maritime
Forces in Bahrain in November 2018.

VI. International legal and judicial issues, including human
rights considerations
A.

Legal frameworks and cooperation
44. The Department of Political Affairs signed a cooperation agreement with the
Indian Ocean Commission in June 2018. This followed the Indian Ocean
Commission-European Union Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security in
the Eastern and Southern Africa-Indian Ocean Ministerial Conference on Maritime
Security in the Western Indian Ocean, held in Mauritius from 24 to 30 April 2018 and
attended by over 150 delegates from 25 countries and 16 regional and international
organizations. On 29 April 2018, States signed the “Mauritius Declaration on
Maritime Security”, a regional cooperation agreement to address the unique maritime
security challenges of the western Indian Ocean. Current challenges identified
included the illicit flow of narcotics and weapons, human smuggling and illegal
migration, increased piracy off the coasts of Somalia and Mozambiq ue and the
movement of terrorists across unprotected borders.
45. IMO continues to assist signatory States to the Djibouti Code of Conduct to
implement capacity-building activities, such as national maritime security workshops
on the enhanced implementation of the International Ship and Port Facility Security
Code. IMO also supports regional training efforts, such as maritime interdiction and
coastguard training at sea, in cooperation with the NATO Maritime Interdiction
Operational Training Centre, the Saudi Arabia Border Guard, the European Union,
UNODC and other entities.
46. The Jeddah Amendment to the Djibouti Code of Conduct, 2017, was adopted by
a majority of signatory States that were willing to widen cooperation under the
Djibouti Code of Conduct to other illicit maritime activities, including human
trafficking and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. As at the time of reporting ,
there were 15 signatories to the Jeddah Amendment, namely, the Comoros, Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Jordan, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Saudi
Arabia, Seychelles, Somalia, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Yemen. The Secretary-General of IMO performs the functions of
depositary for the record of the meeting held in Jeddah.
47. At its twenty-ninth extraordinary session, on 23 November 2017, the IMO
Council requested member States, the European Union and concerned international
organizations, including UNODC, FAO, the United Nations Development
Programme, INTERPOL and others, to consider providing both financial and in-kind

18-16521

11/18

S/2018/903

support for technical assistance activities to implement the Jeddah Amendment to the
Djibouti Code of Conduct, 2017.
48. At its ninety-ninth session, held in May 2018, the IMO Maritime Safety
Committee noted that ISO 28007-1:2015, for private maritime security companies,
could be applied to accredited certification of floating armouries within specific
conditions. At a recent legal conference held in Colombo from 18 to 20 June 2018
and organized by UNODC, a legal framework was presented for floating armouries,
to be included in a future edition of the UNODC publication Maritime Crime: A
Manual for Criminal Justice Practitioners. UNODC will also publish a second edition
of the “Guidelines for the use of privately contracted armed security personnel” in
October 2018.
49. In its resolution 36/11, the Human Rights Council established a new open-ended
intergovernmental working group for a period until 28 September 2020. The mandate
of the working group is to elaborate the content of an international regulatory
framework, without prejudging the nature thereof, to protect human rights and ensure
accountability for violations and abuses relating to the activities of p rivate military
and security companies. The international regulatory framework will be informed by
a discussion document on elements for an international regulatory framework on the
regulation, monitoring and oversight of the activities of private military and security
companies, as prepared by the Chair-Rapporteur in 2017, with further input from
Member States and other stakeholders.

B.

Hostage release and support efforts
50. Since the start of 2016, a total of 30 hostages have been rescued through t he
efforts of the Hostage Support Partnership, which relies on donor support and the trust
fund. Four of the eight Iranian hostages from the Siraj captured on 15 March 2015
and held for over three years in Galmudug by two separate pirate action groups were
finally released in June 2018, thanks to the efforts of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Hostage Support Partnership negotiator s. Originally, the Siraj
had 17 crew members, with 4 rescued, 1 escaping and 4 dying, leaving 8 in captivity.
The Hostage Support Partnership continues to monitor and seek the release of the four
remaining hostages. Pirate action groups hold a number of ot her hostages, indicating
how active these groups remain in central Somalia. INTERPOL, through its Hostage
Debriefing Initiative and the related Global Database on Maritime Piracy, continues
to share information with law enforcement agencies internationally to support piracyrelated prosecutions.
51. On 8 June 2018, the Special Tripartite Committee established under the
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006, adopted an amendment to the Convention to
guarantee payment of seafarers’ wages while they are held by pirates. Under the
amendment, seafarers and their families would receive the wages agreed in the
contract of employment during the period of captivity, regardless of whether the date
fixed for the expiry of the employment contract had passed or either party had given
notice to suspend or terminate employment. It also ensures that the seafarer's right to
repatriation is protected in the event of prolonged captivity. The International
Seafarers’ Welfare and Assistance Network also continued to support hostages and
their families during and after captivity.

C.

Cooperation on piracy-related prosecutions
52. The timely sharing of maritime threat and risk assessments and situation
awareness reports continued to be a weakness among all critical stakeholders.

12/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

UNODC, as the secretariat of the Law Enforcement Task Force of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, convened a meeting in May 2018 that brought
together prosecutors and law enforcement officers from eight countries and three
international organizations. The Task Force has prioritized 3 high -value targets from
the list of 11 and will focus efforts on their indictment and arrest.
53. Furthermore, the Law Enforcement Task Force has conducted a study to identify
financial flows and asset storage locations relating to proceeds of piracy crime. In the
study, investments suspected as belonging to pirate leaders and financiers within
Somalia were identified, including several hotels in Gaalkacyo and Boosaaso. With
regard to asset storage locations outside Somalia, possible investments by pirate
leaders and financiers in eight countries in western Asia, Africa and South -East Asia
were also identified. In the second phase of the study, the Task Force will continue to
pursue the location of overseas investments and the assets of pirate leaders and
financiers.
54. In March 2018, UNODC, in partnership with EU NAVFOR, conducted a piracy
prosecution pathway exercise in Seychelles to identify training needs to maintain a
strong piracy prosecution capability in the region. The capacity and expertise
previously developed remains valuable, but with time and personnel transfers,
refresher courses are needed to maintain the requisite level of expertise. UNODC also
supported the development of enhanced maritime domain awareness capability in
Seychelles by providing visual equipment that will enhance understanding of the
ocean surface around Seychelles and detection of illicit maritime activity.
55. The Government of Seychelles signed an agreement with the Transitio nal
Federal Government of Somalia in 2011 to allow the transfer of persons convicted of
acts of piracy to return to Somalia to serve out their sentences. This was followed by
a memorandum of understanding with each state authority in “Somaliland” and
Puntland. UNODC has facilitated these transfers and assisted “Somaliland” and
Puntland to build appropriate prison facilities fit for this purpose with grants from the
trust fund. On 4 September 2018, however, Garoowe Prison conferred early release
to a convicted pirate without the consent of the arresting or convicting authorities, as
required under the 2011 transfer agreement with Seychelles. The Contact Group
issued a statement on 7 September in which it stressed that any unilateral decision
taken by any federal member state would seriously undermine the collective actions
of the international community over the past 10 years that had contributed to the
reduction in acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia. In its statement, the Contact Group
also reminded Somali authorities of the need to respect the sentences passed by the
courts of prosecuting States, noting that any proposal to vary the sentences should be
in conformity with the existing agreement. It further noted that Contact Group
members had expressed serious concerns about the possible consequences of the
release, as it created a dangerous precedent for the early release of other convicted
pirates serving sentences across Somalia.

VII. Observations
56. The ongoing counter-piracy efforts off the coast of Somalia by the international
community remain critical for the region. The increased efforts by the Federal
Government of Somalia in securing its maritime space and seeking agreements with
the federal member states should continue to be encouraged. Ownership of counterpiracy measures by the Somali people is key, since without their full engagement no
lasting solution can be realized.
57. Piracy cannot be tackled in isolation from sustainable development, which
includes ensuring a more stable and secure future for Somalia. The lasting solution to
18-16521

13/18

S/2018/903

countering piracy lies onshore, through the creation of economic opportunities and
alternative revenue generation for would-be pirates, together with improved prospects
for current and future generations of Somalis. The United Nations stands ready to
assist the Federal Government and the people of Somalia in that regard.
58. The longer-term resilience against piracy must be strengthened. The United
Nations appreciates the continued efforts of Somali author ities and partners in this
regard, including their work towards developing maritime -specific legislation, the
resumption of meetings of the National Maritime Coordination Committee and the
institution of specific governance and judicial mechanisms for tack ling piracy,
including the establishment of a Maritime Administration Department. The renewed
cooperation between the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states
in 2018 to put in place agreements to set up the maritime police and coastguard
functions, on resource/revenue-sharing, to reinstate the Maritime Security
Coordination Committee and to implement the priorities of the Somali Maritime
Resource and Security Strategy is welcome.
59. I reiterate my call to the Federal Government of Somalia to accede to several
international maritime and counter-piracy standards and conventions, to urgently sign
and ratify regional maritime agreements and to become a State party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. I call up on all parties at
both the state and federal level in Somalia to respect international extradition
agreements for all convicted pirates transferred back to Somalia to serve out sentences.
60. The swift response to the incidents by the international naval forces is
commendable, as is their capture of six piracy suspects at sea. The reduction in the
number of incidents over the past year demonstrates the continued effectiveness of
the counter-piracy measures and their deterrent effect.
61. I also commend the work of the Law Enforcement Task Force of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, the Prosecutors’ Network of the Indian
Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime and the Virtual Legal Forum in facilitating effective
prosecutions of those involved in transnational and maritime crime across the Indian
Ocean. We must continue to combat piracy by reducing related transnational
organized crime. Each Member State should ensure that the appropriate financial and
legislative mechanisms are in place to track, halt and retrieve the illegitimate gains
from piracy on its shores. Targeting pirate kingpins, financiers and criminal networks
must remain a priority for all Member States.
62. I thank the Government of Mauritius for its leadership in its role as Chair of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia for 2018/19 and the Indian Ocean
Commission for its role as secretariat of the Contact Group for the next two years.
The Contact Group, the international naval forces, the international community and
the federal, state and regional authorities of Somalia should continue working
together to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the region more generally. It
is critical that members of the Contact Group increase their contributions to the trust
fund to support the initiatives of States countering piracy off the coast of Somalia to
keep it operational. The trust fund, together with partners, has delivered several
important initiatives in countering piracy, including the Expedited Facility, which
continues to fund piracy prosecutions.
63. All remaining seafarers and civilians held hostage in Somalia should be granted
immediate and unconditional release. In this regard, I commend the work of the
Hostage Support Partnership, which has helped to free 44 shore -based hostages to
date, with only 4 remaining in captivity, and I renew my call to all partners to help to
reduce the burden on piracy survivors and their families, includin g through
contributions to the Piracy Survivor Family Fund and the Hostage Support
Partnership.
14/18

18-16521

S/2018/903

64. Finally, I thank the international community, the Security Council, academia,
non-governmental organizations, military and naval forces, the shipping indus try and
the private sector for the contributions they have made to countering piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia over the past decade. Without their commitment,
success in reducing the piracy threat would not have been feasible.

18-16521

15/18

S/2018/903

Annex I
Contributions of Member States, observers, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector to countering piracy off the
coast of Somalia
The following statements have been provided by Member States in response to
Security Council resolution 2383 (2017):
1.
Australia maintains a strong commitment to the maritime security of the waters
adjacent to the Arabian Peninsula and the Horn of Africa and the region. Its ongoing
engagement in the naval operations of the Combined Maritime Forces, through its
deployment of the Warramunga from November 2017 to June 2018, reflects its
support for international efforts to promote regional maritime security, stability and
prosperity. Australian Defence Force personnel are embedded in the headquarters of
the Combined Maritime Forces, in Bahrain, in support of ongoing regional activities,
including counter-piracy. Australia actively engages with regional anti-piracy
organizations such as the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, is a party
to the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
Against Ships in Asia, and contributes to regional law enforcement activities and
capacity-building efforts through cooperation with UNODC.
2.
Since 2008, China has dispatched up to 92 warships to engage in escort missions
for 6,518 vessels; assisted more than 65 at-risk vessels; and expelled over 3,000
suspicious vessels from the region. The contributions of C hina to the fight against
piracy continue to stem the activities of Somali pirates and safeguard international
trade and aid shipments. China supports all efforts made by the Federal Government
of Somalia in social reconciliation, countering terrorism and carrying out national
reconstruction — recognizing the need to counter piracy on land as well as at sea.
3.
The Indian Navy has undertaken anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since
23 October 2008. As at 7 November 2017, 7 naval ships had safely escorted 60 vessels
(52 foreign flagged and 8 Indian flagged or World Food Programme flagged) through
the Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor. India is a member of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and participates in the “Mercury” online
communications platform, established to coordinate anti -piracy efforts off the coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. India will also establish a regional information
fusion centre to contribute to counter-piracy information-sharing efforts.
4.
Lithuania contributes one military officer, serving in the headquarters of
Operation Atalanta of EU NAVFOR. In March 2018, the Lithuanian autonomous
vessel protection detachment returned to Lithuania from operational deployment in
the region.
5.
Mexico has criminalized piracy and armed robbery at sea under its Federal
Criminal Code, while its Law of Navigation and Maritime Trade includes provisions
to combat piracy, trafficking and other illicit crimes at sea. Mexico publishes timely
reports to the IMO Global Integrated Shipping Information System database 1 to alert
mariners of any potential threats to navigation and to prevent piracy attacks. As a
signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Mexico promotes
the strengthening of cooperation against those involved in undertaking acts of piracy
within its territory as well as across national and international jurisdictions. Within
the INTERPOL framework, Mexico facilitates the exchange of information and best
__________________
1

16/18

The Global Integrated Shipping Information System is an online reporting portal for the shipping
industry, hosted by IMO.
18-16521

S/2018/903

practices, while continuing its cooperation for the prevention, investigation and
pursuit of those responsible for the crime of piracy.
6.
The Philippines Maritime Industry Authority regularly issues maritime
advisories for ships transiting along the coast of Somalia, containing i nformation on
preventative measures and recommendations for shipping companies and their crew,
to prevent and suppress acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea. The Philippines also
participates in the Combined Maritime Forces.
7.
Portugal is an active member of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, participating in the recent plenary meeting held in Nairobi in July 2018, at
which the importance of the legal dimension in the fight against piracy was
reaffirmed. Portugal co-chaired the Virtual Legal Forum (or “Piracy Legal Forum”)
with Mauritius. It has stressed that there are still legal challenges to be addressed
owing to the dynamics in maritime security in terms of threats, context and responses.
Portugal remains committed to supporting stabilization efforts in Somalia, providing
naval and military staff to Operation Atalanta of EU NAVFOR and the European
Union Training Mission in Somalia.
8.
Sweden continues its support to counter piracy in the region. In the autumn of
2017, Sweden contributed two fast assault craft crewed by 40 military personnel to
Operation Atalanta, as well as stationing three officers at Operation Atalanta
headquarters. Furthermore, Sweden is one of the main contributors of personnel to
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, ensuring that the longerterm needs to address the root causes of piracy are sustained.
9.
Turkey contributed three frigates to Combined Task Force 151 during 2017/18:
Giresun, Göksu and Gelibolu. Since 13 January 2009, Turkey has deployed naval
representatives to Combined Task Force 151 headquarters in Bahrain for six -month
periods to support operations against piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Aden and off the coast of Somalia. Command leadership of Combined Task Force 151
was executed by the Turkish Naval Forces Command between 29 June and
2 November 2017, the fifth time after its leadership in 2009, 2010, 2012 and 2015.

18-16521

17/18

S/2018/903

Annex II
Map showing pirate activity off the coast of Somalia during 2017/18

18/18

18-16521
