S/2015/246

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2152
(2014), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 30 April 2015 and
requested me to provide a report to it on the situation in Western Sahara well before
the end of the mandate period. It covers developments since my report dated
10 April 2014 (S/2014/258) and describes the situation on the ground, the status and
progress of the negotiations on the future of Western Sahara, the implementation of
resolution 2152 (2014) and the existing challenges to the Mission’s operations and
steps taken to address them, as requested by the Council in its resolution 2152
(2014).

II. Recent developments
2.
The situation in Western Sahara, as it presents itself to MINURSO, is
generally calm. The ceasefire continues to hold. Tensions between the parties and
periodic incidents and demonstrations did not have a major effect on the overall
environment during the period.
3.
West of the berm, public life proceeded peacefully and included large
gatherings at social events in urban areas without major incidents. On the occasions
MINURSO was able to witness, an extensive presence of Moroccan security forces
was noted. This part of Western Sahara continued to receive significant Moroccan
public infrastructure investments, notably in roads and port facilities in Boujdour
and Dakhla.
4.
Thirteen foreign delegations from national legislatures, diplomatic missions
and governmental and non-governmental institutions, as well as journalists and
academic researchers, visited MINURSO headquarters during the reporting period
and were informed about the Mission’s mandate and activities. According to local
authorities, some 50 additional delegations conducted visits. Also according to local
authorities, 18 delegations and 8 individual travellers, mostly European supporters
of Western Saharan self-determination, researchers and media workers alleged to
have misrepresented their purpose, disturbed public order or refused to coordinate
with the authorities, were excluded or expelled.
15-05716 (E)

130415

*1505716*

S/2015/246

5.
A level of discontent was perceptible among the Western Saharan population
west of the berm, illustrated in intermittent demonstrations throughout the reporting
period in Laayoune and other towns. These events aimed to draw attention to human
rights concerns, socioeconomic issues and political demands, including the right to
self-determination, with youth emphasizing the lack of employment opportunities
and organizing informal associations to press for redress. These protests were small
in scale and the Moroccan security forces dispersed them quickly. On several
occasions, credible reports were received about the disproportionate use of force on
the part of the security forces and hostile actions on the part of the demonstrators in
response.
6.
On the 6 November 2014 anniversary of the 1975 “Green March”, King
Mohammed VI stated that “the Sahara will remain part of Morocco until the end of
time”. Regarding the negotiating process, he declared that “[t]he fact that Morocco
chose to cooperate in good faith with all parties should not be interpreted as a sign
of weakness; nor should it be used as a means to ask for more concessions”. He
continued that “[t]he autonomy initiative is the maximum Morocco can offer … to
achieve a final solution to this regional conflict”. He further stressed that
“Morocco’s sovereignty over its entire territory is effective, inalienable and
non-negotiable”. He also indicated that Morocco was “willing to be more open to all
international human rights bodies and organizations that abide by the principles of
neutrality and objectivity in dealing with Moroccan issues”, while rejecting “any
attempt to reconsider the principles and criteria of the negotiating process and any
attempt to revise and expand the mandate of MINURSO to include such matters as
monitoring of the human rights situation”. The King affirmed support for the
October 2013 Moroccan Economic, Social and Environmental Council’s proposed
development plans for the so-called “southern provinces”, which pertain to Western
Sahara and areas to the north. He noted the need to address malfunctions in the
governance of those areas and also announced the implementation of “advanced
regionalization”. Three government bills submitted on 29 January 2015 propose to
devolve more powers to the local level and are pending parliamentary review. In its
8 November reaction, Frente Polisario strongly criticized the King’s speech and
called it a “clear announcement of rebellion against the Charter of the United
Nations and its resolutions, which define the nature of the Western Sahara problem,
the framework for a solution and the basis of the negotiating process … and specify
clearly and unambiguously that the Western Sahara issue is an issue of
decolonization whose two parties are Frente Polisario and the Kingdom of Morocco
and whose solution resides in enabling this people to exercise its inalienable right to
self-determination and independence”. It called on the international community “to
hasten in taking the positions and measures needed to confront this dangerous
intransigence and oblige the Kingdom of Morocco to obey the requirements of
international law and humanitarian law”. It also called on the United Nations to
apply the 1991 Settlement Plan of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity and stop the plundering of Western Sahara’s resources.
7.
From 12 to 14 March 2015, a Swiss non-governmental organization, the
Crans-Montana Forum, held an event in what it referred to as “Dakhla, Morocco”.
The Permanent Representative of Morocco informed me by letter that the Forum’s
focus had been Africa’s economic development and South-South cooperation, that it
had been attended by delegates from 115 countries and that 38 young African
entrepreneurs, including 8 Saharans from Laayoune and Dakhla, had been

2/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

nominated for awards. Frente Polisario and the African Union contested the venue
of this Forum on the basis that the legal status of Dakhla and the rest of Western
Sahara had yet to be determined through negotiations. Following press reports of a
high-level United Nations presence, my spokesperson issued a note to
correspondents indicating that my Special Advisor on Innovative Financing had
attended exclusively in his private capacity and that I had not delegated him or
anyone else to represent me or the United Nations. He further noted that the
definitive status of Western Sahara was the object of a negotiating process being
conducted under my auspices in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.
8.
In the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria, public life and social activities
were conducted peacefully and in a relatively calm atmosphere. However, the severe
living conditions declined further as a result of reductions in international
humanitarian aid (see para. 77 below), and the camp inhabitants continued to suffer
from chronic unemployment, reduced remittances from limited employment
opportunities abroad and lower income from informal trade across the border
between Algeria and Mauritania. Sixteen international delegations visited the
MINURSO liaison office in Tindouf and were informed about the Mission’s
mandate and activities.
9.
Within parts of the refugee community, after 40 years in refugee camps,
increasingly difficult economic conditions and no visible progress towards a political
solution, frustration is coalescing. Individuals returning from higher education
studies abroad bring greater civic and political awareness and compare the hardship
in the camps with living standards elsewhere, applying pressure on the Frente
Polisario leadership to secure better lives for camp inhabitants. Frente Polisario has
also alerted MINURSO to the “hundreds and hundreds of idle youths” affected by
an environment that includes proximity to smuggling routes and extremist activity
in the Sahel.
10. These conditions present political, economic and security concerns. Two
demonstrations were held in the Laayoune camp and five in Rabouni during the
reporting period. On one occasion observed by a MINURSO officer, Frente
Polisario security forces intervened to prevent demonstrators from entering the
premises of the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario. Frente Polisario authorities
subsequently undertook to address the demonstrators’ concerns through broader
consultative and inclusive governance processes.
11. Four incidents of arson in public buildings occurred in the Smara, Dakhla,
Laayoune and Awsard camps in May and June. Frente Polisario investigations
revealed attempted sabotage. Also in June, a group of young men engaged in an
aggressive discussion with the Wali of Laayoune camp, subsequently setting fire to
his office and stoning his vehicle. Several suspected perpetrators were detained and
later released.
12. East of the berm, in the north-eastern part of Western Sahara, MINURSO
observed an increase in civilian activities and local infrastructure construction in six
villages, evidently reflecting the programme approved by the “Sahrawi National
Council” in April 2014 to “consolidate the exercise of sovereignty in the liberated
territories”. Largely abandoned in 1976, several areas are now seeing a return of
original inhabitants from the refugee camps, particularly during the milder climate
of summer. However, several of the areas witnessing initial development remain

15-05716

3/19

S/2015/246

highly contaminated by mines and explosive remnants of war, limiting any
additional growth, curtailing livelihoods and placing residents at risk.
13. During the reporting period, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario wrote to
me on 11 occasions, reiterating his concerns about anomalies in the part of Western
Sahara west of the berm. The letters raised allegations of human rights violations,
disproportionate use of force and illicit exploitation of natural resources and called
repeatedly on the United Nations to implement appropriate remedies, arrange the
release of all Western Saharan political prisoners and institute a human rights
monitoring mechanism for Western Sahara.

III. Activities of my Personal Envoy
14. Following the publication of my previous report on 10 April 2014
(S/2014/258), Morocco expressed strong reservations regarding some elements of
the report, the contours of the negotiating process and the mandate of MINURSO. It
agreed in principle to the continuation of my Personal Envoy’s bilateral
consultations and shuttle diplomacy and to the deployment of my new Special
Representative for Western Sahara and head of MINURSO, but asked to enter into a
dialogue on the issues that concerned it before re-engaging, stating that it sought
clarification for the purpose of ensuring that the negotiating process would proceed
smoothly, including with regard to the preparation of the present report. On
22 January 2015, King Mohammed VI and I spoke by telephone and agreed on the
way forward. I confirmed that reports to the Council would remain objective and
reflect facts. In reply, the King confirmed that Morocco welcomed the return of my
Personal Envoy and the deployment of my new Special Representative and head of
MINURSO to Laayoune.
15. After the call, my Personal Envoy undertook the first set of consultations in
the region in almost a year to re-establish contact with interlocutors old and new,
strengthen confidence in the negotiating process and clarify the way forward on the
basis of the approach identified in my previous report. From 11 to 23 February
2015, he visited Rabat, Rabouni, Nouakchott and Algiers. During his meetings, he
highlighted the importance of negotiating without preconditions and in good faith
and urged the parties to move beyond their respective proposals by seeking
innovative approaches that could help to achieve progress towards “a mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara”.
16. In Rabat, my Personal Envoy met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Salaheddine Mezouar, the Minister-Delegate, Mbarka Bouaida, and other high-level
officials. Mr. Mezouar welcomed the telephone call between the King and myself,
highlighting that it had provided the basis for future interactions. He expressed hope
that the negotiating process would develop in a serene way and without surprises.
He reiterated the long-standing position of Morocco that the autonomy proposal it
had presented in 2007 should serve as the basis for negotiation, arguing that the
Security Council had recognized its pre-eminence. As on previous occasions, the
Minister stressed the role of Algeria in the conflict and noted that Morocco, a State
Member of the United Nations, and Frente Polisario, a non-governmental
movement, should not be treated on an equal footing.

4/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

17. In Rabouni, near Tindouf, my Personal Envoy met with the Secretary-General
of Frente Polisario, Mohammed Abdelaziz; the Coordinator of Frente Polisario with
MINURSO, M’hamed Khaddad; the head of Frente Polisario’s negotiating
delegation, Khatri Adduh, and other representatives of the movement. His
interlocutors expressed disappointment at the lack of progress in the negotiating
process, voiced regret that I had provided assurances to Morocco without consulting
them as the other party and manifested their unhappiness over the lack of attention
that they perceived from the United Nations. They stressed that, as one of the two
parties to the conflict, they should be treated on an equal basis. All interlocutors
expressed uneasiness regarding the growing frustration in the camps, not only
among Saharan youth, but increasingly within the military as well. They warned that
their appeals for patience in the face of growing disillusionment with the
negotiating process were becoming ineffective owing to the lack of progress.
18. In Nouakchott, President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz and the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Vatma Vall Mint Soueina, reiterated Mauritania’s long-standing
position of “positive neutrality” in this conflict. The President highlighted some of
the negative spillover effects of the dispute, in particular the considerable quantity
of cannabis resin arriving at the northern borders of his country for transit into Mali
and beyond. He underlined that this phenomenon posed a serious security threat to
all countries in the Sahel-Saharan region in that it helped to finance criminal,
extremist and terrorist groups.
19. In Algiers, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika received my Personal Envoy after
meetings with Prime Minister Abdelmalek Sellal, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Ramtane Lamamra and the Minister-Delegate, Abdelkader Messahel. The Algerian
authorities reiterated their long-standing position regarding the importance of
holding a referendum of self-determination to determine the future of Western
Sahara. In this regard, they insisted on the significance of a balanced negotiating
process under the auspices of the United Nations. They also stated that Algeria was
not a party to the conflict. All interlocutors criticized the United Nations for having
overstepped its prerogatives in providing “unilateral and counterproductive”
assurances to Morocco, in particular regarding the present report, without consulting
the Security Council or the other party. The Prime Minister expressed fear that
support for radical groups or a return to military hostilities would grow if the
refugee population lost hope that a political solution could be found.
20. From 22 to 29 March, my Personal Envoy again travelled to the region to
consult on the next steps, including the preparation of the present report, visiting
successively Nouakchott, Rabouni, Rabat and Algiers. At each stop, he emphasized
the dangers of the situation in the Sahel-Saharan region, the growing frustrations in
the refugee camps and the importance of an early solution to the Western Sahara
conflict. In Rabouni and Rabat, he sought useful information that could assist in
making the present report a contribution to the negotiating process. With regard to
the next steps, a consensus emerged that a return to face-to-face discussions
between the parties was premature and that my Personal Envoy should continue his
programme of bilateral consultations and shuttle diplomacy for the foreseeable
future.
21. My Personal Envoy also resumed his consultations with members of the Group
of Friends, visiting successively, Madrid, Paris, London, Moscow and Washington,
D.C. In the discussions, my Personal Envoy’s interlocutors expressed satisfaction

15-05716

5/19

S/2015/246

with the resumption of the negotiating process and reiterated their full support for
his efforts. For his part, my Personal Envoy highlighted the need to induce the
parties to show flexibility in their long-standing positions. He also drew attention to
the growing security threats in the Sahel-Saharan region, including a possible future
nexus between the frustrated refugee population and the expanded activities of
criminal, extremist and terrorist groups. He emphasized that such threats further
underscored the importance of an early solution to the Western Sahara conflict. In
Madrid, he also expressed his deep appreciation for the continuing facilitation of his
mission by the Government of Spain through the provision of a Spanish Air Force
aircraft for his travels within the North African region.

IV. Activities of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara
22. The period during which my Special Representative was unable to deploy to
MINURSO marked a decline in Mission engagement with the authorities west of the
berm. This included a decline in contacts with senior officials, whose interlocutor in
implementing the mandate of MINURSO is normally the Special Representative.

A.

Operational activities
23. As at 31 March 2015, the military component of MINURSO stood at
203 personnel, 3 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 246. The
military component remains deployed at nine team sites and at liaison offices in
Tindouf, Algeria, and Dakhla, Western Sahara. The MINURSO military observer
strength has been increased by 15 to 218, with the additional contributions arriving
from existing and new troop contributors. However, prolonged entry processes for a
number of incoming military personnel contributed to stretching operational
capacity and strained remaining observer assets for part of the period. On 31 March,
MINURSO was notified verbally that the pending visa applications had been
approved.
24. From 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2015, MINURSO conducted 9,502 ground
patrols and 493 aerial patrols to visit and monitor units of the Royal Moroccan
Army and the military forces of Frente Polisario for adherence to the military
agreements. In the course of the patrols, MINURSO military observers regularly
monitored 570 units, 29 training areas and 316 observation posts, as well as
355 notified operational activities by the Royal Moroccan Army west of the berm.
East of the berm, military observers regularly monitored 93 units, 8 training areas
and 38 observation posts, as well as 4 notified operational activities by Frente
Polisario military forces. MINURSO observed eight demonstrations by Frente
Polisario supporters near the berm to verify their exclusively civilian nature and
defuse or prevent possible tensions. On rare occasions, MINURSO military
observers faced verbal aggression by demonstrators expressing dissatisfaction with
the lack of political progress and the failure of the United Nations to achieve a
resolution. In written communications with the Force Commander, the Royal
Moroccan Army complained that such demonstrations constituted violations of
military agreement No.1 and increased the risk of escalation between the parties.

6/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

25. MINURSO observed one new violation of freedom of movement by the Royal
Moroccan Army. Nine long-standing violations remained, as indicated in my
previous report (S/2014/258, para. 35). The Royal Moroccan Army removed 123 of
the 325 observation posts comprising its second line of defence 15 kilometres from
the berm, a major long-standing violation since September 2008. As at 9 March
2015, 121 observation posts remained operational. Some 1,000 to 1,200 Moroccan
soldiers were redeployed to reinforce strong points already established on the berm.
The Royal Moroccan Army continued to contest notifications of long-standing
violations of the ceasefire regime, indicating that “situational necessities” unrelated
to the ceasefire were involved. East of the berm, MINURSO recorded two new
violations and two freedom-of-movement violations by Frente Polisario forces.
Three long-standing violations remained, as indicated in my previous report (ibid.).
In their discussions with MINURSO, both parties reiterated their commitment to the
ceasefire.
26. The Mission’s assessment is that both parties remain fully committed to and
respectful of the ceasefire and that their observed violations do not jeopardize it in
the medium term. Rather, as has been observed in previous reports, they have
resulted in a gradual shift in the original military status quo over the years.
27. MINURSO continues to advocate that any discrepancies vis-à-vis the
determination of ceasefire monitoring violations and potential security concerns in
that context be addressed in the framework of military agreement No.1. The Mission
revived dedicated working group discussions with the parties that were initiated in
November 2013 to clarify understandings of the agreement, reconcile variations in
approach, address the concerns put forward by each party with regard to application
of the agreement in the current operational environment and strengthen the
MINURSO monitoring regime overall, in particular with regard to access to military
facilities and violation definitions.
28. In March, April and June 2014, three rounds of discussions were held with
representatives of the Royal Moroccan Army. In March, May, June and September
2014, four rounds were held with representatives of the Frente Polisario forces.
MINURSO considered the parties’ initial proposals for potential adjustments to
military agreement No.1 and identified respective areas of concern.
29. In November 2014, heavy rains and massive flooding caused extensive
damage to Royal Moroccan Army and Frente Polisario facilities, and the Royal
Moroccan Army forwarded a number of requests for and notifications of repairs to
MINURSO. Team sites located east of the berm were also affected by the storms,
which temporarily disrupted the Mission supply chain. Frente Polisario authorities
provided timely and significant support for MINURSO during the disruption.
30. Contamination of Western Sahara by landmines and explosive remnants of war
continues to endanger the lives of local, nomadic and refugee populations, as well
as MINURSO military observers and logistical teams. As at 31 March 2015,
57 cluster strike areas and 41 minefields remained to be addressed. Many are
located in areas that have recently seen increased civilian activity. East of the berm,
four accidents occurred, in which one civilian and one soldier were killed and five
civilians and five soldiers injured. West of the berm, six incidents occurred in which
two civilians and one soldier were killed and three civilians and three soldiers
injured.

15-05716

7/19

S/2015/246

31. East of the berm, humanitarian clearance of landmines and explosive remnants
of war, route verification, risk education and capacity development activities were
undertaken by the MINURSO Mine Action Coordination Centre, in partnership with
the international non-governmental organizations Action on Armed Violence and
Norwegian People’s Aid, the local non-governmental organization Sahrawi Campaign
to Ban Landmines, and commercial contractors Mechem and Mine Tech International.
Demining teams cleared 4,608,423 m 2 of land and verified 1,766,859 m2 of land
along MINURSO patrol routes east of the berm; the Royal Moroccan Army reported
clearance of over 222,800,000 m 2 of land west of the berm.
32. Morocco, Frente Polisario and Algeria have primary responsibility for the
security of United Nations civilian and military staff in the respective Mission
locations. At the request of the Mission, Frente Polisario also provides MINURSO
patrols east of the berm with armed escorts in the vicinity of the Mauritanian border.
In addition, the Directorate-General for Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection of
the European Commission and the Spanish Agency for International Development
Cooperation have funded additional capacities, including an international security
officer integrated into the MINURSO security management system, to increase
security for humanitarian activities and humanitarian personnel in the camps.
Through its liaison office in Tindouf, MINURSO supports the United Nations
agencies on the ground. The joint security coordination committee continued to
provide a mechanism for cooperation between the United Nations, donors,
humanitarian actors and Frente Polisario, enabling stakeholders to exchange
information and take mitigation measures. My designated official for security held
regular exchanges with the United Nations humanitarian agencies in the refugee
camps near Tindouf.
33. While the security environment in Western Sahara appears generally stable,
the longer-term effects of regional instability remain of concern for the Mission, the
parties and their neighbours, all of whom have taken additional security measures to
prevent infiltration by radical groups. In November 2014, the Moroccan Ministry of
the Interior announced the arrest of four French nationals allegedly linked to
terrorist groups, three of whom were apprehended in Laayoune. Algerian authorities
alerted MINURSO to the suspected transport of explosives into or via Tindouf
province in mid-November 2014; the two vehicles under surveillance were
subsequently stopped in Mauritania. On 4 December 2014, Frente Polisario security
forces intercepted approximately 120 pounds of cannabis resin from armed
smugglers operating through the east of the berm, the destruction of which
MINURSO was invited to witness in June. During the period, Frente Polisario
reinforced and maintained strengthened security around the United Nations
compound in Tifariti.
34. Given the potential effects of increasing regional insecurity, MINURSO
enhanced attention to and assessment of security conditions in its area of operation,
requiring military observers to maintain a state of high alert and to keep the Mission
abreast of suspected illegal activities that could affect their safety. My Special
Representative and the Department of Safety and Security have initiated a
reassessment of security precautions and procedures in cooperation with the parties
and with Algeria. Since April 2014, the Department has conducted two
comprehensive compliance evaluations of the Mission security system, and its
recommendations are now being implemented.

8/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

35. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations conducted a military capability
study of the MINURSO military component in March 2015. The study reviewed the
current configuration and operational capacities relative to mandated tasks, existing
challenges and projected risks to mandate implementation and personnel, factoring
in regional security dynamics. The effect of the additional 15 observers could not
yet be fully assessed as it was offset by delays in other incoming observer
deployments. Preliminary findings suggest that, while adequately positioned at the
authorized strength to execute mandate requirements with the cooperation with the
parties, adjustments in patrol route variations, team site rotations and site-specific
security assessments could enhance operational delivery and the safety of observers.
The conclusions and recommendations from the capability study will be finalized in
the coming month and presented to MINURSO troop contributors.

B.

Substantive civilian activities
36. During the early part of the reporting period, my outgoing Special
Representative maintained constructive contacts with the parties on all issues
related to the Mission mandate, primarily through the respective coordination
offices and directly with Frente Polisario leadership. During the remainder of the
period, the acting head of Mission, as well as the Political Affairs Office and the
liaison office in Tindouf, continued interactions to the extent possible pending the
arrival of my new Special Representative. Political affairs officers regularly visited
Rabat from May to July 2014, resuming the visits after the deployment of my new
Special Representative, to inform the diplomatic community about developments in
the area of operations and Mission activities. As noted in paragraph 4 above, visitors
to Laayoune and Tindouf were provided with briefings and assessments to better
understand the local situation and the work of MINURSO.
37. My new Special Representative, Kim Bolduc, arrived in the Mission on
6 February 2015, following the conclusion of her predecessor’s assignment on
31 July 2014. Beginning on 15 November 2014, the MINURSO leadership function
was performed by Ms. Bolduc from Headquarters in New York. Upon deployment,
she was assured by the Moroccan authorities of their intention to cooperate fully
with MINURSO in all matters concerning implementation of the Mission’s mandate
as defined by the Security Council. They indicated that prior agreements and
procedures would be maintained.
38. The Frente Polisario leadership renewed its commitment to full support for
and cooperation with my Special Representative in implementing the Mission’s
mandate. East of the berm and in the refugee camps, access by MINURSO and
United Nations agencies to interlocutors remained unhindered, enabling free
interaction with Frente Polisario representatives and refugees, as well as local and
international civil society organizations. The liaison office in Tindouf maintained
constructive cooperation with the civilian and military components of Frente
Polisario on all matters related to Mission mandate implementation.
39. Both parties continue to diverge significantly in their interpretation of the
MINURSO mandate. Morocco considers the mandate to be limited to ceasefire and
military matters, demining and logistical support for confidence-building measures.
Frente Polisario considers that the organization of a referendum for selfdetermination remains its central element. These opposing views have a direct

15-05716

9/19

S/2015/246

impact on the credibility of the Mission vis-à-vis the parties, affecting its ability to
fully implement its mandate and exercise standard peacekeeping functions. For the
United Nations, the successive Security Council resolutions define the mandate of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara. The standard
peacekeeping functions performed by United Nations operations throughout the
world underpin effective mandate implementation, including assessments of and
reporting on local conditions that may affect their operations and the political
processes.
40. The perception of MINURSO and United Nations impartiality continues to be
affected by the fact that MINURSO vehicles operate with Moroccan licence plates
west of the berm. Logistical and administrative complications also arise, since
Moroccan licence plates must be removed and replaced by United Nations plates
when MINURSO vehicles cross east of the berm and travel outside the area of
operations. Implementation of the March 2014 verbal agreement of the Moroccan
authorities to gradually replace Moroccan licence plates with United Nations licence
plates for MINURSO vehicles, as agreed with my previous Special Representative
(see S/2014/258, para. 50), has not begun. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
reiterated this commitment to my new Special Representative in February 2015.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
41. The International Committee of the Red Cross, playing a role as neutral
intermediary, continued to work with the parties and families concerned in treating
the cases of persons still unaccounted for in relation to the past conflict.

B.

Assistance to and protection of Western Saharan refugees
42. In accordance with its mandate, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continued to provide international protection
and, together with its partners, basic life-saving assistance to refugees in the camps
near Tindouf. This included the implementation of multisectoral activities in the
areas of water, sanitation, health, nutrition, shelter and distribution of non-food
items. UNHCR continued to carry out its mandated responsibilities in protection
and community services through regular field visits and a network of community
refugee outreach workers in all camps. Pending the registration of the refugees in
the camps near Tindouf, the humanitarian assistance provided by UNHCR and the
World Food Programme (WFP) continued to be based on a population planning
figure of 90,000 vulnerable refugees, with WFP furnishing an additional 35,000
food rations to persons with poor nutritional status in the camps.
43. In the health sector, UNHCR and its partners continued to cover up to 60 per
cent of the needs in the refugee camps. Chronic conditions such as diabetes, high
blood pressure, anaemia, heart disease and hepatitis B remained the main health
concerns. The key gaps faced in providing basic health care were related to the
maintenance and development of the health infrastructure. UNHCR supported
multidisciplinary medical commissions to provide specialized consultations to
refugees in the camps on a quarterly basis. The preventive health programme aimed

10/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

at reducing chronic malnutrition and anaemia in the camps targeted more than
22,000 persons of concern in 2014, including children under 5 years of age and
pregnant and lactating women.
44. Working through its partner organization, UNHCR provided financial support
to 1,719 primary, intermediate and secondary school teachers in five camps,
ensuring that all children between the ages of 6 and 11 were enrolled in primary
education and that all children between the ages of 12 and 14 were enrolled in
intermediate school. UNHCR partners also facilitated capacity-building training
focusing on better teaching and school management. For its part, WFP continued to
support the school feeding programme. Altogether, 450 young refugees were
enrolled in vocational training courses in the camps.
45. During the reporting period, UNHCR also continued to ensure the supply of
potable water to all refugees living in the five camps. Preventive plans for the
regular maintenance and rehabilitation of water facilities were implemented to
optimize the use of the existing water infrastructure. Efforts and resources continue
to be focused on the extension of the water distribution network in all camps.
46. Hygiene kits were distributed to 38,450 women and girls of reproductive age.
Through its partners, UNHCR has also procured raw materials for the production of
bleach and soap, which were distributed to health, water and education facilities.
47. UNHCR has been working in close collaboration with relevant basic service
providers for cases of sexual and gender-based violence to ensure that referral
mechanisms and quality response services are available in terms of legal, medical
and psychosocial support.

C.

Confidence-building measures
48. In conformity with its mandate and principles, and with the cooperation of
both the Government of Morocco and Frente Polisario, UNHCR implemented the
confidence-building measures programme from April to June 2014, striving to
facilitate contact and communication between refugees in the camps near Tindouf
and their families west of the berm. Family visits, cultural seminars and
coordination meetings in Geneva between the two parties, with the two
neighbouring States, Algeria and Mauritania as observers, remained the three
fundamental components of the updated January 2012 plan of action for the
confidence-building measures programme. MINURSO supported the programme by
providing medical staff and police officers to facilitate preparations and escort
beneficiaries to their destinations.
49. A total of 20,699 individuals have benefited from the family visits programme
since 2004. Of that total, 997 persons participated in the family visits from January
to June 2014, including 641 from the Saharan refugee camps near Tindouf and
356 from west of the berm. Flights for the family visits have been suspended since
June 2014 because of disagreements between the two parties over the list of
candidates for family visits. Since then, no coordination meeting has taken place.
UNHCR remains ready to facilitate the dialogue required for prompt resumption of
the programme through the existing coordination mechanism.

15-05716

11/19

S/2015/246

D.

Human rights
50. As jointly agreed, a technical team from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) visited Laayoune and Dakhla in
Western Sahara from 28 April to 2 May 2014 to help prepare the visit of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to Morocco.
51. At the invitation of King Mohamed VI, the then High Commissioner, Navi
Pillay, visited Morocco from 27 to 29 May 2014 and met with the King, high-level
officials and representatives of the National Human Rights Council, the Economic,
Social and Environmental Council and representatives of civil society. The High
Commissioner noted the great strides made by Morocco towards better promotion
and protection of human rights. At the same time, she raised human rights concerns,
including in Western Sahara. She encouraged the Government of Morocco to ensure
that human rights and fundamental freedoms were equally protected in Morocco and
Western Sahara. She stressed that, for the National Human Rights Council to be able
to effectively promote and protect human rights in Western Sahara, local and
national authorities needed to cooperate fully with the institution, including by
promptly replying to complaints. The High Commissioner expressed the readiness
of OHCHR to provide technical assistance for the two regional offices of the
National Human Rights Council.
52. The offices of the National Human Rights Council in Laayoune and Dakhla
continued to carry out a range of activities, including monitoring demonstrations,
visiting prisons and medical centres and organizing capacity-building activities for
various stakeholders. The Council continued to monitor the implementation of the
recommendations of the Equity and Reconciliation Commission for former victims
of human rights violations. In 2014, the offices of the Council received
415 complaints of alleged violations of civil, political, economic and social rights in
Western Sahara and carried out 20 fact-finding missions in follow up to some of the
complaints.
53. During the reporting period, the Government of Morocco extended invitations
to 10 special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council.
Nevertheless, no visits of special procedures mandate holders were undertaken west
of the berm, for the most part owing to scheduling issues. Similarly, no special
procedures mandate holders visited the refugee camps near Tindouf.
54. In March 2015, the Government of Morocco invited United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, to visit to Morocco in the
course of the year. In addition, as jointly agreed, OHCHR would carry out a mission
to Morocco and Western Sahara from 12 to 18 April 2015. OHCHR also agreed with
the Government of Algeria, as the host country, and Frente Polisario regarding a
mission to visit the refugee camps near Tindouf from 4 to 10 May 2015.
55. During the reporting period, some Saharan human rights organizations
continued to face difficulties operating west of the berm, including their access to
official premises, convocation of public events and holding of demonstrations. One
of these organizations, l’Association sahraouie des victimes des violations graves
des droits de l’homme, had applied for legal status. In March 2015, pursuant to a
recommendation by the National Human Rights Council, the Moroccan authorities
announced its registration. Another organization, l’Association el Ghad pour les
droits de l’homme, was also registered.

12/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

56. According to some human rights organizations, the Moroccan authorities did
not permit demonstrations in Western Sahara west of the berm during the reporting
period, notably preventing demonstrations calling for self-determination, defending
prisoners’ rights or raising socioeconomic issues. Such gatherings continued to be
forcibly dispersed, with allegations that Moroccan law enforcement officials used
excessive force in suppressing demonstrations, including towards women and
children. In some cases, protesters and activists were reportedly subjected to
arbitrary arrest, torture, ill treatment and prosecution. Furthermore, reports indicate
that very few injured protesters, including those detained, had access to a doctor. As
a result, most were unable to obtain a medical certificate to formally document the
violence to which they stated they had been subjected.
57. In its September 2014 presentation to the Human Rights Council concerning
its visit to Morocco and Laayoune in Western Sahara in December 2013, the
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention reported a number of concerns related to its
area of competence, including the continued detention of the 21 Saharans belonging
to the Gdeim Izik camp group, with some serving life sentences, following a
decision of a military tribunal in 2013 (A/HRC/27/48/Add.5).
58. Information received from some human rights organizations indicates acute
overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, malnutrition and limited or no access to
medical care in places of deprivation of liberty. During the reporting period, local
human rights organizations reported that at least three Western Saharans died while
in custody in Western Sahara, including as a result of medical neglect. According to
the Moroccan authorities, two of the deaths were suicides and one was the result of
a prison brawl. On different occasions during the reporting period, Western Saharan
prisoners and detainees went on hunger strikes in protest against their treatment and
prison conditions. This led in a deterioration of the health of several persons
deprived of their liberty.
59. One major positive development was Morocco’s accession to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment on 24 November 2014. According to the Optional
Protocol, the Government should establish or designate, within one year of
accession, a national preventive mechanism with a mandate to monitor all places of
detention and make recommendations to the authorities on preventing torture and
ill-treatment, among other things. Accession to the Optional Protocol and the
establishment of a national preventive mechanism should enhance prevention of
torture and ill-treatment, including in Western Sahara.
60. Another positive development was the adoption by the Parliament of the new
Code on Military Justice (No.108-13), which was published in the Official Gazette
in January 2015 and is to enter into force six months after publication. The law
excludes civilians from the jurisdiction of military tribunals, which are competent to
deal solely with military crimes and offences committed in wartime. The law also
provides for the creation of a military court of appeals. According to the new law,
ongoing cases concerning civilians in military tribunals will be transferred to
regular courts.
61. In its most recent concluding observations concerning Morocco, published at
the end of 2014, the Committee on the Rights of the Child welcomed the
Government’s efforts in Western Sahara, including major demining efforts, and
urged them to respect and protect the rights of all children living in Western Sahara

15-05716

13/19

S/2015/246

and to take all necessary measures to prevent violations of their rights
(CRC/C/MAR/CO/3-4, CRC/C/OPAC/MAR/CO/1).
62. During the reporting period, investments in the territorial waters adjacent to
Western Sahara continued to be a subject of contention between the Government of
Morocco and Frente Polisario, given the long-standing status of Western Sahara.
Some foreign oil companies, including Kosmos Energy, carried out oil exploration
and exploratory drilling in Western Saharan territorial waters. In a letter dated
19 March 2015 addressed to me, the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations stated that “Kosmos Energy’s exploration activities were preceded
by wide consultations” with the local population, and “are governed by applicable
international principles and standards … in particular those deriving from the
Charter of the United Nations and recalled in the letter S/2002/161 dated 29 January
2002 addressed to the President of the Security Council ... by [the] Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs”. Frente Polisario and Western Saharan organizations
spoke out against these activities repeatedly, pointing out that they had not been
consulted and that any exploitation of resources, if found, would violate the legal
opinion provided in the letter cited above. The Secretary-General of Frente
Polisario, in a letter to me dated 26 January 2015, referred to the activities as a
violation of international law.
63. Information concerning the human rights of refugees in the camps near
Tindouf remains limited. A report by Human Rights Watch published in October
2014 stated that it had found no evidence of organized restrictions on freedom of
movement or any pattern of serious abuse, but had found several areas of concern.
These included the persistence of isolated claims of torture or mistreatment by
Frente Polisario security forces, the use of military courts in investigating and trying
civilians, the persistence of the remnants of slavery and Frente Polisario’s
monopolization of political speech. The report also highlighted the responsibility of
Algeria, as the host country, for ensuring the protection of the human rights of all
persons on its territory.
64. On several occasions during the reporting period, Frente Polisario sent letters
to me reiterating its call for the creation of a permanent United Nations mechanism
for the protection and monitoring of human rights in Western Sahara. In a letter sent
to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights dated 4 November
2014, Frente Polisario offered to facilitate the establishment of a OHCHR presence
in the Tindouf camps, as well as in that part of Western Sahara east of the berm.
Morocco insisted repeatedly that international human rights and refugee law
required OHCHR to work with Algeria, the host country, in dealing with human
rights in the refugee camps.

VI. African Union
65. MINURSO continued its cooperation with the observer delegation of the
African Union in Laayoune, led by Yilma Tadesse (Ethiopia), as well as its support
for the delegation with logistical and administrative assistance drawn from its
existing resources.
66. In June 2014, the Special Envoy of the African Union for Western Sahara,
former President Joaquim Chissano, met with my Deputy, my Personal Envoy and
other United Nations officials in New York to convey the concern of the African

14/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

Union over the lack of progress in the ongoing negotiations. Mr. Chissano indicated
that he sought to play a helpful role in raising awareness of the need to advance
towards a settlement of the dispute.
67. In a letter dated 9 June 2014, the Permanent Representative of Morocco
reiterated his Government’s firm opposition to any involvement of the African
Union in the question of Western Sahara, stating that the organization had lost any
legitimacy to play a role in the settlement of the dispute by taking a position in
favour of one party. In a second letter dated 1 July 2014, he rejected the
appointment of Mr. Chissano as null and void.
68. In a letter to me dated 30 March 2015, the Chair of the African Union
Commission, Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, transmitted the communiqué of the 496th
meeting of the Peace and Security Council, as well as her report on the Western
Sahara negotiations and related issues, and asked that they be distributed to the
Security Council and the General Assembly (A/69/861-S/2015/240). In a letter to
me dated 5 April 2015, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco reiterated “the
categorical opposition of the Kingdom of Morocco to any role for or involvement
by the African Union, in whatever form, in the issue of the Moroccan Sahara” for a
number of reasons explained in the letter addressed to me by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI in June 2013 and reiterated in subsequent letters by Moroccan high
officials. It was requested that the letter be circulated as a document of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

VII. Financial aspects
69. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/296, appropriated the amount of
$53.9 million for the maintenance of MINURSO for the period from 1 July 2014 to
30 June 2015. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
MINURSO beyond 30 April 2015, the cost of maintaining the Mission until 30 June
2015 would be limited to the amounts approved by the General Assembly.
70. The proposed budget for MINURSO for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016 in the amount of $53.3 million (exclusive of budgeted voluntary
contributions in kind) has been submitted to the General Assembly for consideration
during the second part of its resumed sixty-ninth session (A/69/730).
71. As at 25 March 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
MINURSO amounted to $40.5 million. As at 28 February 2015, amounts owed to
troop contributors totalled $181,200. MINURSO also owed $114,000 for
contingent-owned equipment as of 31 December 2014. Reimbursement of troop and
contingent-owned equipment costs has been made for the period up to July 2014 and
June 2014, respectively, owing to the insufficiency of cash in the special account of
the Mission.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
72. Given the lack of progress towards a resolution of the dispute over the status
of Western Sahara, which has not changed since my last report, the efforts of the
United Nations through the work of my Personal Envoy and of MINURSO remain
highly relevant.

15-05716

15/19

S/2015/246

73. Growing frustrations among Western Saharans, coupled with the geographic
expansion of criminal and extremist networks in the Sahel-Sahara zone, present
increased risks for the stability and security of the region. A settlement of the
Western Sahara conflict would mitigate these potential risks. I reiterate my call on
the parties to seriously engage with the Personal Envoy and to sustain and intensify
their efforts to negotiate a “mutually acceptable political solution, which will
provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara” (see Security
Council resolution 2152 (2014), para. 7). The members of the international
community can, collectively and individually, play a critical role in this regard by
encouraging the parties and the neighbouring States to remain engaged with my
Personal Envoy.
74. In the light of last year’s protracted period of clarifications at the request of
Morocco, it is too early to provide an indication of whether or not the new approach
of bilateral consultations and shuttle diplomacy launched by my Personal Envoy
will prove fruitful. However, I expect that he will enjoy the effective support of the
members of the Security Council and the full cooperation of the parties and
neighbouring States as he moves forward, keeping me and the Security Council
informed on the progress for which we all hope. Forty years after the beginning of
this conflict and eight years after presentation of the parties’ proposals, there can be
no justification for continuing to maintain the status quo and failing to engage
constructively and imaginatively in the search for a solution.
75. I welcome the parties’ discussion of military agreement No.1 governing the
ceasefire monitoring regime, and I call for continued and constructive cooperation
with the Mission to move forward on the issues involved. MINURSO carries out a
number of important duties that derive from Security Council resolutions and
normal peacekeeping functions. I therefore seek the assistance of the Council in
supporting the mandated role of MINURSO, upholding peacekeeping standards and
the impartiality of the United Nations and ensuring that the conditions for
successful operation of the Mission are met. The Mission’s presence is relevant to
ensure the parties’ observation of the ceasefire and as a visible representation of the
international community’s commitment to achieving a resolution to the conflict. As
broad engagement across sectors and communities is essential for any peacekeeping
mission, I hope in particular that the remaining limitations on its “free interaction
with all interlocutors”, as cited in Security Council resolutions 2044 (2012), 2099
(2013) and 2152 (2014), will be removed. In this context, and in light of the
continuing efforts of my Personal Envoy, and the continuing importance of
MINURSO, I recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of
MINURSO for a further 12 months, until 30 April 2016.
76. I am concerned by the suspension of family visits and seminars under the
confidence-building measures programme. I therefore encourage the parties to
re-engage in dialogue and resolve any outstanding issues with the aim of resuming
these important humanitarian programmes for the benefit of the entire Western
Saharan population.
77. I urge the international community to provide urgent additional funding for the
UNHCR mandate programme in the refugee camps near Tindouf, given the existing
gaps in key areas of assistance such as protection, health, nutrition, food security,
shelter, water and sanitation. At the same time, I note continuing questions about the

16/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

number of refugees requiring assistance. These highlight the need to address
registration of the refugee population.
78. I commend the positive steps that Morocco has taken on the protection of
human rights during the reporting period. These include the adoption of the new
Code on Military Justice and accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
However, while welcoming these developments, I call on the parties to continue and
further enhance their cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms
and OHCHR, including by facilitating OHCHR missions to Western Sahara and the
refugee camps near Tindouf, with unrestricted access to all relevant stakeholders.
79. These missions and other future forms of cooperation between the parties and
OHCHR and other United Nations human rights mechanisms should contribute to an
independent and impartial understanding of the human rights situation in both
Western Sahara and the camps, with the goal of ensuring protection of all, as well as
to comprehensive and sustained implementation of international human rights
standards by the parties. Human rights do not have borders; all stakeholders are thus
obliged to uphold the fundamental freedoms and human rights of all people. It is
vital that all human rights protection gaps and underlying human rights issues in
situations of protracted conflict be addressed. This would also contribute to creating
an environment conducive to the negotiating process.
80. In the light of increased interest in the natural resources of Western Sahara,
it is timely to call upon all relevant actors to “recognize the principle that the
interests of the inhabitants of these territories are paramount”, in accordance with
Chapter XI, Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations.
81. In conclusion, I wish to thank my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara,
Christopher Ross, for his repeated engagement with the parties and neighbouring
States. I also thank my previous Special Representative in Western Sahara,
Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber, his successor, Kim Bolduc, and Major General Imam
Edy Mulyono for their able and dedicated leadership of MINURSO. Finally, I also
thank the men and women of MINURSO for their work to fulfil the Mission’s
mandate in difficult circumstances.

15-05716

17/19

S/2015/246

Annex
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara
Contributions as at 31 March 2015
Country

Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

0

1

4

Austria

3

0

0

3

Bangladesh

6

20

0

26

Brazil

8

0

0

8

China

10

0

0

10

Croatia

7

0

0

7

Egypt

20

0

2

22

El Salvador

3

0

0

3

France

7

0

0

7

Germany

4

0

0

4

Ghana

5

7

0

12

Guinea

5

0

0

5

Honduras

12

0

0

12

Hungary

7

0

0

7

India

3

0

0

3

Indonesia

4

0

0

4

Ireland

3

0

0

3

Jordan

0

0

1

1

Kazakhstan

3

0

0

3

Malawi

3

0

0

3

Malaysia

10

0

0

10

Mongolia

4

0

0

4

Nepal

3

0

0

3

Nigeria

4

0

0

4

Pakistan

13

0

0

13

Paraguay

5

0

0

5

Poland

1

0

0

1

Republic of Korea

3

0

0

3

Russian Federation

7

0

0

7

Sri Lanka

1

0

0

1

Switzerland

2

0

0

2

Togo

1

0

0

1

Yemen

9

0

2

11

179

27

6

212 c

Total
a

Authorized military strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force
Commander.

b

18/19

15-05716

S/2015/246

15-05716

19/19
