persons concerned arc no longer s<"rving on committees of, or employed on missions for, the Organization;
( c) The same facilities in respect of currency and
exchange restrictions, and in respect of their personal baggag<", as are afforded to officials of forrign
governments on temporary official missions:

(ii) Privileges and immunities are gr;inted to the
experts of the Organization in the interests of the
Organization and not for the personal benefit of the
individuals themselves. The Organization shall have
the right and the duty to waive the immunity of any
expert in any case where in its opinion the immunity
would impede the course of justice and can be
waived without prejudice to the interests of the Organization.
ANNEX

vnr

ficicr de laditc imrnunitc alors meme qu'ils n'exerC!"rairnt plus de fonctions auprcs des commissioru; de
!'Organisation ou qu'ils ne seraient plus charges de
mission pour 1c rompti- de cette derniere;
c) Les rncmes f acilitcs en cc qui concr-rne les
reglemcntations monetaires et de- change et en ce
qui concernc lcurs bagages personnels quc celles
accordecs aux fonctionnaires des Gouvernemrnt,
etrangers en mission officielle temporaire.
ii) Les privileges !"t irnmunites sont accorde,, aux
experts dans l'interet de !'Organisation et non en
vue d,:- !cur avantage personnel. L'Organi~ation
pourra et devra kv!"r l'immunite accordfr a un
expert clans tous ks cas ou ellc estimera quc cette
irnmunite generait !'action de la justice et qu'clle
peut etrr- levfr sans nuire aux interets de !'Organisation.
ANNEXE

VIII

The Universal Postal Union

Union j)(Jstale universelle

The standard clauses shall apply without modification.

Lc-s clauses-standard s'appliqueront sans modification.

ANNEX IX

ANNEXE

IX

The International Telecommunications Union

Union internationale des telecommunications

The standan.l danses shall apply without modification.

Les clauses-standard s'appliquc-ront sans modification.

180 (II). Draft convention on genocide

180 (II). Projet de convention sur le geno-

cide
The General Assembly,
Realizing the importance of the problem of
combating the international crime of genocide;

L' Assemblee ghufrale,

Considering that the Economic and Social
Council has stated in its resolution of 6 August
194 7' that it proposes to proceed as rapidly as
possible with the consideration of the que~tion of
genocide, subject to any further instructions which
it may receive from the General Assembly,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue the 'l'.'ork it has begun concerning the
suppression of the crime of genocide, includin.cthc study of the draft convention prepared by the
Secretariat, and to proceed with the completion of
a convention, taking into account that the Intnnational Law Commission, which will he set np ia

Considerant !'importance t!u probleme de Ja
lutte contre le rrimr de genocide en tant que crime
international;
Reaffirmant sa resolution 96 (I)' en date du 11
deccmbrc 1946 Sur le crime de genocide;
Declarant q uc le crime de genocide est un crime
international q ui comporte des responsabilites
d'ordre national et international pour les individus et pour Jes Etats;
Constatant que la grande majorite des Gouverncments des Etats Membrrs de !'Organisation
des Nations lJnics n'ont pas encore prcsentc !curs
observations sur le projct de convention prepare
par le Secretariat" concernant le crime de gcnoprojn q•ri ln,r ::,·ait rtC ,,oumi, par le Se,rCtaire
gcneralc le 7 j uillet 194 7;
( :on)idhrmt q ue k Corn:cil cconurn'.q uc cl mcial
a d<-cb:·t;, clan, ,.a rc~nl11tion en d;ite du 6 ao(it
1'i47 ', qu';l sc propose de poursuivrc l'cxamcn t!c
la qul'stion du genocide a1!ssi r,1pidcmcat quc possible, sous reserve de nou\Tl!cs instructions de
I' Asscmblee generale,
Inuite le Co11Seil cconomiquc et sncial ;'t pomsuivrc les t rava11x q H'il a curnrncnc,'.s sur L1 1 cpre,.
,ion dH crime de genocide, travaux qui
c1,111prc11nent l'etudc du proict ck 'unvcntion
prepare par le Secretariat, et ;l proccder it l'ctablis.,cment du tcxte definitif d\mc <''Hlvention ,,1:
tc:ant compte du fait q1,e la Com111is.'ion de dro;t

1
Sec Resolutions adopted by the General A.ucm/J/y
during the second part of its first session, page 14 ·L

;)(_'r:c-1c111l la ~ccondt· partic di'..,,, JHC1111!'·re srssion JJ;lPT 14·1.

Reaffirming its resolution 96 (I) 1 of 11 December 1946 on the crime of genocide;
Declaring that genocide is an international
crime entailing national and international responsibility on the part of individuals and States;
Noting that a large majority of the Governments of Members of the United Nations have not
yet submitted their observations on the draft convention on the crime of genocide prepared by the
Secretariat" and circulated to those Governments
by the Secretary-General on 7 July 1947;

'See document E/447.
See Resolutions adopted by the Economic and Social
Council during its fifth session, resolution 77(V), page 21.
1

: \'oir ks Ul~.wlutions a,foJ,fl:,.s fJar l'As.icmblie /.:,.~nlral,
18')
'
"
'\"uir docum~nt E/1·17.
.- Voi. ks RCsolutionradof,tl:cs J>arlc Conseil Cconomiqtte
et ~n(:·al pe-nda11t sa I i1H111ihnc Si.._':-.'-ilon, n··~oh1tion "77 (V),
p;1gc~ 21 •i2.

due course in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 174(II) of 21 November 1947, has
been charged with the formulation of the principles recognized in the Charter of the Niirnberg
Tribunal, as well as the preparation of a draft
code of offences against peace and security;
Informs the Economic and Social Council that
it need not await the receipt of the observations
of all Members before commencing its work, and
Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit a report and the convention on this question to the third regular session of the General
Assembly.
Hundred and twenty-third plenary meeting_.
21 November 1947.

international, qui sera crccc en temps voulu conformement a la resolution 17 4 (II) de l' Assemblce
generale en date du 21 novembre 1947, a etc
chargee de formuler les principes consacres par le
Statut de la Cour de Nuremberg et d'claborer un
projet de code rclatif aux crimes contrc la paix et
la securite;
Fait savoir au Conseil cconomiquc et social que
point n'cst bcsoin qu'il attende de recevoir Jes
observations de tous Jes Etats Membrcs pour
entreprendre son travail;
Invite le Conscil economiq ue et social a presenter, a la troisieme session ordinaire de I' Assemblee
generale, un rapport sur cette question, ainsi que
le textc de la convention susvisee.
Cent-vingt-troisieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

130
