S/2014/518

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 24 of Security Council
resolution 2156 (2014), in which the Council requested that I continue to inform it
of progress made in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), and to bring to its attention any serious
violations of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on Temporary Arrangements for the
Administration and Security of the Abyei Area (S/2011/384, annex), signed on
20 June 2011. In that connection, the report provides an update on the situation in
Abyei and UNISFA operations since my previous report of 13 May 2014
(S/2014/336). In addition, it outlines progress made in the implementation of the
additional tasks mandated to UNISFA under Security Council resolution 2024
(2011) related to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

II. Security situation
2.
The security situation in Abyei during the period under review was relatively
calm, although the underlying conditions remained volatile and unpredictable. The
presence of small arms remained prevalent among the civilian population. Between
120 and 150 Sudan oil police force personnel remained deployed in the Diffra oil
complex, in violation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and multiple Security
Council resolutions. UNISFA observed the entry and exit of small numbers of Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) personnel in southern Abye i, also in
contravention of existing agreements between the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan.
3.
During the reporting period, the Sudan oil police detained two trucks at Diffra,
from 15 to 23 June, belonging to a mission contractor transporting water welldrilling equipment. The police cited a lack of valid travel permits on the part of the
drivers. The incident constituted a violation of the status-of-forces agreement signed
with the Government of the Sudan, which provides for the unrestricted freedom of
movement of mission contractors without the need for permits. UNISFA protested
the matter with authorities of the Government of the Sudan. On 12 May, UNISFA
patrols sighted approximately 20 armed SPLA soldiers, several of whom were in
uniform, at a roadside shop near Athony village, southern Abyei. At the urging of
the UNISFA troops, the soldiers left the Area and crossed into South Sudan. On
14-57936 (E)

300714

*1457936*

S/2014/518

3 July, a UNISFA patrol to Athony village observed two unarmed SPLA soldier s in
the Area. Upon sighting the UNISFA patrol, the soldiers retreated southwards.
4.
Several incidents of livestock theft undermined security among the civilian
population. On 25 May, UNISFA was informed by Ngok Dinka community
members that approximately 10 to 15 armed men, alleged to be Misseriya youths,
stole 158 goats and sheep from Dungoup village, central Abyei. UNISFA troops
retrieved most of the livestock, along with abandoned ammunition and three rifle
magazines approximately 10 km north of Goli to wn, northern Abyei. The
perpetrators could not be located. On 4 June, Ngok Dinka community members
reported the theft by unidentified persons of approximately 300 cattle in Rumamier
village, 25 km north-east of Agok town. A UNISFA patrol located the cattle nearby
and returned them to their owner.
5.
On the night of 17 July, unidentified armed assailants shot dead five civilians,
injured six civilians and stole approximately 800 cattle in Wunrouk (4 km south west of Abyei town). A UNISFA patrol dispatched in response to the incident came
under fire from the assailants near Nyincour (3 km west of Abyei town). The patrol
returned fire. There were no casualties. UNISFA provided medical treatment and
evacuated the injured civilians to the Abyei clinic. The livestock were retrieved and
returned to their owners. The mission searched for, but was unable to locate, the
perpetrators.
6.
There were two incidents during the reporting period in which armed
assailants attacked youth. On 18 May, two unidentified armed men k illed two Ngok
Dinka youth near Leu village, 21 km east of Abyei, in a suspected feud over
attempted cattle rustling. On 13 June, unidentified assailants, three of whom were
armed with AK-47 rifles, killed four Ngok Dinka youths and stole 52 cattle on the
outskirts of Abyei town. UNISFA aerial and ground patrols were unable to locate the
perpetrators or livestock, with poor road conditions hindering the search in some
areas. The mission engaged Ngok Dinka traditional community leaders and
intensified patrols in and around Abyei town to prevent an escalation of tensions. On
18 June, members of the Ngok Dinka community demonstrated peacefully in front
of the UNISFA headquarters to protest the incident. In an address to the
demonstrators, the UNISFA Head of Mission/Force Commander reiterated the
mission’s continued commitment to the protection of civilians.
7.
A UNISFA patrol sighted 14 armed Misseriya men in the Abyei Area, on
12 June, in the vicinity of Luki village, 24 km north of Abyei. Upon sighting the
peacekeepers, the armed men fled northwards. Subsequent patrols were unable to
relocate them. On 26 June, UNISFA troops at Farouk, northern Abyei, disarmed a
Misseriya pastoralist carrying an AK-47 rifle and ammunition.
8.
Given the administration and rule-of-law vacuum in the Abyei Area, UNISFA
continued to implement its conflict prevention and mitigation strategy, which
consists of monitoring and early warning assessments, conducting day and night
patrols, maintaining a disengagement area between the local c ommunities, and the
regular convening of joint security committee meetings with the traditional leaders
of the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities. With the arrival of the seasonal
rains, the mission commenced the implementation of its rainy season deploy ment
plan to enable the provision of security and the protection of civilians despite the
reduced mobility.

2/7

14-57936

S/2014/518

9.
UNISFA police personnel continued to provide advice and support to the
UNISFA Head of Mission and the military component on issues related to law and
order and the protection of civilians. UNISFA police provided training in riot
control and public order management to 37 mission quick reaction force officers. In
addition, they continued to promote local security initiatives through the provision
of support to unarmed, voluntary neighbourhood watch mechanisms and to conduct
community patrols.
10. The northwards migration of nomads continued without major incident. As at
1 July, approximately 75,000 Misseriya migrants had exited the Abyei Area to the
north, while another 25,000 remained slightly south of the Area’s northern
boundary. On 22 June, after having previously exited the Area, 30 Mezeqna
pastoralists, a sub-clan of the Misseriya, returned south to the vicinity of Goli
village because of delays in the arrival of seasonal rains further north.
11. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) continued to conduct mine
action survey, clearance and explosive ordnance disposal operations throughout the
Abyei Area to improve safety for United Nations personnel, humanitarian actors and
local communities. In particular, UNMAS conducted non-technical surveys in five
zones in Abyei town and five villages within the Abyei territory, safely removing
and destroying seven explosive remnants of war items. In ad dition, mine action
teams conducted area clearance operations at all UNISFA sites to locate and remove
potential explosive remnants of war. The mine action teams responded to two
emergency tasks that led to the clearance of 143 m 2 of land and the removal of one
explosive remnant of war item.

III. Political developments
12. Further to the recommendations of the recently concluded strategic review of
UNISFA (see S/2014/336), which were welcomed by the Security Council in its
resolution 2156 (2014), a joint delegation consisting of the UNISFA Head of
Mission/Force Commander and representatives of the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Commission started a joint series of consultations with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in Khartoum and Juba, respectively,
from 25 June to 2 July, to encourage the parties to take concrete steps to promote the
consolidation of peace and security in Abyei. In particular, the delegation sought the
parties’ views on the implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and the
Abyei Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, including through the full
withdrawal of their security forces, the resumption of Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee meetings, the implementation of the previous decisions of the
Committee and the organization of a joint peace conference between Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka traditional leaders. The Government of Ethiopia has decided to join t his
engagement with both parties, which will continue until the expiry of the current
mandate of UNISFA.

IV. Status of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism
13. The Government of the Republic of South Sudan informed UNISFA in writing ,
on 27 May 2014, of its intention to resume participation in the Joint Border

14-57936

3/7

S/2014/518

Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. This followed the withdrawal of its
monitors six months earlier pending resolution of a disagreement between the Sudan
and South Sudan over the location of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone centreline.
On 28 June, senior South Sudan officials informed UNISFA that their objection was
not related to the centreline coordinates, but to the use of those coordinates to
demarcate the agreed border corridors in disputed border areas, as it would then
amount to de facto border demarcation. The Mechanism resumed operations, on
16 June, through aerial patrols of the Zone from its base in Kadugli, Southern
Kordofan. There was no reported military presence or activity in the Zone.
14. The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism initial operational
capability development plan provides for the establishment of team sites in the
following four locations: Gok Machar and Malakal in South Sudan and Kadugli and
Buram in the Sudan. The mission has completed the construction of accommodation
facilities for a force protection platoon at Gok Machar and, from 25 to 27 June,
relocated troops from Kadugli. Expansion of that camp to accommodate a full force
protection company and additional United Nations monitors continued. Work on the
expansion of the Kadugli site to enable the accommodation of a force protection
company in transit also continued. Preparations for the development of Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism sites in the other two locations are ongoing.
In addition, preparation was undertaken for the commencement of Mechanism
ground patrols, which requires the deployment of additional force protection
elements and the clearance by United Nations demining teams of patrol routes.
15. As at 1 July, UNISFA, the Sudanese Armed Forces and SPLA had 25, 34 and
30 monitors, respectively, at the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism headquarters in Kadugli. Three UNISFA and two SPLA monitors were
deployed at the Gok Machar site. Of the 117 force protection troops deployed to the
Mechanism, 79 were in Kadugli and 38 in Gok Machar.
16. The entire complement of 60 dedicated Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism demining staff, and the requisite technical equipment,
including 21 landmine-protected vehicles, arrived at the mission. UNMAS surveyed
357 km and cleared 129 km of priority mission routes, including the entirety of the
route between Gok Machar and the UNISFA headquarters in Abyei, enabling safe
movement along that axis.

V. Humanitarian situation
17. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and their non-governmental
organization partners continued to provide humanitarian assistance in the Abyei
Area, including in the education, food, health, hygiene, non-food items, nutrition,
sanitation and water sectors. The assistance was provided to approximately 81,000
Ngok Dinka beneficiaries. Further, humanitarian actors conducted sustained
protection monitoring, in particular for internally displaced persons and returnee
populations, to ensure that vulnerable households received humanitarian assistance.
Despite impediments, humanitarian actors based in Abyei town provided assistance
to approximately 15,000 resident Misseriya and nomads, including health, water and
sanitation services.
18. In addition, humanitarian agencies pre-positioned supplies to enable effective
emergency responses during the peak of the rainy season. In early July, the World

4/7

14-57936

S/2014/518

Food Programme undertook a food security and logistical assessment in the northern
part of Abyei to support vulnerable populations through food distribution where
required. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) continued with the
implementation of rehabilitation and construction projects. This included the
rehabilitation of 9 hand pumps and 2 water yards, as well as the upgrading of
10 mini water yards. IOM also completed the rehabilitation and construction of four
new school classrooms at Mekenis (11 km north of Diffra, northern Abyei) and four
classrooms in Rumamier (25 km north-east of Agok, southern Abyei). The World
Health Organization assisted with the establishment of a health clinic in Diffra.
19. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes continued to face access
challenges, especially delayed processing of travel permits from Khartoum to Abyei.
Insecurity also hampered access to parts of the Area, with humanitarian actors
reliant upon UNISFA for force protection in northern Abyei. In addition, the
seasonal rains rendered some roads impassable. The absence of Sudanese national
staff also limited programming in the northern areas. Finally, international
non-governmental organizations based in Agok were not allowed by Ngok Dinka
authorities to access northern Abyei.
20. As a result of the ongoing crisis in South Sudan, displaced persons continued
to enter the Abyei Area. As at 1 July, there were approximately 6,500 such persons
from South Sudan in the Abyei Area.

VI. Personnel deployments and mission support
21. As at 1 July, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,088 of the authorized
strength of 5,326. As part of the rainy season relocation plan, UNISFA troops were
moved from temporary operating bases at Noong and Dungoup to Dokura and Abyei
town (central Abyei), respectively, while troops stationed at the Marial Achak
operating base were moved to Banton (southern Abyei).
22. As at 1 July, the strength of the mission’s police component was 22 out of an
authorized strength of 50 police officers. The remaining personnel are expected to
join the mission when the Abyei Police Service, which the United Nations police
component is mandated to train and advise, is established.
23. The development of mission infrastructure continued. In particular, work was
completed at the Tajalei temporary operating base (southern Abyei) on the
relocation of 150 soldiers from tents to prefabricated hard -wall structures, the
provision of an uninterrupted electricity supply and improved access to water. The
mission upgraded 11 km of access roadway between Todach and Diffra (northern
Abyei) and accelerated the drilling of bore holes for its field sites in southern Abyei
through the provision of an extra drilling rig. The mission completed the site
clearance and filling works for an airstrip at Athony, southern Abyei.

VII. Financial aspects
24. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/258 B of 30 June 2014,
appropriated the amount of $318.9 million for the maintenance of the For ce for the
period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015.

14-57936

5/7

S/2014/518

25. As at 10 July 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNISFA amounted to $38.8 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $1,060.8 million.
26. Reimbursement to the contributing government for troop and contingent owned equipment costs has been made for the period up to 31 May 2014 and
31 March 2014, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations
27. Despite the absence of clashes in the Abyei Area, I remain deeply concerned
about the potential for a serious escalation of tensions between the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities that could lead to an outbreak of hostilities du ring the
upcoming migration season. In its resolution 2156 (2014), the Security Council
welcomed the recommendations of the strategic review of UNISFA (see
S/2014/336), the aims of which are to contribute to the consolidation of peace and
security in Abyei by addressing challenges related to full and complete
demilitarization, law and order, public administration and inter-community
relations. The Security Council called upon the two Governments to work with the
United Nations towards that goal and decided to extend the mandate of UNISFA
until 15 October 2014.
28. It was on this basis that the African Union Commission, UNISFA and the
United Nations Secretariat engaged the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan during the reporting period to solicit their support for
the recommendations. I am grateful to the Government of Ethiopia for having
agreed to join this effort. The delegation emphasized to the parties that the present
arrangement whereby UNISFA is providing security in the absence of public
administration and law-and-order mechanisms is ultimately unsustainable and that
greater commitment is needed from them to jointly address such requir ements.
Practical decisions to address the current and upcoming security, political,
administrative and inter-communal challenges in Abyei are urgently needed.
29. The resumption of Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meetings and the
implementation of its past decisions are particularly critical, as is active cooperation
to address the illegal presence of the Diffra oil police and specific steps to find
closure on the assassination of the Ngok Dinka Paramount chief, promote the
reduction of small arms circulation and cattle rustling, and prepare the ground for
the peaceful and secure return of internally displaced persons north of Abyei town
and a peaceful 2014-2015 migration across Abyei. I call on both the Sudan and
South Sudan to facilitate the early conduct of a joint inter-communal peace
conference between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya traditional leadership without
preconditions, which UNISFA stands ready to support. I look forward to reporting
on the results of this joint engagement in the next UNISFA end -of-mandate report in
September 2014.
30. Despite their assurances, both the Sudan and South Sudan continue to maintain
security forces and allow the entry of armed elements into the Abyei Area. This
undermines the already fragile security situation in the territory and is in violation
of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and several Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1990 (2011) and 2046 (2012). It is imperative that both

6/7

14-57936

S/2014/518

Governments urgently take measures to redeploy all of their forces outside of the
Abyei Area and prevent the entry of other armed elements.
31. The instability in locations surrounding the Abyei Area has also created
tensions and volatility within the Area itself. These have been further exacerbated
by the continued prevalence of small arms among communities within Abyei. Such a
situation is not conducive to sustainable peace and security. The communities of
Abyei and their leadership must take urgent steps to ensure that Abyei is made
“weapons free”, in keeping with the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee resolution of
3 May 2013.
32. With the crisis in South Sudan threatening the stability of Abyei and the
increasing influx of displaced persons from South Sudan into the area, there has
never been a greater need for unhindered access for humanitarian assistance,
effective administration and rule-of-law mechanisms. It is crucial that both parties
work towards the immediate reconvening of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee to
resume its crucial, mandated function of providing political, administrative and
security oversight over the Area, on behalf of the Presidents of the Sudan and South
Sudan.
33. The resumption of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
operations following the re-engagement of the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan is very welcome. The participation of the Sudan and South Sudan in that
mechanism is a positive indication of their willingness to work together towards
reducing tensions along their shared border. I urge both parties to build on such
cooperation to ensure the creation of conditions that support stability and
sustainable development in the border region. In the light of the reactiva tion of the
Mechanism, the deployment of additional authorized forces to UNISFA has been
initiated to enable the provision of force protection.
34. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my appreciation to the outgoing Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Yohannes Tesfamariam, who has led UNISFA with
distinction and whom I recently appointed as Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. I am also grateful to all of the women and men of
UNISFA for their sustained efforts to promote peace and stability in the Abyei Area
in what are often arduous and challenging conditions.

14-57936

7/7
