S/PV.7871

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7871st meeting

Thursday, 26 January 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Faye
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02087 (E)
*1702087*

S/PV.7871

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council has not discussed the
situation in Yemen since October (see S/PV.7797). For
this reason, I believe that it is a particularly opportune
moment for the Council to receive an update on the
political negotiations, including for a renewed cessation
of hostilities, and on the dire humanitarian situation.
I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest developments in Yemen.
The past several months have seen a dangerous
escalation of military activities, with tragic
consequences for the Yemeni people. Armed hostilities
have continued in many areas, including Sana’a
governorate, Taiz city and the border area between
Yemen and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Civilians in
Taiz continue to suffer from indiscriminate shelling in
residential areas of the city, with such attacks increasing
in recent days. Ground shelling and air strikes have
also escalated along the western coastline following the
launch of Operation Golden Spear by the Government
of Yemen and allied forces.
Both sides continue to claim in the media that
they have made significant military progress, but
I remain convinced that there is no possibility of a
military solution. We are witnessing daily attacks and
counterattacks. Those who seek a military solution will
only prolong the suffering caused by the war, allow
2/10

26/01/2017

the terrorist threat to continue to grow, and deepen the
challenges of Yemen’s eventual recovery following the
war. The continued military activity is all the more
tragic as a viable proposal for peace is on the table and
within reach of both parties. With political courage and
will, this war can be stopped.
On 18 December, the Foreign Minister of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia hosted a meeting in Riyadh
with the Foreign Ministers of the Sultanate of Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, the United States and the
United Kingdom, and I was invited to join. The meeting
ended with an urgent call for a rapid recommitment
to a cessation of hostilities, followed by a two-week
preparatory period in order to look into the violations
that have taken place every time a cessation of hostilities
has been announced.
We want to ensure that this time the parties honour
the cessation of hostilities fully and effectively in
order to allow assistance to be provided to the Yemeni
people. My Office has completed preparations for
the preparatory meeting, which includes a five-day
workshop for representatives from both sides to
develop a concrete joint implementation plan to ensure
the strengthening of the cessation of hostilities and that
no violations occure by either party. The successful
implementation of the cessation of hostilities will bring
about a much-needed respite for many Yemenis, as well
as hope after suffering long months of war, and will
pave the way for progress towards a political agreement.
I met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan two days after he took
up his position. He stated that his country was willing
to host the workshop. He also expressed the Kingdom’s
willingness to provide any assistance needed for the
people of Yemen and to support peace in that country.
We were not surprised at that stance, given that Jordan
hosts a large number of neighbouring countries’
citizens, including Yemenis, providing them safe
shelter and basic health services.
In that regard, I welcome the positive response
of the Yemeni Government and the fact that it has
agreed to send its representatives to the workshop. I
hope that the delegation of Ansar Allah and General
People’s Congress will confirm their participation at
that gathering.
On the political front, the statement issued at
the meeting on 18 December in Riyadh called on the
parties to respond constructively to the United Nations
17-02087

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

proposal I submitted in preparation for a next round of
cosultations. While the parties still have some concerns
and reservations, I will continue my consultations
with them in order to arrive at compromises and a
convergence of views.
To a large extent, this proposal builds on the main
points discussed during the Kuwait consultations and
paves the way towards a political solution that is in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), and the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism.
It is also the first step along the path towards peace and
sets the stage for a transitional period in accordance
with the National Dialogue Conference decisions. The
international community has welcomed that proposal.
In November, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and
the United States helped us to ensure that the delegation
of Ansar Allah and General People’s Congress agreed
to a road map as a negotiable working paper, which was
a positive development. However, they did not provide
any practical proposals or detailed plans for security
arrangements dealing with military withdrawal
or the handover of heavy weaponry. Therefore, no
progress was possible, specially given that the security
component is essential and fundamental to peace. We
discussed these topics in details during my latest visit
to Sana’a.
Undoubtedly, the decision by Ansar Allah and
the General People’s Congress to set up a parallel
Government within the Supreme Political Council
throws up an additional barrier along the road to peace
and has an adverse impact on trust between the parties.
More than once, we have said how dangerous it is to take
unilateral decisions in these difficult times and how
that will impact the revitalization of State institutions.
On the Government level, since my previous
briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.7797) I have
undertaken two visits to Aden, under difficult and
sensitive security conditions. My latest trip took place
on 16 January, when I met Yemeni President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, Prime Minister Ahmed
Obaid Bin-Daghr and Foreign Minister Abdulmalik
Al-Mikhlafi. I called on the President to commit
publicly to the consultations based on my proposals
made in Kuwait and thereafter. Continued criticism
of the proposals without agreeing to discuss them in
order to make amendments undermine the path towards
peace and prolongs the conflict.

S/PV.7871

I emphasized, and assured President Hadi, that
what was being presented by the United Nations were
proposals open for discussion in order to reach a
comprehensive solution acceptable to all sides and that
there was no other way to bring about peace in Yemen
and to afford all Yemenis an opportunity to come to the
table to address their country’s challenges, including
the south’s historic grievances.
Yemen’s economic and humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. According to humanitarian
organizations,
18.8
million
Yemenis
require
humanitarian assistance and 2.2 Yemeni children
are malnourished — one of the highest rates of acute
malnutrition in the world. That is not only a result
of poverty, but of a deterioration in basic services in
the areas of health, water and sanitation, as well as
other factors. The Emergency Relief Coordinator, my
colleague Mr. Stephen O’Brien, will be able to provide
members more details on the war’s terrible impact on
the humanitarian situation.
In that regard, the continued closure of the Sana’a
airport has added to the overall hardship. Many people
who want to leave Yemen to seek medical treatment
abroad cannot do so, while Yemenis abroad are unable
to return home. As well, the journey to and from Aden
airport is too difficult for many to undertake, leaving
many people with no option. I call on the Government
of Yemen to allow for the resumption of commercial
flights to Sana’a without further delay. And I call on
all parties to ensure the safety of air navigation. I have
addressed a formal letter to all parties calling on them
to ensure the safety of the airport and of all civilian
commercial aircraft.
The extensive delay in the payment of civil servants’
salaries has severely undercut the purchasing power
of most Yemeni households. The continuing lack of
payments will drive ever more people into destitution.
The Government of Yemen, the Central Bank, Ansar
Allah and the General People’s Congress must work
together to ensure the resumption of salary payments to
civil servants in all areas of the country. Earlier today, I
received information from the Government that salary
payments had resumed.
It will also be critical, in cooperation with UNICEF
and the World Bank, to fully fund the social welfare
fund that provides cash payments to the most vulnerable
people in Yemen. I also encourage international
partners to find ways to ensure access to hard currency

17-020873/10

S/PV.7871

The situation in the Middle East

for importers of basic commodities, so as to guarantee
the continuity of such imports.
There is a clear path out of the violence that plagues
Yemen. Although it requires some concessions, the
proposals that I put forward are based on the concerns
and needs of both sides and take into account the
political, security and social situation in the country,
while providing for a secure future for Yemen and
Yemenis. I will present the sides with a detailed timetable
that reflects the political and security stages and their
sequencing, as we envisage it. I call upon the parties
to demonstrate political wisdom and responsibility in
order to make the necessary progress.
Since my previous briefing to the Council, over the
past few weeks I have held meetings with the Foreign
Ministers of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Jordan, as well as Sweden. I
also met with the Deputy Foreign Ministers of China
and the Russian Federation. I have seen that there is
in fact consensus for the efforts of the United Nations.
In that regard, I would like to mention the support I
received from the Russian Embassy in Sana’a during my
latest visit. I hope that the international community will
continue to bring pressure to bear on the parties so that
they recommit within the next few days to a cessation
of hostilities. I am confident that improvements in the
security situation will open up space for a renewed
political dialogue, which we hope will bring about a
solution.
I have seen for myself the suffering of the Yemeni
people. I just returned from a devastated Sana’a. I saw
at first hand the suffering of Yemeni women and men. I
hope that Yemeni leaders will be able to see the impact
that this tragedy has had on the country, take the bold
decision to commit to a political solution and put an end
to the conflict. The solution to the Yemeni situation is
not external. The United Nations and the international
community can help to promote, mediate and bring
pressure to bear. But the key decisions and compromises
must be made by Yemenis and will depend upon their
ability to make consessions. Failing that, history will
judge them harshly.
The President: I thank Mr. Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: Since my previous briefing (see
S/PV.7797), the humanitarian situation in Yemen
has further deteriorated, while the armed conflict
4/10

26/01/2017

has continued to intensify, with daily air strikes and
armed clashes. In the past week, we received reports
of at least 365 conflict-related security incidents,
up from 231 in the previous week, and at least 100
airstrikes in Taiz governorate alone. During the
last quarter of 2016, approximately 2,400 incidents
consisting of air strikes, armed clashes and shelling
were reported throughout Yemen. This is a 12 per cent
increase from the previous three months. Today I am
particularly concerned about civilians caught up in the
crossfire in Mokha, Taiz governorate’s coastal region.
I have received reports that more than 5,000 families
are fleeing.
It is clear that in this fight the most affected are
the ordinary Yemeni people, who continue to suffer.
Overall, more than two thirds of the population — an
alarming 18.8 million, as we have heard — is in need
of humanitarian and protection assistance, including
an astounding 10.3 million Yemenis who require
immediate assistance to save or sustain their lives. This
is about the size of the entire population of Sweden,
and the numbers are rising. More than 2 million people
are internally displaced. By 31 December, 7,469
Yemenis had been killed and 40,483 injured owing to
the conflict. The true number is likely to be higher, as
we report only cases by health facilities that are still
functioning — a mere 45 per cent.
Overall, the plight of children remains grim, with
a child under the age of 5 dying every 10 minutes of
preventable causes. A grim illustration of the impact on
children is the air strikes two weeks ago near a petrol
station next to a school in Sana’a governorate’s Nihm
district that resulted in the death of one schoolgirl and
injury to four others. A week earlier, on 3 January, a
school was completely destroyed in Sa’ada governorate’s
Safra district, reportedly — and luckily — without any
child casualties. Since the hostilities began in March
2015, more than 1,400 children have been killed and
over 2,140 injured. Another 1,441 children, some as
young as 8, have been recruited by warring parties. The
actual numbers are likely to be much higher.
Beyond the direct casualties of the armed conflict,
there are also the so-called silent deaths of Yemenis
that go largely unnoticed and unrecorded. Girls, boys,
women and men are dying of hunger and diseases that
are easily preventable and treatable. Unfortunately,
vital food commodities and medicines cannot be
imported easily owing to access restrictions imposed
by all parties. People with chronic diseases, including
17-02087

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

high blood pressure and diabetes, who are not receiving
life-sustaining treatment due to medical shortages are
slowly dying.
The conflict in Yemen is now the primary driver
of the largest food-security emergency in the world. If
there is no immediate action, famine is now a possible
scenario for 2017. There are currently 14 million
food-insecure people, of whom half are severely
food-insecure. This means that Yemenis are not able
to feed themselves adequately and are frequently
forced to miss meals or eat food with poor nutritional
value. At least 2 million people need emergency food
assistance to survive. Again, the situation for children
is especially grave, as 2.2 million babies, boys and girls
are acutely malnourished, and almost half a million
children are suffering from severe acute malnutrition.
This represents a 63 per cent increase since late 2015.
Children are going to bed hungry every night.
Shockingly, incidents of gender-based violence
have reportedly increased by more than 63 per cent
since before the conflict. As of this month, there have
been 10,806 reported cases. To be clear, this means
more rapes, more forced marriages, more child brides
and many more unspeakable acts of violence against
girls, boys and women compared with two years ago.
All parties to the conflict are failing to take
precautions to spare civilians and civilian infrastructure.
So far, the United Nations has verified more than 325
attacks on schools, health facilities, markets, roads,
bridges and even water points. More than two thirds
of the damage to public infrastructure is a result of
airstrikes. Violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law continue unabated and largely with
impunity. Attacks against hospitals, schools and other
protected civilian structures and facilities must stop
immediately. International norms must be respected.

S/PV.7871

unable to seek treatment abroad. Similarly, life-saving
medicines cannot be flown in. Students are unable to
resume their studies abroad, and Yemenis outside the
country seeking to go home are unable to do so. In
addition, the suspension of commercial flights has also
meant that journalists can no longer travel to Sana’a and
report on Yemen’s grave humanitarian situation.
We expect all parties to the conflict, including
the Government of Yemen, to do the utmost with the
Saudi-led coalition to reopen the airport and airspace
to commercial flights. This could include addressing
security concerns through previously established flight
routing through Bisha, Saudi Arabia, or other airports
within the Saudi-led coalition.
Humanitarians now fill in for collapsing public
institutions, which at this scale is beyond both our
capacity and our remit. The health-care system is in
decline. Public infrastructure such as bridges and
ports, as well as water and sanitation systems, is being
destroyed. The near-collapse of the country’s social
security and economic institutions has a multiplier
effect on humanitarian needs. Yemen’s poorest
families, widows, orphans, people with disabilities and
the elderly are no longer receiving a monthly allowance
of 2,500 rials — about $10 — per person. In addition,
1.25 million civil servants, including nurses, doctors
and teachers, do not receive salaries regularly. Yemen’s
middle class is growing poorer, and many are no longer
able to provide for their families. While a batch of money
arrived in Aden earlier this month, no information has
been received as to whether it will reach civil servants
in all governorates.

Granting rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
is a key obligation under international humanitarian
law. Yet people face major challenges in accessing
humanitarian aid, and humanitarian actors face
impediments to access people in need, including due
to active fighting, insecurity, bureaucratic hurdles and
a lack of funding.

Yemen’s contracting economy, the associated
liquidity crisis and the continued depreciation of the
local currency mean further hardship for Yemen’s
people. Ninety percent of Yemen’s food and fuel and
almost all medical supplies are imported. Only 40 per
cent of pre-crisis amounts of fuel are now entering
the country. Import restrictions are leading to price
increases. For instance, in December the price of wheat
flour was 25 per cent higher than in the pre-crisis
period. Petroleum prices rose by more than 33 per cent.
Cooking gas is now 60 per cent more expensive.

The closure of Sana’a airport to commercial
flights since 9 August has had a disproportionate
impact on Yemen’s civilians and further increases the
humanitarian caseload. The lack of in- country specialist
medical care means that more than 20,000 Yemenis are

The sharp decline in the Central Bank’s foreign
reserves combined with its move to Aden and lack of
liquidity has had a ruinous socioeconomic impact.
Yemen could run out of wheat within months unless
traders can access lines of credit in the coming weeks.

17-020875/10

S/PV.7871

The situation in the Middle East

Foreign banks no longer accept financial transactions
with many of Yemen’s commercial banks. We must
mobilize to sustain the traders’ ability to import,
replenish the country’s stocks of staple food and
reverse the trend of growing food insecurity and
potential starvation. In addition, some humanitarian
organizations are struggling to find enough cash to
implement projects. The end result is a country in
economic distress, which is translating into acute
humanitarian need.
Let me provide the Council with an update on the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM). As of 23 January, UNVIM had cleared
324 vessels from 394 requests. Since the beginning of
operations, more than 5 million metric tons of cargo
have been discharged, including 2 million tons of food
and just over 1 million tons of fuel. During this period,
54 vessels were not cleared; 20 vessel clearances were
revoked, 28 cancelled and six declined. The Mechanism
has completed 21 inspections of suspicious cargo or
information presented. Delays in receiving clearances
are also due to restrictions imposed by the Saudi-led
coalition, such as the hampering of vessels’ access to
Yemeni Red Sea ports and in the absence of clear lists
of prohibited items.
Once goods are offloaded, there are often
additional bureaucratic impediments that slow down
the transport of commodities to their final destinations.
All parties have to be held responsible for those
impediments. Moreover, ports have been damaged and
need to be repaired. Hudaydah port, Yemen’s main
port — through which 80 per cent of imports arrive
and which was damaged in the conflict in 2015 — has
not been rehabilitated. A vessel carrying four mobile
cranes procured by the World Food Programme (WFP)
has arrived in the Red Sea, but has been ordered by
the Saudi authorities to leave Yemeni waters and is
now anchored 50 miles off Yemen’s coast. The vessel
is awaiting the coalition’s approval to berth at the port.
Those cranes will boost the port’s capacity in handling
humanitarian cargo. Two of the cranes will be used
exclusively by the United Nations, by the WFP, and
help expedite the timely delivery of vital humanitarian
aid supplies.
In spite of the difficult conditions and tremendous
challenges, the humanitarian community delivers.
Together in 2016, we reached 5.6 million Yemenis
in need with direct assistance and via a coordinated
response in 22 governorates. There are five operational
6/10

26/01/2017

hubs — in Aden, Hudaydah, Ibb, Sa’ada, and Sana’a.
More than 114 humanitarian organizations are
working in Yemen and are delivering life-saving and
life-sustaining assistance across the entire county.
In the darkness of conflict, there are some
glimpses of hope. Thanks to the swift intervention by
humanitarian partners, which established 26 cholera
treatment centres and launched a massive containment
campaign through water and sanitation interventions,
the cholera outbreak, which started in October, is now
in decline. We must remain vigilant, as there are still
more than 18,000 suspected cases.
In recent weeks, there have been some improvements
in overcoming bureaucratic impediments, especially
in terms of issuing visas to humanitarian workers.
Dialogue is also becoming more effective in leading to
a better understanding with parties to the conflict and
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law. I welcome the efforts of the Saudi authorities
and other partners to strengthen the dialogue and
information-sharing with humanitarian partners to
overcome the challenges faced in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in Yemen.
For 2017, approximately $2 billion is required
to support the humanitarian response, targeting
10 million of the most vulnerable people in Yemen. The
increase over 2016 is directly tied to the breakdown
of the socioeconomic order, increased suffering and
the absence of a cessation of hostilities and a political
settlement. The parties to the conflict are closing their
ears to the desperate pleas of the Yemeni people and
to those of the broader international community. I ask
Member States to pledge generously at the forthcoming
Yemen pledging conference, to be held late in March.
In conclusion, I request that Council members once
again call for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities. The Yemeni people need a political solution
to the horrendous conflict they are caught up in. I also
request that Council members, first, use their influence
over the parties to the conflict to ensure that they
respect international humanitarian law and provide
timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian access;
secondly, hold parties to the conflict accountable for
breaching their obligation to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure; thirdly, facilitate an increase in
commercial imports of essential supplies, facilitate the
import of cranes to Hudaydah, support the rehabilitation
of the port and extend the mandate of the United
17-02087

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen beyond April; fourthly, demand the resumption
of commercial flights to Sana’a; and, fifthly, facilitate
lines of credit for the purchase of staple food, including
wheat, to traders and Yemeni banks, and urge the
Government of Yemen to use funds from the first batch
of newly printed Yemeni riyals optimally, equitably and
without political bias and ensure that civil servants are
paid throughout the country.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their briefings.
I would like to highlight the work done by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen
and to convey my delegation’s support for his tireless,
rigorous efforts to find a solution to put an end to the
conflict. Similarly, I also express our deep gratitude to
all those who provide humanitarian aid to Yemen for
their tireless and courageous efforts to bring some hope
to its beleaguered people.
Uruguay is appalled by the worsening conflict
in Yemen, where the worst violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights occur
on a daily basis. The fact that the serious conflict in
Yemen has received less media coverage than other
conflicts, such as those in Syria or South Sudan, does not
absolve the perpetrators, the international community
nor, much less, the Council, of their responsibility. By
way of illustration, how many meetings on Syria have
we convened since the last time there was a briefing on
Yemen, on 31 October (see S/PV.7797)? We have held
no fewer than 13 such meetings.
Uruguay is concerned about the ongoing violence
and the dismantling of institutions in Yemen, which
have made possible the spread of terrorism. Groups such
as Da’esh and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula have
expanded their operations and found the perfect haven
for their activities in the absence of any State presence.
We regret the long stagnation in the peace process,
which has not consolidated any positive results.
Nevertheless, we support the resumption of the peace

S/PV.7871

process, which for too many months has not yielded
any concrete results and is currently constrained due
to a very fragile road map. Uruguay once again calls
upon the parties to resume dialogue and to fully comply
with their commitment to the ceasefire, in order to
bring about an environment that is favourable to the
restoration of peace. Stability in Yemen also requires
a show of commitment from regional stakeholders and
their supporters, in particular from countries that have
sway over the parties, in order to vigorously seek a
peaceful resolution to the conflict.
Uruguay emphatically condemns the continuing
attacks on civilian targets in Yemen. Daily air strikes
and mortar and missile attacks indiscriminately destroy
hospitals, schools, markets, residential buildings and
other infrastructure. Cluster munitions, bunker-busting
bombs, anti-personnel mines and snipers also create
rifts among the civilian population. All stakeholders in
Yemen continue to show total contempt for the rules of
international humanitarian law, thereby giving rise to
great suffering and catastrophic consequences among
the civilian population trapped in combat zones.
Yemen, like Syria, is reaching levels of
dehumanization like we have seldom seen before.
Uruguay condemns all attacks on civilians, be they
in Yemen, Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, regardless of who
carries them out. We cannot have double standards
on this matter. Those responsible for these abhorrent
atrocities and their accomplices should be held
accountable for their crimes.
We are also worried about the devastating food
security crisis that affects more than 14 million
Yemenis, over half the population of Yemen. The
images we have seen this month of January of Yemeni
children literally dying from hunger should suffice
to elicit a reaction from us and to urgently call for
immediate and unfettered access to humanitarian aid,
which regrettably continues to be blocked by both
parties to the conflict.
It is time to revitalize the ceasefire and to find a way
to return to the negotiating table. We all know that these
conflicts have no military solution. The only resolution
can be broad and inclusive political agreements reached
in direct negotiations among the parties. That should
continue to be the main objective of the Security
Council and the entire international community. The
millions of Yemenis affected by the crisis have the

17-020877/10

S/PV.7871

The situation in the Middle East

right — and we the obligation — to tirelessly continue
to seek out the best options for achieving peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my sincere gratitude to you,
Mr. Olof Skoog, as Ambassador of Sweden and President
of the Security Council, for giving us this opportunity
to address the Council. This is an opportune occasion
for us to express our sincere congratulations to your
delegation and the brotherly delegations of Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, Italy and Bolivia at the start of the journey
in the Security Council to promote international peace
and security.
It would be remiss of me not to express my sincere
congratulations and good wishes to the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres. We
believe that his competency will enrich the work of
the United Nations. The Yemeni Government and its
delegation in New York are ready to work hand in hand
with the Secretary-General to find a solution to the
Yemeni crisis that would end the coup d’état against the
authority and legitimate institutions in Yemen, as well
as the aggressive interference by Iran in the affairs of
Yemen and of the wider region.
Today marks two years since the start of the unjust
war launched by Houthi militias that formed an alliance
with the former President against our people and their
Republic. It is clear that that plan is falling apart
because of the determination of our people and their
noble uprising throughout Yemen to eradicate political
factions intent on wiping out Yemen’s democratic
federal State project — the vision of His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, backed by
the Yemeni people and its social and political powers.
Since the start of the Houthi coup against our
State and its legitimate institutions, in September
2014, we in the Yemeni Government have remained
resolutely determined to fully reject bullying and
the use of weapons and force. Instead, we must rely
on dialogue and accept the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference, which our people also accepted.
In the light of the ongoing war of annihilation, which
was launched by Iran for the sake of its expansionist
policies, we reaffirm our position that a solution
must be based on the terms of reference governing a
peaceful political transition in Yemen — terms agreed
upon and supported by Yemen, the United Nations, the
8/10

26/01/2017

region and the international community — as well as a
commitment to the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
When it was affirmed that it was difficult to
implement that resolution, we underscored that, in sum,
as perceived by our people and other friendly countries
that yearn for stability in Yemen and full adherence
to international law, that resolution means an end
to the coup d’état and a restoration of constitutional
legitimacy. Coup leaders must abide by those terms and
accept the presidency of President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour — the sponsor of the peaceful political
transition in Yemen. Therefore, any other initiative or
idea that is not in line with those parameters will be
unacceptable and irrational because it will not lead to
peace; it will result only in superficial solutions and the
crisis in Yemen will continue.
The Government of Yemen reiterates its
commitment to peace — a trajectory that was started
in Geneva, Biel and Kuwait. We will always be
committed to sustainable peace based on those three
terms of reference. That is why we refused the Kerry
ceasefire plan and called upon the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen to provide a new plan that
is informed by the outcome of the Kuwait meetings and
try to build upon it. For we will not agree to setting an
international precedent by legitimizing the coup d’état
or sustaining it in any way, shape or form.
During a meeting between the President and
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the interim
capital, Aden, on 16 January, the President stressed
that the Government was willing to start work on the
De-Escalation and Coordination Committee, which can
hold meetings in Dhahran Al-Janoub, Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, in line with the Kuwaiti agreement, by which
coup leaders refuse to abide. We, on the other hand,
are committed to the agreement because we believe that
no cessation of hostilities can remain in effect without
activating all local committees.
Accordingly, last December, the Government
accepted the proposal put forward by the Special Envoy
to convene a special workshop on the De-Escalation and
Coordination Committee, which was scheduled to be
held in the Jordanian capital. However, to date the coup
leaders have refused to participate in the workshop.
Mr. Ahmed stressed that the priority for reaching
17-02087

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

peace now is to start the work of the De-Escalation
and Coordination Committee. The President has
expressed his willingness to announce a cessation of
hostilities — for the eighth time — if conditions are
conducive to supervising such.
Copious information has been provided on the
humanitarian suffering in regions under the control of
the coup leaders. Unfortunately, there is no talk about
the carnage in Taiz. We would like to point out that
a policy of collective punishment has been carried out
against our people over the past two years in every area
under the control of the coup leaders.
The coup leaders have also been plundering the
State’s resources. They have taken all of the money in
the Central Bank and have engaged in, and profited
from, unlawful trading activity. The looted billions
from the Central Bank. That compelled the Yemeni
Government to relocate the Central Bank to the interim
capital, Aden, after the State declared bankruptcy.
Over the past two months, the Government has
tried to generate the necessary liquidity to pay the
salaries of civil servants and military personnel.
Despite the escalation of punishment by the coup
leaders, who threatened any party that cooperated with
the Government in facilitating the payment of salaries,
yesterday we were successful in transferring all Sana’a
salaries to the Al-Kuraimi Islamic Microfinance Bank.
We have provided the Office of the Special Envoy copies
of all the pertinent reports, agreements and checks.
On 22 January, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs sent a letter to the Special
Envoy requesting his urgent personal intervention to
put pressure on the Houthis and Mr. Saleh to ensure that
salaries reached those in need without any obstacles
or interference. It is a humanitarian matter and not a
political issue. We, in turn, call upon the Security
Council to bring pressure to bear on coup leaders in
order to facilitate the transfer of salaries to persons in
areas under their control so that we do not add to the
complexity of the humanitarian situation.
I would like to express my Government’s concern
about ongoing Houthi militia exploitation of the
port at Hudeydah, which they control, as well as
other facilities for the provision of fuel, health-care
supplies, medication and food. Unfortunately, they are
manipulating access to such commodities for blackmail
and to subvert trade in order to make enormous ill-

S/PV.7871

gained profits at the expense of the dire humanitarian
situation faced by the people of Yemen.
The upheaval created by those responsible for
the coup d’état has reached unprecedented levels, in
total disregard for human dignity. They are recruiting
women and children. Official reports indicate that
the militias have recruited 10,000 children and thrust
them into the line of fire. That is to be expected from
people who have indiscriminately planted in our
territory thousands of anti-personnel mineswhich are
internationally prohibited. Our people will pay a steep
price for such actions after the end of this criminal war.
The continued punishment of Taiz and the
closure of its airport by those responsible for the coup
should also be a cause of concern to the international
community. Thousands of our brave Yemeni people,
including journalists, students, activists, academics
and politicians, continue to suffer under the yoke of
imprisonment and detention by the militias, which
have turned Yemen into a huge jail.
By the end of 2016, the number of detainees had
reached 4,414, with 204 of them children. I have
personally sent letters to the former and current
Secretaries-General, the President of the Security
Council, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, the members of the Panel of Experts on Yemen
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), and
the Office of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, appealing to their moral conscience to
intervene and pressure the militias to end the suffering of
those detained and set them free without preconditions
or delay. We must allow their relatives to contact them
and learn of their fate. To date, unfortunately, that has
not been achieved. I told the Special Envoy that we,
as the legitimate authorities in the liberated areas, hold
no detainees at all. If there are any, we stand ready to
discuss their release. Why should we punish people by
depriving them of their freedom simply because they
refused to accept the coup d’état?
As we all know, the Council will meet tomorrow
to discuss the final report (see S/2016/73) submitted
by the Panel of Experts on Yemen. I met with the
members of the Panel yesterday, and they stressed that
their investigations proved that the Houthis and Saleh
had no interest in peaceful solutions; they rely on
violence as an instrument to achieve their ends. Former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh still controls the billions
of dollars that he stole and uses them to destabilize the

17-020879/10

S/PV.7871

The situation in the Middle East

country and finance the terrorist cells in Yemen. The
Government has invited the Panel of Experts to all the
areas that it controls. We will work for the success of
the sanctions committee’s efforts. I would like to thank
Ambassador Koro Bessho, Permanent Representative
of Japan, for his wise leadership of the Panel.
Before concluding, I would like to underscore the
victories that the Yemeni people and armed forces have
achieved, as well as their courageous resistance in
defeating the militias on all fronts, with the support of
the alliance, to restore legitimacy in Yemen, under the
leadership of Saudi Arabia and with the assistance of
the United Arab Emirates. The latest such victory was
the liberation of the port of Mokha and all areas south
of the Red Sea. We have accordingly stood steadfast
against all threats posed to international navigation.
As everyone knows, those responsible for the coup
have, at the instigation of Iran and by using Iranianmade missiles, targeted the United Arab Emirates ship
Swift and a Spanish vessel transporting liquid natural
gas, as well as United States naval ships. Our armed
forces achieved further victories in Nihm, near Sana’a.
We have been forced to close the Sana’a International
Airport to protect civilians and passengers. Given the
current military clashes, the Government can in no
measure ensure aerial navigation safety. People can,
however, reach all parts of Yemen and use the airports
in Aden, Seiyun and Riyan, where normal operations
have been saliently illustrated by the resumption of
departing and arriving commercial flights.

10/10

26/01/2017

In conclusion, I cannot but stress that the
Government firmly believes in the serious work, in
cooperation with Mr. António Guterres, to revive the
effective partnership required to restore Yemen. We
invite the Secretary-General to visit the interim capital
so that he can see the developments on the ground for
himself. We call on all United Nations agencies to return
to the interim capital of Aden now that we can provide
the necessary facilities, including on the security level.
We would also like to renew our full support to
the efforts made by Mr. Ahmed, the Security Council
and the Ambassadors of the group of 18 to bring
about peace and stability in Yemen. Furthermore,
we reiterate our thanks and deep appreciation to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
the Arab Republic of Egypt and all the Arab coalition
countries that are working diligently towards restoring
legitimacy in Yemen. We call upon all members of
the Security Council to continue their unified efforts
aimed at confronting and settling the crisis that began
in 2011. Thanks to this unified stand, much has been
achieved in Yemen. We call upon the Council to
take a firm position against those responsible for the
coup and pressure them to comply with the relevant
international resolutions.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

17-02087
