S/PV.7779

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7779th meeting

Wednesday, 28 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Health care in armed conflict
Letter dated 18 August 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/722)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-30066 (E)
*1630066*

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Hospitals, clinics, ambulances and medical staff in
Aleppo are under attack around the clock.

Adoption of the agenda

According to Physicians for Human Rights, 95 per
cent of medical personnel who were in Aleppo before
the war have fled, been detained or killed. This is a
war against Syria’s health workers. One medical
professional spoke of how he endured the difficulty and
the dangers. “This is Aleppo”, he said. “We do not have
time to be scared. We are being crushed like bugs daily,
and the world has abandoned us.”

The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Health care in armed conflict
Letter dated 18 August 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/722)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Médecins
Sans Frontières, and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Maurer is joining us via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/722, which contains a letter dated
18 August 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank New Zealand for
convening today’s debate, and I welcome Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Joanne Liu, International
President of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF). ICRC
and MSF play a critical role in providing health care in
the most difficult and dangerous circumstances. I pay
tribute to their staff and all medical personnel under
fire for their dedication and professionalism.
This morning, we awoke to reports of strikes on two
more hospitals in Aleppo. Let us be clear — those using
ever-more destructive weapons know exactly what
they are doing. They know they are committing war
crimes. We can only imagine the destruction — people
with limbs blown off; children in terrible pain with no
relief, infected, suffering and dying, with nowhere to
go and no end in sight. Let us imagine a slaughterhouse.
This is worse. Even a slaughterhouse is more humane.
2/20

28/09/2016

The global public does not distinguish between
Member States, the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral. They know only one thing — the world has
let them down. We have let them down. There must
be action. There must be accountability. International
law is clear — medical workers, facilities and
transports must be protected. The wounded and sick,
civilians and fighters alike, must be spared. Deliberate
attacks on hospitals are war crimes. Denying people
access to essential health care violates international
humanitarian law.
On 3 May, the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) on the protection of medical care in armed
conflict around the world. Since May, there has been
no let-up. In Hajjah, Yemen, 19 people were killed last
month in an attack on a hospital run by Médecins Sans
Frontières. This forced the organization to evacuate
its staff from six hospitals in the area, with untold
consequences for sick and injured women, children and
men. In Pakistan, more than 70 people were killed in
a suicide attack on Sandeman Provincial hospital on
8 August. And in Syria, the carnage continues and no
one is spared.
The World Humanitarian Summit and the Agenda
for Humanity reaffirmed that safeguarding humanity
in armed conflict must be a priority. The Council
has a unique responsibility and influence in that
area. Resolution 2286 (2016) urges parties to armed
conflict and Member States to take concrete action.
The recommendations I have submitted to the Council
provide detailed steps to improve the protection of
medical staff and facilities, as well as the wounded
and sick.
First is prevention. Member States should do
all they can to promote respect for medical care
in armed conflict; align national legislation with
international humanitarian law; establish dialogue
among medical personnel, civil society organizations
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and the authorities; train all those involved in the laws
and standards that apply; and ensure that decisions on
foreign policy, including those involving weapons sales
and transfers, respect the provision of medical care
in conflict.
Second is protection. Member States and parties
to conflict must take precautions to safeguard
medical facilities and personnel when they plan and
conduct military operations. My recommendations
cover military orders, the location of targets, visible
military presence in and around medical facilities, the
issuing of advance warnings and evacuations, among
other aspects.
Third is accountability. Member States and parties
to conflict should ensure that those responsible for
violations are prosecuted and punished. They should
also provide reparations and support to people and
communities affected by such attacks. That will mean
conducting systematic and impartial investigations into
specific incidents and collecting and analysing better
and more extensive data.
Attacks and access restrictions on medical care are
signs of a broader erosion of respect for international
humanitarian law. Failure to act is an affront to our
shared humanity. It undermines States’ legal obligations
and the multilateral system as a whole. Building on
pledges made at the World Humanitarian Summit, we
need a global effort to enhance respect for the laws that
safeguard humanity.
The Council has a key role to play. I call on
members to take decisive steps so that protecting health
care facilities and personnel during conflict moves
from aspiration to reality. More than this, I urge them to
overcome their divisions and meet their responsibilities
in Syria and around the world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Liu.
Ms. Liu: Last week, the world witnessed a savage
attack on a United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent humanitarian convoy and on a hospital near
Aleppo. Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon said: “Just
when we think it cannot get any worse, the bar of
depravity sinks lower”. Indeed, it does.
The conduct of war today knows no limits. It
is a race to the bottom. The unrelenting assault on

S/PV.7779

Aleppo by Russian and Syrian forces over recent
days — with no evacuations possible and bodies lying
unburied — testifies to that. On 3 May, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016). Council
members pledged to protect civilians and the medical
services they need to survive. The adopted the resolution
in the wake of the obliteration of Al-Quds Hospital in
Aleppo by the Syrian Government and its allies. It was
just the latest in a staggering number of such attacks.
Five months later, the resolution has plainly failed
to change anything on the ground. This failure reflects
a lack of political will among Member States fighting
in coalitions and those who enable them. There can be
no more waiting. Council member should make their
pledges operational.
Since the resolution was adopted, Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF) alone has experienced more horrific
attacks. In early August, our hospital in Abs, Yemen, was
destroyed in a Saudi-led coalition airstrike. Nineteen
people,including patients and health workers, were
killed. The GPS coordinates of that fully functioning
hospital had been shared with belligerents, including
the Saudi military. It did not matter. It was the fourth
such attack against MSF facilities in Yemen in less than
one year — killing 32 people and injuring 51 in total.
Our team had to withdraw from the north of Yemen,
leaving scores behind with reduced medical care,
which Saudi carpet-bombing then further reduced. The
Saudi-led coalition and its opponents are so negligent,
and their rules of engagement so loose, that this war
truly stands apart. Many attacks are brushed off as
mistakes committed in the fog of war. Let me be clear
—we reject the word “mistake”.
In Syria, the attacks never stop. Doctors in Aleppo
pull their weakest patients off ventilators so that
someone else can get a chance. But ventilators are made
for the weakest cases. This is desperate, desperate
medicine. Just this morning, two more hospitals in
eastern Aleppo were struck, leading to their temporary
shutdown. In one, the intensive care unit was severely
damaged. Besieged, our Syrian colleagues are there for
the duration. When it is their turn, they will die there,
they tell us, with their patients. We deplore the lack of
control over hostilities. This free-for-all is a choice.
There is a method in the madness. In both Yemen
and Syria, four of the five permanent members of the
Council are implicated in these attacks.

16-300663/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In an age when counter-terrorism shapes war,
a license to kill has been issued. We call on Council
members again to revoke that license, whether or not
their enemies are receiving the medical care that is
attacked, because throwing medical impartiality to
the wind is also becoming a new norm of warfare.
Military action and humanitarian needs must be
balanced. Attacking hospitals and medical workers is a
non-negotiable red line. As such, it must be set out — in
clear and simple terms — in all military manuals, rules
of engagement and standard operating procedures.
Too often, unverified intelligence, or opaque claims
that a hospital is a command-and-control centre
is justification enough for an attack. To stop that,
there must be accountability. There must be credible
investigations — and not just by the perpetrators.
I deliver this message almost one year to the day
that United States forces destroyed the Médecins sans
Frontières hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan. We are
still waiting for an independent investigation into how
42 patients, hospital staff and caregivers were killed
while simply receiving and providing medical care.
We appeal to the Council to immediately
endorse and implement the Secretary-General’s
recommendations — in particular the call for
independent and effective investigations. We also
urgently request that the Secretary-General appoint a
special representative mandated to document and report
attacks on medical facilities, health personnel, and
patients. Impunity must end. Only political pressure
and accountability will bring that about. In short, the
Council must make its resolution operational. Stop
bombing hospitals. Stop bombing health workers. Stop
bombing patients.
The President: I thank Ms. Liu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: We met in New York exactly 149 days
ago for the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which
many of us appreciated for its clarity in language,
commitment to international humanitarian law and
design of concrete follow-up. In the five months that
have passed since then, however, attacks on health
care personnel facilities and vehicles have certainly
not ceased. The situation in many countries remains
deeply alarming.
In Syria, for instance, on all sides of the front lines,
health facilities and personnel regularly come under
4/20

28/09/2016

fire or are forced to close due to heavy clashes. Just
a few hours ago, the two largest hospitals in Aleppo
were reportedly attacked. Patients were killed and
medical staff were injured. All across the country,
many hospitals are no longer functional, leaving
injured people with little hope of getting life-saving
medical assistance. The violence, the disruption of the
electricity and water supplies, and the lack of medicines
have severely jeopardized access to health care.
In Yemen, one-quarter of all health services have
reportedly either been destroyed or shut down at a time
when there are more injured people than ever. Just over
a month ago, a Médecins Sans Frontières supported
hospital in Hajjah governorate, Yemen, was hit and 90
people were killed — and that is just a tip of the iceberg.
The list continues — Afghanistan, South Sudan,
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Libya and so on. Unfortunately, the
trend described previously continues unabatedly. The
behaviour of actors on the battlefield has not changed
over the past couple of months, nor have belligerents
been seen to factor humanitarian consequences more
prominently into their military decision-making. Health
systems continue to disintegrate under the cumulative
impact of violence, leaving millions of people in highly
fragile conditions.
Although we have not seen progress on the
battlefield, at least here at the United Nations the
community of States has resolved to work on this issue.
First, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) is pleased to see the leadership of the Council
reaffirming the continued validity of international
humanitarian law as the universally agreed framework
for the protection of the wounded and sick and the
delivery of medical care in armed conflict. We must
remain confident and demonstrate through our
actions that, even in the most trying circumstances,
international humanitarian law remains relevant and
can make a difference for people bearing the brunt
of war.
Secondly, specific recommendations and measures
for the protection of health care in conflict are now
integrated in official resolutions. At the International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the
resolution to protect health care in armed conflict
was unanimously adopted. The Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016). Eightyfive countries supported it and we now have a solid
foundation from which to promote such measures.
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

But it is clear that more concrete action is necessary.
The ICRC notes with appreciation the letter of the
Secretary-General addressed to the States Members
of the United Nations (S/2016/722, annex), as a followup to resolution 2286 (2016) and delineating a clear
road map for implementation. We appreciate having
been consulted on the content of the letter and for the
opportunity to provide input.
From our perspective, being close to the victims
when negotiating humanitarian access with weaponsbearers on all sides and from the information collected
through the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement’s
Health care in Danger initiative, we believe that there
are four areas where concrete measures must be taken.
First, on legislation, States must strengthen
domestic legislation protecting access to health care as
is their obligation under international law. They must
ensure that national laws recognize the role of first
responders, often staff and volunteers from national
Red Cross and Red Crescent societies. States must
do everything in their power to enforce existing legal
sanctions so that they act as a deterrent.
Secondly, on data collection, we encourage
States and other relevant actors to set up national and
international systems to collect and analyse data on the
occurrence of violence against health care personnel,
facilities, medical transports and patients and convene
multi-stakeholder meetings to regularly share challenges
and good practices on preventing and addressing acts of
violence against the delivery of health care.
Thirdly, on accountability, I ask the Council to
ensure that acts of violence against the delivery of
health care that amounts to grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions are penalized as such in domestic
legal orders. We would like to see the strengthening
of capacities to enable full, prompt, impartial,
independent and effective investigations, ensuring
enhanced accountability and addressing the grievances
of victims.
Lastly, on preparedness and prevention, we ask
States and other relevant actors to adopt contingency
plans. Such plans would be adopted in anticipation of
situations that could jeopardize the organization and
provision of assistance to the sick and the wounded
and to develop practical measures for armed forces to
minimize disruptions to health-care services during
the planning and conduct of military operations and
incorporate them into orders, rules of engagement,

S/PV.7779

training and standard operating procedures and other
relevant documents.
I would like to renew ICRC’s offer today to build
a more constructive relationship of deep operational
engagement, feedback, dialogue and corrective
measures with all parties to conflicts on the conduct
of hostilities. That may eventually help to re-establish
trust among belligerents that the law is not only
applicable because of the sanctions and accountability
processes attached to it, but as a useful and necessary
tool in the interest of all. In that regard, let me make the
following comment.
I do understand and respect the role of the Council
to offer political positions and guidelines with regard
to international peace and security. In dealing with
the issue of international humanitarian law and its
implementation, the Council must still factor into
its reflections the importance of trust, confidence
and consensus among belligerents that can best be
promoted through mutual, impartial and independent
intermediaries able to maintain the confidence of
the parties to the conflict, as stated in the Geneva
Conventions. It is important, therefore, that, while
united around the table today, we also understand and
respect our roles and responsibilities as political and
humanitarian actors.
One hundred and forty-nine days ago, the Council
took historic measures and your presence here today,
Sir, attests to your commitment to the protection of
patients and health-care workers everywhere. But
meanwhile, men and women, girls and boys, doctors
and nurses, continue to run to the basements when they
hear planes and rockets approaching. They continue to
pull their loved ones out from the rubble of destroyed
hospitals. They continue to fear armed men stopping
their ambulances. Much stronger engagement is needed
to turn our commitment into a reality on the ground, to
make a real difference for people suffering in wars. I
urge the Council to continue to push.
The President: I thank Mr. Maurer for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/722, annex) and for his dedication. I thank
Ms. Liu and Mr. Maurer for their respective briefings.

16-300665/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I have listened with the utmost attention to Ms. Liu
and have taken on board her proposal that the SecretaryGeneral assign a Special Representative to deal with
these issues. I have also listened attentively to my
good friend Mr. Maurer regarding his four proposals
on legislation, data collection, accountability and the
adoption of contingency plans. Above all, I thank
them for the outstanding work they are doing for the
enormous number of people around the world who are
working to save the lives of others, often sacrificing
their own lives in the process.
Spain was one of the sponsors of resolution 2286 (2016).
When did the idea crop up? The idea arose at a meeting
on the humanitarian crisis in Syria at the beginning of
the year between Spain, New Zealand and Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF). That is why today I wished to
exercise some self-criticism on the basis of the report
of the Secretary-General in order to analyse the role
that Security Council members should play and the
response that the Council should give as a collective
body with regard to attacks on doctors and hospitals.
I would like to begin by expressing our full support
for the recommendations of the Secretary-General,
which show us the path we should follow to comply with
resolution 2286 (2016). Some of those recommendations
could have immediate effect on the ground, of which
I shall cite two examples. The first is reforming the
rules of engagement to prohibit a military presence and
the stockpiling of military materiel in the vicinity of
hospitals and other medical facilities. The second is
the use of new technologies to prevent attacks and, if
necessary, to document incidents. We would call upon
all Member States to put those measures into practice
as a matter of urgency.
Furthermore, I would like to address the role of
members of the Council. It is obvious that we have the
responsibility to be realistic; we have to accept that
attacks on health-care workers during armed conflicts
cannot be curbed by a simple resolution. Nevertheless,
resolution 2286 (2016) can serve as a basis for a change
of culture within the Security Council. Accordingly,
members of the Council, particularly those that
sponsored the initiative, are especially responsible in
this area.
We must bear in mind the need to protect doctors
and hospitals in all decisions made by the Council, from
the mandates for peacekeeping operations — which
6/20

28/09/2016

we are constantly revising — to the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the dialogues that we have with the Special Envoys of
the Secretary-General.
This change of culture also implies maintaining
more regular contact with specialized organizations
in order to benefit from the exchange of information
and to find solutions. As far as Spain is concerned, we
are following up on all our activities with the aim of
producing a best practices guide for future members of
the Security Council. This will be the legacy we leave
in this area.
Our first impression during the five months since
resolution 2286 (2016) was adopted is that much still
remains to be done. We are also part of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 2286 (2016), which is already
under way in Geneva, and Spain would like to convene
a meeting of this Group at least once a year here in
New York.
I shall now briefly address the response that should
be given by the Security Council regarding the attacks
on doctors and hospitals. This is the most important part
of what I have to say, and the great unresolved issue of
resolution 2286 (2016): we must recognize that we are
failing. We are failing the doctors in Aleppo, as we have
done this week. We are failing the MSF clinics that had
to close down in Yemen last summer, something we
have not forgotten. We are failing the patients of the
hospitals that have been bombed in South Sudan. We
owe them all an answer.
Once again, the Council has the necessary tools at
its disposal. What is lacking in the Council is simple,
namley, the political will to take action. The report of
the Secretary-General refers to various measures — for
example, the use of sanctions and referring certain
cases to the International Criminal Court. I would like
to state clearly that Spain supports those measures,
but we also have other, simpler options within our
reach. For example, the Council could, if it had the
political will, agree to demand a swift, independent,
impartial and effective investigation in response to the
most serious attacks, as established in resolution 2286
(2016). I am referring to the attack of 19 September and
to the attacks that apparently took place this morning
in Aleppo. Spain is prepared to contribute human and
material resources so that such investigations can be
carried out. However, we need the consensus of all 15
members of the Council. This is where we would ask
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for special efforts from those that are directly involved
in armed conflicts.
Our commitment to resolution 2286 (2016) is
devalued every time we fail to act. As Ms. Liu urged
the Council on 3 May (see S/PV.7685), let us use this
resolution as a tool to save lives, rather than continuing
to devalue the work of the Security Council.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing and for the relevant recommendations
appended to his letter dated 18 August 2016 (S/2016/722,
annex). We would also like to thank Ms. Joanne Liu,
International President of Médecins Sans Frontières,
and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their excellent
briefings and the tireless efforts ceaselessly made by
their respective organizations on the ground in order to
prevent and mitigate attacks committed against medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict zones.
The information we have just received
demonstrates — if it was still necessary to do
so — the need for the Security Council to undertake
the protection of medical personnel, facilities
and transport. It is clear that this protection must be
respected in times of war. This is why we commend
the timeliness of the recommendations on measures to
be taken to strengthen the protection of the injured, the
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian players, as
well as their means of transport, as contained in the
aforementioned letter of the Secretary-General. We
also endorse the concrete recommendations aimed
at preventing acts of violence, attacks and threats
against health care in times of armed conflict. In that
regard, my delegation backs the idea of that opening
investigations into allegations of violations and a
commitment to prosecuting the perpetrators of these
crimes are essential to strengthening the protection of
health care in times of armed conflict.
Furthermore, we believe that the role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations needs to be
strengthened. This presupposes the need, during the
drafting of mandates or the establishment of missions,
for capacity-building measures and support for
security sector reform and sanctions procedures, and
especially to ensure that the resources of peacekeeping
operations are commensurate with their mandate.
This also presupposes the importance of ensuring
that individuals suspected of having committed grave

S/PV.7779

violations of international law relating to the protection
of medical care during armed conflicts be brought
to justice. It further requires the restoration of basic
services, including the reconstruction of medical
hospitals or other medical facilities destroyed or
damaged during attacks.
In addition to these recommendations of the
Secretary-General, we believe that it would be just as
relevant to take the following additional measures to
counter the attacks and obstructions to access to health
care in conflict zones.
First, we must identify all obstacles that prevent
access to health care and medical facilities, and to
ensure that these obstacles are lifted so as to enable
appropriate deployment on the ground.
Secondly, local health-care organizations must
be supported so as to ensure that they can provide
minimum services thanks to ad hoc solutions that could
be identified based on conditions on the ground.
Thirdly, military personnel must receive highquality training in order to reduce to a minimum
disruptions to health-care services, while safeguarding
the legitimate security considerations.
Finally, the Security Council must hold debriefing
meetings on attacks carried out frequently in
specific areas.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Senegal’s dedication to
the protection of medical personnel and health facilities
during armed conflict, an issue that remains at the heart
of the Global Health and Foreign Policy initiative of the
Oslo Group on Global Health Policy, which our country
led in 2015, with the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 63/33 on strengthening the management of
international health crises.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Today
brought us the terrible news of the death of Shimon
Peres, to whom we pay deep and sincere tribute. A
couple of hours later, we learned of renewed bombings
of hospital installations in Aleppo. It would seem
that this is a without end tragedy. The five pages of
resolution 2286 (2016) apparently have not been worded
strongly enough to protect these hospital installations
and medical personnel against these horrendous — and
as the Secretary-General has called them — cowardly
attacks on hospitals and medical personnel working
in them.

16-300667/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We thank the Secretary-General for the
recommendations that he has prepared, which my
country fully supports. We are also very grateful to
the International Committee of the Red Cross, through
our friend Mr. Peter Maurer — we have taken very
good note of his comments — and to the International
President of Médecins Sans Frontières, Ms. Liu. We
fully support the proposal to establish a post of special
representative of the Secretary-General to investigate
attacks on hospitals and hospital staff.
My briefing was going to be somewhat longer,
but my colleague Román Oyarzun Marchesi basically
read out my speech with his comments. I endorse
each and every one of his words. Therefore, the only
thing that I will stress in particular is the need and
the commitment to investigating and punishing these
horrendous acts. All preventive measures are necessary
and indispensable, but we must also recall that war
crimes must be prosecuted to the fullest extent of
the law and that we must therefore take all measures
necessary to ensure that justice is served and the guilty
are duly punished.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), Mr. Peter Maurer, and the International
President of Médecins Sans frontières (MSF) ,
Ms. Joanne Liu, for their very inspiring, concrete and
operational briefings, which reflect a unanimous desire
to put an end to attacks against medical facilities and
health-care personnel.
Allow me here, on behalf of France, to again pay
tribute to the selflessness, courage and exemplary action
of MSF and ICRC personnel and of all humanitarian
workers working in increasingly difficult conditions,
who have now themselves become targets as a result of
their dedication to victims. Their work and commitment
are a source of inspiration and admiration.
Whether it be in Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Iraq,
Afghanistan or anywhere else, attacks on health workers
have increased over the past few years. The Council
had to act, and therefore took up this issue and adopted
by consensus resolution 2286 (2016), whose goal is to
rapidly strengthen the protection of medical workers
and health facilities in conflict zones. I commend in
particular the mobilization of the penholders regarding
that very important question.
8/20

28/09/2016

Since the adoption of the resolution, attacks on
health workers have continued. The Secretary-General
has told the Council that in Syria, eleven hospitals were
bombed in August — three in Aleppo, four in Idlib,
two in Homs, one in Damascus and another in Darayya.
These facilities are now closed. Since mid-July, the
eight hospitals that remain open in eastern Aleppo
have all been damaged at least once by bombing and
shelling — four repeatedly so. Just today, the two largest
hospitals in eastern Aleppo were hit by intentional air
strikes that temporarily put them out of service. If
those are not war crimes, then I honestly do not know
what war crimes could possibly be. The SecretaryGeneral — whom I thank on behalf of France — was
especially clear on this issue.
In Yemen, the Abs hospital was bombed on
15 August, claiming 19 lives and injuring 24 people
and forcing MSF to evacuate its personnel. I could cite
numerous other examples.
The Council must follow up on its decisions and
has accordingly asked the Secretary-General to submit
to it concrete recommendations for the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). France welcomes the letter
(S/2016/722, annex) of the Secretary-General and
supports its main recommendations. Similarly, we will
give our full consideration to the proposals made by
Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Joanne Liu.
The increasing attacks against medical facilities
and health workers remind us that the principles of
humanity enshrined by international humanitarian
law need to be applied, strengthened and supported
everywhere and in all circumstances. It is a daily
struggle. In that regard, France takes this opportunity
to call on countries that have not yet done so to ratify
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions.
In addition to the attacks, preventing access to
health care is increasingly used by the parties to the
conflict as a tool of war. In Syria, the obstruction of the
delivery of medical supplies by the authorities continues
despite the commitments they have undertaken, and
more than 8,000 kits were removed from convoys
in August. Access to humanitarian assistance, in
particular to medical supplies, must be the norm and
not the exception.
Lastly, the protection of medical personnel cannot
be effective without fighting impunity. The attacks
against hospitals, medical facilities and medical
personnel are war crimes. Those responsible must be
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

brought to justice. Faced with the increasing number
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, impartial and independent investigations
to determine the facts are indispensable. That demand
to determine the truth will enable Security Council
members to come together in carrying out effective
and resolute actions. As members knows, France will
remain particularly vigilant and fully mobilized in this
literally vital role.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and Ms. Liu for
their very moving briefings. The United States deeply
appreciates the life-saving work of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF), and we commend their unstinting
efforts to treat the sick and the wounded in the world’s
most brutal and dangerous places. We also pay tribute
to all of their staff members who have made the ultimate
sacrifice in their determination to help others.
As we all know, the creation of the Red Cross and
the norms enshrined in the Geneva Convention can be
traced back to June 1859, when the businessman Henry
Dunant was so disturbed by a battle between France
and Austria that he began a movement for the humane
treatment of the wounded in conflict. In his book A
Memory of Solferino, Dunant recalled a scene of the
battle that inspired him to push for change. He wrote,
“[the] guns crash over the dead and wounded,
strewn pell-mell on the ground. Brains spurt under
the wheels, limbs are broken and torn, bodies
mutilated beyond recognition — the soil is literally
puddled with blood, and the plain littered with
human remains”.
That was 1859. But let us consider the scene
today in eastern Aleppo in 2016. Early this morning,
contacts inside eastern Aleppo told us — as members
of the Security Council have already heard — that two
hospitals were reportedly hit by air strikes and shells,
killing two patients and injuring many medical staff.
There are obviously very limited options for medical
care for the trapped civilians of eastern Aleppo. One
medical worker told a journalist this week that non-stop
bombing in eastern Aleppo means that “hospitals
have no more room to receive even one more case”. A
radiologist said that they are running short of drugs and
respirators, and do not have baby milk, especially for
newborns. Another doctor, Dr. Ahmed — who was so
afraid of being targeted that he did not wish to use his

S/PV.7779

full name — told a reporter that “we are carrying out
a large number of amputations just so that patients can
survive, because otherwise we do not have the means
to treat them”. Many of the wounded, he continued, are
dying before the doctors’ eyes. They feel helpless.
In the streets of eastern Aleppo, people are
frantically digging through the rubble, as we have seen,
with their bare hands to find members of their families
and their children because there are not enough first
responders. There is not enough rescue equipment to go
around. The people of eastern Aleppo are literally dying
in their streets. They are maimed and wounded by air
strikes carried out by Russia and the Al-Assad regime,
and they are unable to receive treatment because of
the medieval siege that Russia and the Syrian regime
have imposed. The plains of Dunant’s Solferino have
become the thoroughfares of eastern Aleppo.
We must not become inured to these atrocities as
Russia and the regime carry out this new offensive. We
cannot forget that the tactics used in eastern Aleppo
are the very same ones that the Al-Assad regime
patented years ago and has deployed throughout
Syria, systematically removing medical supplies from
assistance convoys, denying medical evacuations,
bombing hospitals to pieces and killing first responders
in unconscionable double-tap attacks. Since 2011, the
highly respected group, Physicians for Human Rights
has documented 382 attacks on 269 medical facilities in
Syria. Not one week goes by without another report of a
hospital having been struck. The actions of the Al-Asaad
regime and Russia are contrary to the demands of
resolution 2286 (2016), which we unanimously adopted
only five months ago.
This campaign against health-care sites and medical
workers in Syria must end. The protection of medical
facilities and personnel, as well as humanitarian
personnel, continues to be eroded in conflicts around
the world. In South Sudan, one of the world’s most
dangerous countries for aid workers, in August alone
the United Nations recorded 64 incidents of violence
against humanitarian workers and the equipment that
they use to deliver care. Last February, an attack on
the protection of civilians site in Malakal destroyed an
international corps and medical facility, and killed two
MSF staff. Humanitarian organizations have recorded
the parties to the conflict killing patients, torching
clinics, stealing medicine and threatening medical
staff. At a minimum, Council members and countries in
the region need to use whatever channels of influence

16-300669/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

that they have available to insist that all parties to the
conflict in South Sudan stop this violence against
humanitarian and medical personnel immediately.
In Yemen, the United States shares the grave concern
that MSF has expressed with regard to the attacks that
have struck its medical facilities. The United Nations
has verified 59 attacks affecting hospitals in Yemen in
2015 by all parties. The United States has engaged the
Saudi-led coalition to emphasize the imperative of the
need to take all feasible precautions to avoid harm or,
in any even, minimize harm to civilians and civilian
objects. We have stressed that unacceptable strikes on
schools, hospitals and other civilian objects must stop,
and we call on the coalition to publicly release the
results of the investigations that it has launched into
such incidents.
We also call on the Houthis and their allies to cease
the indiscriminate launch of rockets against Saudi
Arabia and the shelling of civilian areas within Yemen,
causing numerous civilian casualties. All parties need
to comply with international humanitarian law. To
alleviate suffering, the United States urges the parties
to commit to an immediate cessation of hostilities,
enabling humanitarian needs to be addressed without
fear of attack.
Many have also criticized the United States for the
erroneous air strike on an MSF hospital in Kunduz a
year ago. We accept responsibility for the strike and
we have repeatedly expressed our deepest regret for
it. The United States Department of Defense took
full responsibility, conducted a full and transparent
investigation and made the results of that investigation
publically known. We have since taken steps to learn
from Kunduz in order to minimize the likelihood of any
future incidents.
Moreover, in July President Obama released an
executive order on United States policy on pre- and poststrike measures to address civilian casualties in United
States operations involving the use of force. The policy
is the first of its kind. The executive order commits every
component of the United States Government to work
together towards the goal of reducing civilian casualties
and to be transparent and learn from them when they
do occur. The United States also works actively with
the ICRC and non-governmental organizations to refine
how we distinguish between combatants and civilians.
The United States will continue to do all it can to reduce
10/20

28/09/2016

civilian casualties and to be transparent about how we
meet that goal.
Let me conclude by focusing on the human
consequences of attacks on and obstruction and
interference in health care in armed conflict. When
people are denied health care today, the consequences
will be felt long, long after current conflicts end. In
Nigeria, for example, vaccines are not being delivered
to areas of fighting between the Government and Boko
Haram. The result is that polio has re-emerged as a
threat to Nigerian children, with two cases discovered
last month. Polio is a disease that was cured in the
1950s. The vaccine is easy to administer and is very
inexpensive. But every single day that vaccines cannot
be delivered, more and more Nigerian children are at
risk of lifelong disability or death, so a new generation
will certainly feel the consequences of the conflict.
So much changes when the children in a conflict
zone are able to access the medical care they desperately
need. Last November, a sniper in eastern Aleppo shot
six-year-old Shaima in the face, blinding her. However,
unlike so many children who are now besieged in
eastern Aleppo, Shaima was able to get out of the city
in November. She told her father, “It is okay that the
sniper hit me — I am not sad. God meant it to be this
way and I know I will get better”. Miraculously, with the
help of doctors in Turkey, Shaima was able to survive
and one day she may even be able to see again, once
her family raises enough money for an eye operation.
Shaima went through an unspeakable horror, but access
to medical care will give her a future. As Shaima told a
reporter, “I just want to go back to school. I know I will
be there soon”.
Fellow Council members, we must all do more for
the children in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Nigeria and
in so many other conflict areas — for the children who
need that same chance.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; and Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of
Médecins Sans Frontières, for their very comprehensive
briefings. We pay tribute to the role of those two
organizations in conflict areas. We appreciate the work
of all medical personnel and practitioners and thank
them for their sacrifice, especially in the light of the
dangers they face on a daily basis.
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Early in the Egyptian presidency, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Its
elected members wanted the Security Council to rise
to that challenge and confront the problems faced
by health-care personnel in armed conflict. The
obstruction of the delivery of assistance to those in
need poses an unprecedented challenge that threatens
the very foundations of international law, international
humanitarian law and, of course, the principle of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Resolution 2286 (2016) enjoyed broad consensus,
backed by nearly 85 States. However, it did not change
a great deal in terms of the reality on the ground. It has
not at all alleviated the horrors experienced by healthcare personnel working in conflict zones throughout the
world. We take note of the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/722, annex) concerning
measures to be taken to strengthen the protection of the
wounded and sick, health-care personnel, hospitals and
other medical facilities, in keeping with paragraph 13
of resolution 2286 (2016).
At the same time, however, we affirm once more
that those recommendations must be implemented
impartially and in a depoliticized way. It is also
important to avoid any divisive initiatives that did not
enjoy consensus during the negotiations that resulted
in resolution 2286 (2016). Egypt strongly supports the
very noble values of international humanitarian law,
which aim to strengthen the protection of medical
facilities and health-care personnel, especially in light
of the current challenges facing the medical sector in
conflict areas.
Egypt therefore backs the three main axes upon which
the Secretary-General has based his recommendations
regarding the protection of the injured, the sick and
health-care personnel, as well as that of hospitals
and other medical facilities. We also support his
recommendations regarding the responsibility of those
who perpetrate attacks against the aforementioned
individuals. We believe that it is necessary to prevent
further attacks and will spare no effort to ensure that
we achieve the objectives of resolution 2286 (2016), in
order to provide greater security to the sick, the injured
and health-care personnel in areas of armed conflict.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Peter Maurer, President

S/PV.7779

of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Médecins
Sans Frontières, for their valuable briefings. We would
like to echo the urgent call to those participating in
conflicts that they stop bombing hospitals, healthcare workers and patients. We would like to express
our thanks to and recognition for the thousands of
medical health workers, many of whom are working
anonymously but who are putting their lives on the
line every day to fulfil their noble task of saving lives
and alleviating human suffering in the cruel situation
of those conflicts. The work of humanitarian workers
is an extraordinary example of humanity and hope for
peoples who are so deeply affected by the violence and
the horror. Attacking health-care workers is a barbarity
that cannot be justified under any circumstances.
Once again, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), which represents a timely political
response to the systematic and serious violations of
international humanitarian law that are taking place on
a daily basis in the ongoing armed conflicts that have
led to so much bloodshed in various parts of the world,
particularly in the Middle East and Africa. What we
now have to do is to comply honestly, straight-forwardly
and without excuses with the mandate and purposes of
the resolution.
It is difficult for us to understand how it is possible
that, at a time when high-tech satellite- or laser-guided
weapons are capable of killing at any distance with
terrifying precision, such mistakes could be made and
that concentrated bombings are targeted on medical
facilities and personnel in areas of armed conflict,
despite the fact that hospitals are public facilities, whose
locations are well known by all parties to the conflict,
and where there are early-warning protocols in place to
avoid bombing situations. We cannot understand how
such things can be happening and how people can keep
claiming that they are simply mistakes. We therefore
repudiate the attacks that have taken place against
medical and humanitarian staff and facilities and
means of transport in Palestine, Afghanistan, Yemen
and Syria.
For us, it is unacceptable that Médecins Sans
Frontières, the Red Cross and other health-care workers
and humanitarian convoys of the United Nations have
become military targets in war-torn areas. That is
something that we cannot tolerate — that hospitals are
being bombed and that doctors, the wounded and the
sick are being killed those hospitals.

16-3006611/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It seems that for very many people life does not
have any value. We are seeing conflicts that are taking
humankind back to times where there were no rules.
Such violations not only endanger the well-being and
security of millions of people, but they also worsen crises
and represent an enormous challenge for humanitarian
and health-care workers. It is increasingly difficult for
them to carry out their humanitarian work.
We believe that we must all make a special effort to
ensure that the situation is resolved and that the Security
Council plays its crucial role in that regard. We fully
endorse the Secretary-General’s recommendations
of 8 August 2016, formulated in accordance with
paragraph 13 of resolution 2286 (2016), and we
decisively support the proposal that was made today by
Ms. Liu to the Council.
We believe that it is imperative that all countries
adhere to international treaties as they pertain to the
protection of health-care workers and facilities in armed
conflicts and that national legislative frameworks
be strengthened. We also think that peacekeeping
operations and special political missions of the United
Nations should play a more active role in the creation of
an environment conducive to the protection of healthcare workers and facilities. We also believe that both
United Nations missions and the Member States that
are able to bring influence to bear on the parties have
the obligation to advocate for respect for, and the full
implementation of, international humanitarian law.
There need to be greater efforts to document and
analyse all incidents that affect the security and wellbeing of health-care workers and facilities and ensure
that impartial, independent and prompt investigations
are carried out and that those who are suspected of
perpetrating such acts are brought to justice. Reparations
must be provided to the victims of the damage caused.
Finally, my country, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, has never attacked any other country. We
have never participated in any military coalition. Nor
do we have double standards on that issue. We also do
not have double standards when it comes to bombing
humanitarian workers in particular. We do not justify
some attacks and remain silent on others. We do not
denounce some and use others for political purposes.
Nor do we sell weapons to anyone or, much worse,
spend billions of dollars on the terrifying weapons
of death. That is to say that we have all the political
moral and ethical force to call upon countries that
12/20

28/09/2016

participate in conflicts to cease the killing and violence
against humanitarian workers, and we, as a member
of the Security Council, will do everything necessary
to ensure that the horrors of war that we are seeing in
these meetings are at least brought under control. The
most important thing is for us to achieve peace and
for the extraordinary health-care workers to be able to
continue to be deployed and do their magnificent work
in favour of life and human beings.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China commends the initiative taken by New Zealand
to convene this meeting on the protection of medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict. I wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
China has listened carefully to the statements by the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the representative of
Médecins Sans Frontières, Ms. Joanne Liu.
Last May, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls upon the parties
to armed conflicts to enhance the protection of
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
This underscores the importance that the international
community attaches to the question of the protection
of medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
China pays tribute medical personnel and the relevant
humanitarian agencies for their humanitarian spirit
in healing the wounded and rescuing the dying in
extremely harsh conditions and at the risk of their own
safety. I would like to make the following points.
First, emphasis should be put on promoting
political processes to resolve regional hotspot issues.
Only by ending conflict will it be possible once and for
all to eliminate security threats to medical personnel
and medical facilities. The Security Council should
actively work to promote dialogue and negotiations
and facilitate efforts by the parties to conflict to end
them and resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations, thereby eliminating conflicts. The
international community should also adhere to a fair
and objective stance and play a constructive role in
promoting political solutions, so as to create favourable
conditions for protecting the safety and security of
medical personnel and facilities during armed conflicts.
Secondly, it is incumbent upon the Governments
concerned and the parties to the conflict to protect
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflicts. The
Governments concerned bear the primary responsibility
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for protecting civilians within their borders, and
they should therefore strengthen their measures to
protect medical personnel and facilities. The countries
concerned should investigate, in accordance with the
law, violent acts, including attacks against and threats
to medical personnel and facilities in armed conflicts.
Parties to a conflict should adhere to international
humanitarian law and abide by Council resolutions
and fulfil their duty to protect and allow access to
humanitarian assistance. The international community
should provide support and assistance on the basis of
full consultations with the countries concerned.
Thirdly, humanitarian operations must win the
understanding and trust of the parties concerned. In
armed conflicts, as medical personnel and humanitarian
agencies carry out operations in the discharge of their
medical duties, they must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries concerned; adhere to impartiality, fairness
and independence; follow guiding humanitarian
principles and avoid getting involved in conflicts. Such
practices will help to protect medical personnel and
facilities in armed conflict.
Fourthly, the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies should work in synergy to protect medical
personnel and facilities. The United Nations should
conduct an in-depth study and comprehensive
assessment of humanitarian risks and challenges
in armed conflicts. On the basis of the views of the
countries concerned, it should establish effective
mechanisms for communicating with medical
personnel and humanitarian agencies and engage in
the timely exchange of information concerning the
situation on the ground, so as to establish conditions
favourable to the protection of humanitarian efforts,
medical personnel and their facilities. On their part,
medical personnel and relevant agencies also need to
exercise their own awareness of risks and enhance their
own safety and protection.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join others in thanking
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his participation in
this important meeting, convened pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), which Malaysia strongly supports.
I also wish to join other sponsors of that resolution
and Council members in expressing special thanks and
appreciation for the participation of Mr. Peter Maurer and
Ms. Joanne Liu, representing the esteemed organizations

S/PV.7779

the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), respectively. Their
briefings provided a harrowing glimpse into the daily
struggles and increasing challenges and risks faced by
health-care providers in situations of armed conflict.
We pay our deepest respects and highest tribute to those
health-care providers who risk their lives and selflessly
devote themselves to this noble cause.
Documented evidence of attacks, deliberate or
otherwise, on the wounded and the sick, medical
personnel and health facilities across many ongoing
conflict areas underscores the grim reality that
international humanitarian law has been wilfully
ignored and, in some cases flagrantly violated on
multiple occasions by belligerent parties. Resolution
2286 (2016), as Ms. Liu noted, has failed to change
anything on the ground. Therefore, the Council now
has the obligation to evaluate and mainstream the
Secretary-General’s recommendations (see S/2016/722,
annex) on measures to prevent acts of violence against
the wounded and sick, as well as health-care personnel,
in situations of armed conflict. We see today’s meeting
as an important small step towards realizing that
commitment. That is an urgent and priority task for
the Council.
As an illustration, despite the 9 September
ceasefire agreement reached by Russia and the United
States, health-care providers and facilities in Syria
continue to be targeted. In addition, the challenges
faced by medical personnel seeking to treat victims are
enormous and compounded as the attacks and fighting
escalate. Just two days ago in Aleppo, a hospital was
struck during an air assault on the area. More than a
week ago, an Aleppo-bound 31-truck humanitarian
convoy carrying medical supplies, among other things,
was also attacked.
Unfortunately, Syria is not the sole conflict where
there is an abhorrent lack of respect for the principle
of medical neutrality. As Ms. Liu clearly mentioned,
the conflict in Yemen has also seen attacks against
fully functioning hospitals as recently as mid-August.
We regret to learn that, due to escalating hostilities
against medical facilities, the situation has become so
untenable that MSF was forced to withdraw from six
hospitals in northern Yemen.
That disturbing situation merits deeper, urgent
concentration and response through concrete actions
that go further than mere condemnation. To that end, the

16-3006613/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secretary-General’s recommendations should provide a
guiding framework. As a first step, the Council should
muster the will to implement recommendations on the
need for a full, prompt, impartial, independent and
effective investigation into attacks against health-care
systems in situations of armed conflict. As attacks
against medical personnel and facilities in many conflict
situations continue unabated, the establishment of an
international fact-finding mission or recourse to the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
in line with the Geneva Convention, to investigate
allegations of those serious violations would allow us
to pursue accountability and deliver justice.
Impunity will only compound the atrocities
committed against health care. Malaysia therefore
reaffirms its support for both resolution 2286 (2016)
and the Secretary-General’s recommendations, which
call for investigations into all allegations of violations,
as well as taking measures against the perpetrators. All
perpetrators must be held accountable.
Before I conclude, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the fallen medical personnel devoted to saving
others and to express our gratitude to the noble role
played by those who continue to do so under dangerous
and trying circumstances. As we seek to shield the very
persons protecting the civilians at large, the protection
of medical personnel and health facilities should be
high on the Council’s agenda. The Security Council
must persist in defending and protecting the safety of
medical personnel and health facilities in situations of
armed conflict — an undertaking to which Malaysia is
fully committed.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We welcome and
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and his
clear recommendations (S/2016/722, annex) for the
protection of civilians and of health-care workers and
facilities in armed conflicts and for his compelling
call on the parties to conflicts to strictly uphold and
implement them.
We also thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Médecins
Sans Frontières, for their very enlightened briefings
this morning and for bringing here to the Council the
real situations that persist in a number of parts of our
common globe, to which we must pay special attention.
Angola is deeply concerned by the prevalence of
attacks on health-care workers and medical facilities
14/20

28/09/2016

in conflict zones, with a devastating impact on people
in need of health care and humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access remains a key challenge as
the parties to conflicts deliberately obstruct the
delivery of assistance to civilians trapped in conflict
zones. Attacks against humanitarian and health-care
workers and facilities, their means of transport and
equipment; the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access;
bureaucratic restrictions; interference in the delivery
of assistance; and depriving civilians of their means
of survival are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law set down in the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, its Additional Protocols of 1977
and 2005, as well as the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol. Moreover, such acts of violence
exacerbate the conflicts and undermine the Security
Council’s efforts, as mandated by the United Nations
charter. South Sudan, Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen
are some of the instances where vital humanitarian
supplies are looted, damaged or destroyed, prolonging
the population’s suffering and the conflicts themselves.
Regrettably, and despite the robust normative
frameworks set out in several resolutions and presidential
statements issued by the Security Council, especially
the unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, we continue
to witness constant violations of these principles.
Angola condemns all attacks against humanitarian
and health-care personnel and facilities, and urges the
parties to conflicts to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. We repudiate the prevailing impunity for
violations and abuses committed against medical and
humanitarian personnel. Parties to conflicts bear the
primary responsibility for meeting the basic needs of
the civilians under their control, and we agree with
the Secretary-General’s assessment that humanitarian
organizations must be able to engage systematically
with all parties to conflicts in order to secure and
maintain humanitarian access and alleviate the human
suffering of those trapped in conflict.
Resolution 2286 (2016) conveyed a strong signal
on the rejection of such violations of international
humanitarian
law.
The
Secretary-General’s
recommendations are an extremely important tool to put
an end to that scourge. We call for their implementation
by all relevant actors. The Council cannot continue to
meet and simply listen to the appeals and descriptions of
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the prevailing situations in different parts of the world,
especially when called to briefings by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans
Frontières. We must act, and the time for action is now.
It is even late — we must act.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this meeting. I would also like to convey
my gratitude to the Secretary-General; to Ms. Liu,
International President of Médecins Sans Frontières;
and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings and, of
course, their appeal to the Security Council.
Even in times of peace and stability, medical
facilities and medical care save lives every day, but in
the context of armed conflict, access to medical care
becomes an immediate life-or-death concern for all
innocent civilians caught in the grips of war. Hospitals
represent the last, and sometimes only, hope for survival
for those that are injured. Attacks on medical facilities
threaten or even dash that hope.
We believe that attacks on medical facilities
for strategic purposes are malicious, beyond human
decency and absolutely unacceptable. In service of
that belief, Japan took the lead, along with Egypt, New
Zealand, Spain and Uruguay, in drafting and ensuring
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) in May. The
adoption of the resolution by consensus demonstrated
the firm commitment of the Security Council to
ensuring that medical facilities are fully protected and
secured, even under combat.
However, as briefed by the representatives of
Médecins Sans Frontières and the International
Committee of the Red Cross earlier, attacks against
medical facilities have continued in those conflict
areas even after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
The lives of medical workers remain under threat, and
their deaths continue. We share our grief and anger
with Médecins Sans Frontières and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We would like to express
our profound respect for the courage and devotion of all
medical staff working in the field during the conflict.
We thank those who helped draft the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations to the Council, detailing
various practical measures. Japan would like to once
again urge all parties to armed conflict to take concrete
actions in furtherance of the recommendations before
us and the briefings delivered today, in order to protect
medical care in armed conflict. I fully agree with the

S/PV.7779

Ambassador of Malaysia in believing that one of the
main factors behind the failure to prevent the recurrence
of attacks against medical facilities is the lack of
accountability. When such attacks are conducted, the
facts of the attack are difficult to ascertain, different
sides of the conflict cast blame on each other, no
thorough investigation is ever conducted and therefore,
ultimately, accountability cannot be enforced.
In that context, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
Recommendation 11 indicates that Member States
“should develop protocols and processes to ensure
full, prompt, impartial, independent and effective
investigations into allegations of serious violations
of international law relating to the protection of
medical care in armed conflict.” (S/2016/722,
annex, para. 28)
The recommendation goes on to state that
“[w]hen Member States fail to carry out such
investigations, the Security Council should consider
establishing international fact-finding missions
or commissions of inquiry, or have recourse to
the International Humanitarian Fact Finding
Commission established pursuant to Article 90 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions.”
(ibid., para. 30)
It further reads that
“Member States and parties to armed conflicts
should provide support to, and facilitate the work
of, fact-finding missions” (ibid., para. 31).
Here, Japan emphasizes the important role of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
in ensuring the objective and fair application of
international humanitarian law. Hence, Japan has
contributed and will continue to contribute to that body,
both financially and with personnel. Here, I would like
to underline that the Security Council should play an
active role in fact-finding and ensuring accountability
in that regard. Japan is determined to collaborate with
the United Nations and all the parties concerned on
that issue.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): During our meeting in
May when the momentous resolution 2286 (2016) was
adopted, Ms. Liu said that we should make the resolution
save lives (see S/PV.7685). We could not agree more.
Yet, now in September, we must admit that the goal is

16-3006615/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

still out of reach. Tragically, Syria is the worst example
of attacks against medical facilities. According to
the World Health Organization, almost every day
hospitals, clinics and ambulances are being targeted in
that country. So far in September there have been two
especially hideous attacks against medical facilities in
Syria: one on a humanitarian convoy, on 19 September,
and another one the very next day on a medical mobile
unit in an opposition-controlled area of Aleppo. This
morning we learned of yet another bombing, that of
two hospitals that provide badly needed services to the
people of eastern Aleppo. Frankly, we are speechless.
We join the call made by other delegations around this
table on the Syrian regime and its Russian ally to stop
these barbaric acts.
In Yemen, medical facilities have also become
a frequent target of airstrikes. Unfortunately, the
situation is not much different in Afghanistan, where
in the past three months alone there have been eight
attacks against health-care facilities.
It is against this appalling backdrop that we must
urgently consider how to make resolution 2286 (2016)
work. In this regard, we took note of the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to enhance the protection of
medical and humanitarian personnel.
We would like to emphasize that international
humanitarian and human rights law has sufficient
provisions providing legal protection to medical
and humanitarian personnel and related facilities.
Nevertheless, quite often these provisions are not
respected and are violated by parties to armed conflict.
In that light, we would like to underline the
following recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral.
First, there must be enhanced documentation of
acts of violence against medical personnel and facilities
in armed conflict. The collection and public recording
of data on attacks on health services is a key element
in developing an effective preventive system. Thus
we would like to echo the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to Member States that they enhance
their support for United Nations monitoring and datacollection efforts.
Secondly, we must ensure that independent and
effective investigations are carried out into serious
violations of international law against medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
16/20

28/09/2016

In this regard, we deem it necessary to hold
Security Council briefings on country situations where
medical care is under attack. Such briefings should,
in our view, include information on the investigative
steps that the relevant Member States have taken. In
addition, the recommendation to the Council on the
possible establishment of international fact-finding
missions or commissions of inquiry deserve our most
careful consideration.
Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for acts of
violence against medical care in armed conflict.
It is of the utmost importance that those responsible
for such war crimes be held accountable. We share the
view that where domestic accountability mechanisms
are insufficient, Member States should cooperate fully
with existing international criminal justice institutions,
including the International Criminal Court, to combat
impunity and to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
to the briefers for their participation in this meeting.
The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict unfortunately continues to be an urgent one.
We share the briefers’ concerns about the reports
of casualties among civilians and humanitarian and
medical personnel. We are very grateful for the selfless
work of the doctors who risk their own lives to carry
out their professional duties in conflict zones. We
are exceedingly concerned about attacks on medical
facilities and personnel and condemn them firmly.
The circumstances of such events require careful,
independent investigation. Mindful of the special
significance of medical facilities and the danger their
personnel face during conflict, our delegation supported
the adoption in May of resolution 2286 (2016). We
are carefully studying the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard in the expectation of
a detailed discussion of them and we hope to get some
clarification on the questions we have about them.
At this stage, we would like to make a few general
comments. The primary responsibility for the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and others
who are entitled to special international protection in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, lies with
every party to an armed conflict. They must make
every possible effort to avoid the death of civilians,
including medical personnel, in order to abide by
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian law. Clearly, that does not
cover situations in which medical personnel suffer at
the hands of those who are supposed to protect them. To
deal with that, Member States and United Nations and
humanitarian organizations should mobilize additional
efforts aimed at strengthening the mechanisms for
providing security to medical facilities and their
personnel in armed conflict.
Against the backdrop of today’s information
wars, in considering this issue every United Nations
body should operate using verified information that
is not open to doubt. It is important to ensure that the
Secretary-General’s reports submitted in response to
Security Council resolution 2286 (2016) include only
reliable information.
Lastly, we consider it essential to approach the
problem of ensuring the safety of medical personnel
in the context of the protection of civilians generally,
without creating any sort of hierarchy among the
various categories.
Today a lot has been said, and said very emotionally,
about the tragedy of the citizens of Syria and the
conditions in which medical workers have to operate
there. The suffering of the country’s civilian population
must be stopped. There was a real chance of achieving
that in the Russian-United States agreements of
9 September. Our approach to what is going on in Syria
at the moment, as well as to countering the terrorist
groups that are firmly established on its territory, has
been laid out in detail in the Security Council meetings
held on 22 and 25 September (see S/PV.7775 and
S/PV.7777, respectively), as well as in other formats.
We will not repeat it all again but will focus on the
following points.
It has already become a sort of tradition that the
majority of strikes on civilian targets in Syria are
indiscriminately — by default, as it were — blamed
on Damascus and Russia. That trend has continued
today. In zones of conflict, including the Middle East,
similarly unacceptable incidents have been a natural
consequence of the policies of destabilization of the
United States, with the support of its allies. Hospitals
have been reduced to rubble as a result of strikes by the
Americans or their allies.
We all recall the tragedy of the bombing of
the Médecins Sans Frontières hospital in Kunduz,
Afghanistan, in October 2015. The coalition in Yemen
has destroyed civilian infrastructure, including medical

S/PV.7779

facilities, and the United States has given direct
assistance to that through its air force. Some European
capitals have generously supplied that coalition with
arms. From time to time, the pressure of the facts
produces admissions and apologies. In the case of
the deadly attack American air attack in Kunduz in
particular, there were investigations and disciplinary
proceedings, and improvements were made in the
air force’s operational guidelines. But what does that
really mean? None of the military personnel involved
were convicted; they continued to serve. According to
the information in the media, the compensation paid
to the families of the victims was merely symbolic.
Regarding the operating improvements for the air force
that I mentioned, we have to ask how they resulted
in the alleged mistakes made in the United States-led
coalition’s bombardment of Syrian army positions in
the city of Deir ez-Zor, the strikes on the city of Manbij
on 19 July, where almost 100 civilians died, according
to reports, and the attack on 28 July on the town of
Al-Ghandoura.
Within the Syrian conflict there has been a
persistent desire to supersede the Government at any
price and to redraw the geopolitical map of the region.
At one point there was a possibility to prevent the
start of this conflict, and there has been more than
one chance to end it and reach a political settlement,
to which there can be no alternative. However, instead
of seeking a collective solution, the representatives
of the States directly responsible for fanning the
flames of the war in Syria prefer to rehearse endless
anti-Russian fabrications in the Security Council and in
other forums. What we are hearing in the media now is
nothing but speculation that exploits people’s suffering
for propaganda purposes and to divert attention from
their own failed policies.The information is often based
on unreliable data from neighbourhoods under the
control of armed groups that have a direct interest in
discrediting the activities of the Syrian Government
and Russia. The work with so-called witnesses is
frequently done in Syria’s neighbouring States and
falsified information is spread.
For our part, we urge the rejection of provocative
rhetoric and that we put all our efforts into bringing an
end to the conflict in Syria as quickly as possible. We
already have a good basis on which to work, including
through the Russian-American collaborative effort.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the clarity of his briefing

16-3006617/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and for sharing his recommendations with us today.
These ideas will help us protect and prevent attacks on
medical personnel and their places of work. The United
Kingdom welcomes this important contribution.
At the outset, I want to pay tribute to Ms. Joanne
Liu and Mr. Peter Mauer from Médecins Sans frontières
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), respectively. I want to highlight one thing
each of them said to us. Ms. Liu told us that throwing
medical impartiality to the wind is becoming a new
norm of warfare. Mr. Mauer said that we must show that
international humanitarian law remains relevant for
people bearing the brunt of war. That is a wake up call
for the Council. He and his colleagues are carrying out
vital work, so often in the most harrowing of conditions
and so often at great risk to themselves.
Sadly, five months since the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), the overwhelming dangers facing
Médecins Sans Frontières, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and others operating in conflict
zones are still painfully apparent. Despite resolution
2286 (2016) and despite the clear protections provided
under international humanitarian law, medical workers
continue to be injured and killed as they work to save
the lives of others in Syria, in Yemen in South Sudan, in
all the countries Mr. Mauer listed and in so many places
around the world.
But let us be honest here — the most starkly this is
on display is in Aleppo. This is not a propaganda point;
it is a fact. We have just heard today about air strikes
against the two largest remaining hospitals in rebelheld eastern Aleppo. That is a fact. We, the Council,
cannot hide behind the passive voice. We need to be
clear. The only air forces caring out strikes in eastern
Aleppo are the Syrian and Russian air forces. That is
also a fact.
As the Secretary-General said just now, those
using ever more destructive weapons know that they
are committing war crimes. Aleppo is now a city that
is synonymous with suffering. It is a city synonymous
with medics working by the lights of their phones with
only the most basic supplies. It is a city synonymous
with rubble, dust and unrelenting bombardment — a
sickening test bed for even crueller, even more barbaric
weapons. Syria and Russia bear full responsibility for
these atrocities.
And yet this is just the tip of the iceberg. While
400,000 people have died as a direct result of the
18/20

28/09/2016

conflict, the secondary death toll, as a result of the
destruction of the health-care system, will be much
higher. Access to vaccinations, neonatal care, maternal
health care, women’s health care — all these things
have all but disappeared. Once extinct diseases like
polio have returned and measles, typhoid, hepatitis and
tuberculosis are now reaching dangerous levels. In cities
like Madaya, we hear heartbreaking stories like that of
Ghina Ahmad Wadi, who was shot by a regime sniper
last month. For over two weeks the regime denied her
medical evacuation before she eventually received the
attention she needed. Why? Together with the forced
removal of medical supplies from convoys, such actions
amount to amount to a calculated dismantling of Syria’s
health-care system.
Our concern also extends to Yemen, 40 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Improving access to them is a top priority for the United
Kingdom. We call on all sides to improve the flow of
essential medical and humanitarian supplies to alleviate
the suffering. We also take very seriously reports of
violations of international humanitarian law in Yemen,
including attacks on medical facilities. All sides must
conduct thorough and conclusive investigations into
all incidents where it is alleged that international
humanitarian law has been breached.
Wherever in the world international humanitarian
law is breached and whomever by, we must ensure
accountability. We owe it to the people of Aleppo
and to countless more around the world. To do so,
it is clear that we need to gather the evidence and
collect the data to bring this about. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s drawing attention to this in his
recommendations. Groups like Da’esh, which conduct
sickening attacks on medical workers and facilities
are no exception. That is why our Foreign Secretary,
Boris Johnson, announced last week that the United
Kingdom, alongside Iraq, will bring a proposal to the
United Nations calling on the Organization to gather
and preserve evidence of Da’esh’s crimes in Iraq. We
did so because there can be no impunity. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that where domestic accountability mechanisms are
insufficient or inadequate, international accountability
mechanisms should be sought, including the
International Criminal Court.
I want to conclude by once again stressing the
importance of international humanitarian law. Where
there is armed conflict, civilians and those who
16-30066

28/09/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

provide medical assistance must be protected. I am
proud to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s commitment
to upholding these laws. I urge all Council members to
follow suit.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.
I want to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Ms. Liu and Mr. Maurer for their briefings, and I want
to underline the gravity of the messages they have
conveyed to the Council.
We adopted resolution 2286 (2016) in May with a
degree of optimism and a strong sense of unanimity.
Eighty-five countries sponsored the resolution, making
it one of the most widely sponsored Security Council
resolutions ever. As one of the drafters, New Zealand
hoped the strong message it sent about the need to
protect health-care workers and facilities in times
of armed conflict would be heeded where it most
matters — in the conflicts that are currently on the
agenda of the Council. The past few months have been
more than dispiriting.
As we have heard, attacks against medical workers
and facilities and against the humanitarian convoys
delivering medical supplies, have increased since the
adoption of the resolution. As others have reminded
us, these attacks are taking place in various places
around the world, but for frequency and ferocity Yemen
and especially Syria are in classes of their own. In
Yemen, indiscriminate attacks, including the deadly
attack on the hospital in August, resulted in Médecins
Sans Frontières having to withdraw support from
six hospitals in northern Yemen. The result has been
increased suffering and deaths of innocent Yemenis.
Syria is the most dangerous country in the world
for health-care workers, largely as a result of the
actions of the Syrian Government. We have seen a
clear pattern of systematic targeting of hospitals,
clinics and ambulances, obstructing health workers and
confiscating life-saving medicines and equipment. It
has been reported that all hospitals in eastern Aleppo
have been subject to military attacks and are only
partially functioning as a result. As we have reported
today, there have been two more attacks on hospitals in
eastern Aleppo overnight.
The apparently deliberate attack last week on
a humanitarian convoy near Aleppo represented a
new low for a conflict that has been characterized by

S/PV.7779

flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
Like so many other recent attacks on healthcare and
humanitarian workers, it probably constitutes a war
crime. Such attacks show that some Member States of
this Organization are willing to deliberately breach or
show reckless disregard for international law in order
to achieve their military and political ends. That charge
applies both to those that carry out such attacks and
to those who ally themselves with such states. Such
behaviour is utterly unacceptable.
The Secretary-General’s letter (S/2016/722, annex)
provides recommendations that we fully support. If
followed, they will help operationalize the measures
contained in resolution 2286 (2016), which reflect wellestablished and long-standing rules of international
humanitarian law. I wish to highlight several that
deserve particular attention.
First, States can and should do more to ensure that
international legal frameworks relating to the protection
of medical care in armed conflict are reflected in
domestic law, as well as in relevant rules of engagement,
military manuals and other operational guidelines.
Compliance with international humanitarian law is not
discretionary. It is as binding on States as any other rule
of international law.
Secondly, States must promote understanding of
international humanitarian law within their armed
forces through regular training and the enforcement of
military discipline.
Thirdly, we must get serious about holding to
account those most responsible for attacks on healthcare workers. Resolution 2286 (2016) strongly
condemns the widespread impunity for attacks against
health care, and urges States to conduct full, prompt,
impartial and effective investigations. It is critical that
these investigations be rigorous and serve the interests
of justice, including the rights of victims.
The Security Council has an important role to play
in ensuring that violations of international humanitarian
law are properly investigated and, where appropriate,
that those responsible are held accountable. While the
Council cannot be the global enforcer of international
humanitarian law, we must be willing to use the tools
available to us when the circumstances demand.
Finally, continuing assaults on medical workers
and facilities demonstrate the critical need for ongoing
oversight by the Council. We ask the Secretary-General

16-3006619/20

S/PV.7779

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to continue drawing attention to this issue in his
regular reports to the Council. This reporting must be
supported by the consistent collection of relevant data,
including through information-sharing between the
United Nations and relevant entities, such as the World
Health Organization.
The Council should use the annual briefing
provided for in resolution 2286 (2016) to highlight key
challenges and to press States to take further steps,
including by using their influence over warring parties,
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law. We owe it to all those civilians caught up in
conflict, as well as those who risk their lives to save
others, to ensure that health-care workers are protected
and that their neutrality is respected. Most of all,
Council members have to show by their behaviour here
and in the conflicts in which they are involved that their
respect of international law is real. If they do not, they
call into question the very purpose of this body and
their right to sit on it.

20/20

28/09/2016

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I merely wish to briefly clarify the fact that,
as I understand it, the interpretation of my statement
was not entirely accurate. My reference to the fact
that the suffering of civilians in Syria must come to
an end was interpreted incorrectly. In that respect, we
would ask members to refer to the correct version of our
statement, which, as always, shall be circulated later.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I want to
Ms. Liu and Mr. Maurer for their contributions to this
debate. I commend them and all the people who work
with them for their bravery and dedication.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

16-30066
