S/PV.7545

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7545th meeting

Wednesday, 28 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/729)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33824 (E)
*1533824*

S/PV.7545

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2015/729)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/729, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/729)
of 25 September, which is before the Council, provides
an update and analysis of the conflict, the political
situation and the operational environment in Darfur,
as well as the mandate implementation efforts of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). I will highlight key developments
identified in the report and over the past month.
As described in the report, the overall security
situation in Darfur remains precarious and unpredictable.
From December 2014 to June 2015, the forces of the
Government of the Sudan implemented the second
phase of the Decisive Summer counter-insurgency
operation. achieving considerable gains against the
non-signatory armed movements. The operation, which
involved a series of violent ground clashes and aerial
bombardment, led to over 104,000 newly confirmed
displacements, as well as 69,000 unconfirmed cases,
2/6

28/10/2015

mainly located in the inaccessible East Jebel Marra
area. Since June 2015, with the exception of intermittent
clashes with the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid,
which remains in East Jebel Marra, Government forces
have maintained an operational pause during the rainy
season.
In contrast, there has been no pause in
intercommunal fighting, which remains a major
source of instability in Darfur and has resulted
in approximately one-third of all conflict-related
fatalities and 40 per cent of displacement so far this
year. These disputes have been further exacerbated
by the involvement of local armed groups in counterinsurgency operations against the armed movements,
their access to weapons, continued local influence and
widespread impunity for their attacks against other
tribes and other criminal activities. The Government of
the Sudan, particularly at the state level, has attempted
to contain the violence through the swift deployment
of security forces in hotspots in North, East, South and
West Darfur, and the organization of intercommunal
mediation conferences for the cessation of hostilities.
However, the underlying causes of these conflicts,
related to the use and management of resources and
impunity of actors involved in the violence, remain
unaddressed.
With respect to the negotiations, following earlier
announcements to this effect, on 28 September
President Al-Bashir issued decrees providing for a
two-month cessation of hostilities in Darfur, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, and an unconditional
pardon to members of the Sudanese political and armed
opposition who decide to participate in the national
dialogue process. On 18 October, following a meeting
of its leadership in Paris, the Sudan Revolutionary Front
declared its own six-month cessation of hostilities in
Darfur and the Two Areas in accordance with its road
map of 14 September. The road map further provides
for the protection of civilians, unhindered humanitarian
access and the creation of an environment conducive to
peace talks and the national dialogue.
These positive signals, however, did not reduce the
evel of distrust between the two sides. On 10 October,
President Al-Bashir launched the national dialogue in
Khartoum without the participation of the main armed
and unarmed opposition groups. In his opening remarks,
the President committed to creating an enabling
environment for the participation of all citizens in the
dialogue and the release of political detainees who have

15-33824

28/10/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

not been charged with an offense, and highlighted the
Government’s readiness to engage in discussions on a
permanent ceasefire with the armed movements.
In subsequent statements to the media, the Sudanese
political and armed opposition reiterated their boycott
of the process in the absence of a conducive environment
for a genuine dialogue, as well as their willingness to
participate in a pre-dialogue meeting in Addis Ababa
under the auspices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP). The AUHIP meeting
on the national dialogue, followed by cessation of
hostilities talks on Darfur and the Two Areas that were
initially scheduled for next week, are now expected to
take place, respectively, in Addis Ababa from 16 to 17
and from 18 to 19 November.
During the reporting period, UNAMID and
humanitarian actors continued to face enormous
operational challenges in Darfur. The Government of the
Sudan continued to restrict the air and ground movement
of UNAMID and humanitarian actors primarily to
conflict areas, citing security concerns. Delays and
denials by the Government of customs clearances for
UNAMID containers, including food rations and visas
for staff, have threatened to significantly undermine
mandate implementation efforts.
I am relieved to inform the Council that, out of
the 190 containers previously blocked in Port Sudan,
52 have been released by the authorities and are being
transported to warehouses in Khartoum for further
inspections and subsequent transport to the Mission.
An additional 52 containers are expected to be cleared
and transported to Khartoum this week. The remaining
86 containers are at various stages of the clearance
process. In addition, as part of its contingency plan in
this context, UNAMID has successfully transported
by air locally purchased food items from Khartoum to
El Fasher, El Geneina and Nyala. There has been no
progress on the issuing of visas since Mr. Ladsous’
briefing to the Council two weeks ago.
In addition to these operational constraints, in
the past four months an increase in attacks against
UNAMID and its personnel has been recorded in Darfur,
including the killing of a South African peacekeeper
by an armed group north of Mellit, North Darfur, on
27 September. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate my deepest condolences to his family and to
the Government of South Africa.

S/PV.7545

Despite these considerable obstacles, UNAMID
remained steadfast in the implementation of its
strategic priorities and addressing key challenges to
mandate implementation. In response to the growing
levels of intercommunal violence and as part of its
strategic priorities, UNAMID supported the mediation
of intercommunal conflict through capacity-building
and engagement with national and local Government,
traditional mediators, tribal and community leaders
and the Darfur Regional Authority. In this regard,
the Mission also focused its efforts on developing
early-warning capacity and other preventive measures
with local stakeholders, promoting dialogue between
farming and pastoral communities and supporting local
institutions to address the root causes of the conflict,
in collaboration with the United Nations country team.
In support of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and despite the tensions surrounding the
leadership contest among its signatories, UNAMID
continued to facilitate the demobilization of former
Liberation and Justice Movement and Justice and
Equality Movement-Sudan combatants and to support
the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations process.
After extending the term of the Darfur Regional
Authority for an additional year in June, on 19 October,
President Al-Bashir announced the holding in April
2016 of a referendum to determine the administrative
status of Darfur.
In accordance with resolutions 2173 (2014) and
2228 (2015), UNAMID and the United Nations country
team continued their work on developing an operational
plan for the gradual and phased transfer of tasks to the
latter, outlining which tasks will be conducted jointly or
transferred and the requisite budgetary requirements.
The initial phases of the process are expected to focus
on capacity-building for the sexual and gender-based
violence prevention mechanisms, and joint activities in
the police, justice and corrections sector.
Regarding the exit strategy, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Foreign Minister of the Sudan met
in the margins of the seventieth session of the General
Assembly in New York, on 29 September, to discuss a
framework of cooperation regarding the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate and the format and exit
strategy based on the parameters and benchmarks set by
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Trilateral discussions are expected to
continue in early November.

15-338243/6

S/PV.7545

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to conclude with comments on
the overall situation in Darfur and the relationship
between UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan. A comprehensive resolution of the Darfur
conflict, allowing for the return of the over 2.6 million
displaced persons to their places of origin, requires
first and foremost a political settlement between the
Government and the armed movements. The stated
intent of the parties to engage in discussions on the
cessation of hostilities, as well as the national dialogue
in Addis Ababa, is therefore a commendable step in that
direction. It is crucially important that those meetings
take place as scheduled and that they create momentum
for future comprehensive direct talks on Darfur.
I would like to urge the Government of the Sudan
to maintain its current cooperation in ensuring the
swift clearance of UNAMID food rations and their
delivery to the mission. In order to fully re-establish
its collaborative working relationship with the United
Nations and the African Union on UNAMID and
allow the mission to effectively discharge its mandate,
I would furthermore call upon the Government to lift
all existing restrictions on the free movement of its
personnel and assets, particularly with regard to access
to conflict areas and, importantly, the issuance of visas,
consistent with the provisions of the UNAMID statusof-forces agreement.
Finally, as Council members are aware, yesterday
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission announced the appointment
of Mr. Martin Uhomoibhi of Nigeria as their new
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
UNAMID. On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Uhomoibhi on his appointment.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Abiodun Oluremi Bashua for his dedication to
peace in Darfur and his tireless efforts to deliver on
UNAMID’s mandate during his tenure as Acting Joint
Special Representative over the past year.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mulet
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government of the Sudan, and on my
own behalf, I would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2015/729)
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

4/6

28/10/2015

in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as for his close personal
monitoring of the work of the mission, which has
included the engagement of the Sudanese Government
in the process since the adoption of resolution 1769
(2007). I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and all the staff of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their good
cooperation in achieving our common goals.
I should like to express my condolences to
UNAMID and to the friendly Government of South
Africa following the death of that country’s citizen
in Darfur. We face armed groups that are killing the
messangers of peace.
We are greatly concerned about references in
various parts of the report to the lack of progress towards
a peaceful political resolution of the conflict in Darfur,
as well as about the Secretary-General’s repeated call
on both the Government and the armed movements
there to immediately and without preconditions resume
direct talks. I sincerely hope that no one will seek to
be excused from adhering to the 2011 Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur as a precondition for participating
in the talks. There is no alternative to a negotiated
agreement of international nature. Abandoning this
would lead nowhere but to a recurring cycle of violence
and a return to a protracted conflict situation, which
has already been surmounted on the ground in Darfur.
We call upon the members of the Security
Council to review the conclusions of the meeting
of the Implementation Follow-Up Commission of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which is
made up of representatives of the Government of the
Sudan, the five permanent members of the Council,
neighbouring countries and international partners
for peace. The Commission meets twice a year with
a view to eliminating obstacles that could hinder
progress in implementing the agreement. Granting this
international Commission due relevance and support
would ensure the elimination of all the obstacles to
implementation. Moreover, the establishment of such a
mechanism was a landmark event in the history of the
peaceful settlement of disputes in the world.
The Sudan is currently in the process of an
inclusive national dialogue, as called for and launched
on the basis of an initiative of the President of our
country. The dialogue includes armed movements
and groups that have resorted to violence as a means
to achieve political aims in Darfur. The initiative
aims at exploring the prospective configuration of a
15-33824

28/10/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

future political environment in the Sudan by building
consensus on the drafting of a permanent constitution
to replace the provisional Constitution of 2005, which is
credited for time-bound achievements in implementing
the principle of self-determination and conducting the
referendum that led to the creation of the State of South
Sudan.
Presidential and parliamentary elections took place
in April throughout the country, including the five
states of Darfur. The successful holding of violence-free
elections in the context of an internal conflict provides
indisputable proof of a return to normalcy in the
conflict area. In that regard, I would like to note that
the holding of elections in a zone of conflict anywhere
in the world is indicative of the prevalence of postconflict measures. I hope that the Council will take that
into account.
What I have just mentioned does not mean that
the states of Darfur are free of violence. However,
incidents of violence in Darfur are not indicative of
the existence of an internal conflict commensurate
with the definition of such under international law, in
particular the one set out in the 1997 annex II to the the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949. That is also true with
regard to the political narrative depicting the security
situation and the real state of events on the ground in
Darfur.
I should also like to refer to paragraphs 16, 25
and 27 of the report of the Secretary-General, which
indicate that incidents of crime, including theft, armed
robbery, carjacking and other crimes, are all being
committed by individual outlaws.
The facts of the situation we have described
unequivocally point to a transition from a conflictmanagement situation to a conflict-ending situation
having occurred. What is required now is commitment
to development efforts and to mitigate the devastating
effects of desertification and environmental degradation
in Darfur. That requries the fulfilment of the financial
commitments made for development by the international
community, in line with the parameters set out in the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
We are deeply concerned about the incidents
involving attacks on UNAMID patrols by individuals
or groups of individuals. They are robbing and looting
and, while their numbers and weapons are inferior
to those of UNAMID, they have met with little to no
resistance. Seen in the context of carrying out its duty

S/PV.7545

to protect civilians and their right to self-defence, those
incidents justify the growing concerns regarding the
relevance and efficiency of UNAMID.
We regret that we have to scrutinize the statistics
with regard to certain areas in the report. For
example, the report has removed those statistics from
their appropriate contexts, such as in the case of the
accusations levied against the Sudanese Government,
which has allegedly refused to issue visas to UNAMID
staff. Likewise, the number of displaced persons is
inaccurate. That statistic does not take into account, for
example, inter-tribal clashes, which are usually followed
by immediate measures taken by State authorities to
contain those hostilities. That is done with the help of
the long-standing and traditional magistrate-mediated
system, by creating buffer zones between the belligerent
parties, which consequently results in the return of
displaced persons to their villages and towns. Those
numbers are not reflected in the report.
Furthermore, there is the phenomenon of what
we might call temporary displacement. That involves
farmers who are attracted by the material conditions
offered in the internally displaced persons camps, who
usually return to their villages of their own accord to
cultivate the surrounding land during the rainy season
and afterwards return once again to the camps. That
kind of temporary displacement was not fully taken into
account when the statistics were tabulated. We would
like to draw the Council’s attention to the statistics cited
by the Darfur Regional Authority, established under
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. They are in
complete contradiction with the numbers contained in
the report.
Controversy has erupted here at the United Nations
during the past two weeks with regard to two episodes
mentioned in the report under consideration. The first
has to do with the withholding of visas for UNAMID
staff members. We would like to refer the Council to a
bulletin of the Office for Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) issued in Khartoum in May. It states
that positive responses to requests for visas and travel
permissions varied — and I emphasize this — between
86 per cent and 96 per cent. That statistic comes from
OCHA. The arbitrary numbers mentioned in the report
concerning the issuing of visas and the way that they
are taken out of general context are meant, in our
opinion, to level accusations against the Government in
order to deem it non-cooperative, and therefore stall the
peacekeeping operation.

15-338245/6

S/PV.7545

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In addition, the UNAMID mission insisted on
terminating the service of a number of local staff
members and replaced them with international staff,
for whom visas were requested. That runs contrary to
the strategic review recommendations, which called
for a reduction in the number of international security
personnel, who were to be replaced by local staff.
I would like to call on the Council once again to
scrutinize those reports, the elements contained in the
UNAMID report and the facts and figures related to the
issuing of visas. We have brought those statistics here,
Sir, and if you allow us, we could circulate them. The
Sudan has exercised its sovereign right in disseminating
those facts and figures.
The second issue is related to the customs
clearance of food containers in Port Sudan. The
problem of the food containers could have been solved
without complications, if the UNAMID mission
had complied with the customs rules that had been
agreed upon — particularly in connection to its
acting head — regarding the advance submission
of the containers’ inventories. The mission elected
not to inform the Ministry for Foreign Affairs or the
tripartite commission made up of UNAMID itself,
the Government of the Sudan and the African Union
in seeking a timely solution to the issue and avoiding
a worsening of the situation. We have informed the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
of the particulars of that matter.
As I said at the beginning of my statement, we are
prepared to cooperate with UNAMID to achieve the
common goals, based on resolution 1769 (2007), on the
establishment of the mission, including the development
of an exit strategy, and to build on what was delivered
by the tripartite commission. In that regard, we are
pleased to note that the report includes clear references
to cooperation on the part of the Government of the

6/6

28/10/2015

Sudan, as well as to achievements in that regard. I
would like to cite the following examples.
First, there was a decrease in displacement during
the reporting period.
Secondly, there is clarification of the reasons for
launching air strikes against rebel armed groups and
their targets:
“The combined air and ground offensive succeeded
in dislodging [Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid] from Rokero, Rowata and Burgo villages.”
(S/2015/729, para. 3)
Thirdly, in paragraph 42, the report mentions that
UNAMID military personnel conducted a very large
number of patrols and humanitarian armed escorts.
That fact serves to refute accusations of restrictions on
the movement of those forces.
Fourthly, in paragraph 73, the report refers to the
efforts of the Government to contain the effects of
fighting among local tribes.
Fifthly, the Secretary-General thanks the
Government of Qatar for its continued support for the
Doha Document for Peace, which is embraced and
adhered to by the Government of the Sudan as well as
by the United Nations, which was the advocate, sponsor
and partner of the peace negotiations.
Lastly, in paragraph 75, the report refers to the
progress made in the implementation of the Darfur
Internal Dialogue and Consultation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-33824
