310

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad Hoe
Committee has made some progress, it has not yet fulfilled
its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made by the Ad Hoe Committee.
especially during its fifth session;
2. Decides to renew the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee to enable it to continue its work on the drafting of
an international convention against the recruitment, use,
financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to use the draft articles contained in chapter
V of its report, 40 entitled "Consolidated negotiating basis
of a convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries" as a basis for future negotiation
on the text of the proposed international convention;
4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals of Member States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments expressed at the current session of the General
Assembly; 41
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working groups;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
1. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
sixth session for four weeks, from I 6 June to 11 July 1986;
8. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its sixth session and to
submit a draft convention to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Ad /lot'
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries".
I I 2th plenary meeting
I 1 December 1985

40/75. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session, 24
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations 2 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
41 Ibid.. fi,rtwth Semon. Snth ( ·,,,n1nill1'c. 11th to 17th. 44th and 4Xth
meetings.

progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should continue its work on the
topics in its current programme, bearing in mind the clear
desirability of achieving as much progress as possible in
the preparation of draft articles on specific topics before
the conclusion of the term of office of the present membership;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission concerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 297 to 306 of its report; 24
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars and appeals to States that can do so
to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently
needed for the holding of the seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the fortieth session of the General Assembly4 2 and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
112th plenary meeting
II December 1985

40/76.

Preparation for the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States
and International Organizations or between
International Organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
hy which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
42 /hid .. Sixth ( ·omm111,•e, 23rd to 36th,--46th and 47th meetings; and 1h1d.
Snrh Comm1tte1·. Sess,onal Fasc1cle. corrigendum.

IX.

311

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

the law of treaties between States and international organi:zations or between international organi:zations adopted by
the International Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session, 43
Recalling also its resolution 39/86 of 13 December
1984, by which it decided that the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organizations should be held at Vienna from 18 February to 21
March 1986, and referred to the Conference, as the basic
proposal for its consideration, the draft articles on the law
of treaties between States and international organizations
or between international organizations adopted by the
International Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session,
Recalling further its appeal, in paragraph 8 of resolution
39/86, to participants in the Conference to organize consultations, primarily on the organization and methods of
work of the Conference, including rules of procedure, and
on major issues of substance, including final clauses and
settlement of disputes, prior to the convening of the Conference in order to facilitate a successful conclusion of its
work through the promotion of general agreement,
Reiterating the importance of enhancing the process of
codification and progressive development of international
law at a universal level,
I. Considers that the informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution 39/86 have proved to be
useful in enabling thorough preparation for successful conduct of the United Nations Conference on the Law of
Treaties between States and International Organizations or
between International Organi:zations;
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the successful outcome of the work of the informal consultations conducted
by the co-Chairmen;
3. Decides that, in addition to the organizations referred to in paragraph 2 (e) of resolution 39/86, the United
Nations should participate in the Conference;
4. Decides to transmit to the Conference and to recommend that it adopt the draft rules of procedure for the
Conference, worked out during the informal consultations
and annexed to the present resolution as annex I, taking
into account that those draft rules were drafted for the specific use of that Conference in view of its particular nature
and the subject-matter to be considered by it;
5. Decides further to transmit to the Conference for its
consideration and action, as appropriate, a list of draft
articles of the basic proposal, for which substantive consideration is deemed necessary and which are annexed to
the present resolution as annex II;
6. Refers to the Conference for its consideration the
draft final clauses presented by the co-Chairmen on which
an exchange of views was held and which are annexed to
the present resolution as annex III.
1I 2th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

panicipating in the Conference shall consist of a head of delegation and
such other representatives. alternate representatives and advisers as may
be required.
Alternates and advisers
Rule 2
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an
adviser to act as a representative.
Credentials. corresponding documents and
notifications of delegations
Rule .i
I. The credentials of representatives of States, the corresponding documents of the organizations mentioned in rule 60 as well as appropriate
notifications, containing the names and titles of the members of each delegation referred to in rule I authorizing them to panicipate in the Conference shall be submitted early to the Executive Secretary of the Conference, and if possible not later than 24 hours after the opening of the
Conference. Any subsequent change in the composition of delegations shall
also be submitted to the Executive Secretary.
2. The credentials of representatives of States shall be issued by the
head of State or Government or by the minister for foreign affairs.
3. The corresponding documents of organizations referred to in rule 60
shall be submitted to the Executive Secretary of the Conference together
with a statement on behalf of the organization confirming that such document 1s issued in accordance with the internal rules and practices of the
organization concerned.
Credentials Commillee
Rule 4
A Credentials Committee shall be appointed at the beginning of the Conference. It shall consist of nine members from among the representatives of
panicipating States who shall be appointed by the Conference on the proposal of the President. It shall examine the credentials of representatives of
States and repon to the Conference without delay. The Credentials Committee shall also verify the corresponding documents submitted by representatives of the organizations referred to in rule 60 in accordance with
rule 3 and repo11 to the Conference on those documents.
Provisional partinpatwn ,n the Conference
Rule 5
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representatives of States shall be entitled to panicipate provisionally in the Conference. Representatives of the organizations referred to in rule 60 shall
likewise be entitled to panicipate provisionally in the Conference pending
its decision on whether the documents submitted by them are in conformity with the requirements provided in rule 3.
II

OHlCERS
Flemons

Rule 6
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of panicipating States the following officers: a President and twenty-two Vice-Presidents, as well as the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole provided for
in rule 47 and the Chairman of the Drafting Committee provided for in
rule 48. These officers shall be elected on the basis of ensuring the representative character of the General Committee. The Conference may also elect
such other officers as 11 deems necessary for the performance of its functions

General po~·ers of the President
Rule 7

ANNEX I
U■ited Nations Conference on the Law or Treaties between States and

International Orpnizations or between International Organizations

(Vienna, 18 February-21 March 1986)
Dn,ft rulu of procedure
I.

REPRESENTATION AND CREDENTIALS
Composition of delegations

Rule I
The delegation of each State, Namibia, represented by the United
Nations Council for Namibia and each organization referred to in rule 60
43 Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session. Supplemeni No. /0 (A/37110), chap. II.
sect. D.

I. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him elsewhere
by these rules. the President shall preside at the plenary meetings of the
Conference. declare the opening and closing of each meeting. direct the discussion. ensure observance of these rules. accor<i the right to speak, promote the achievement of general agreement, put questions to the vote and
announce decisions reached by general agreement or taken by vote. The
President shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules, shall have
complete control of the proceedmgs and over the maintenance of order
thereat The President may propose to the Conference the closure of the list
of speakers. a lim1ta1ion on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the
number oft1mes each representative ma} ,peak on a question, the adjourn-

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

312

mentor the closure of the debate and the suspension or the adjournment of
a meeting.
2. The President, in the exercise of his functions, remains under the
authority of the Conference.
Aeling Pres1den1

(/) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the
Conference in the archives of the United Nations;
(g) Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.
Sratemenls h_v the secretariat
Rule 16

Rule 8
I. If the President finds it necessary to be absent from a meeting or any
part thereof, he shall designate a Vice-President to take his place.
2. A Vice-President acting as President shall have the powers and
duties of the President.

In the exercise of the duties referred to in rules 14 and 15, the SecretaryGeneral or any other member of the staff designated for that purpose may,
at any time, make either oral or written statements concerning any question under consideration.

Replacemenr of /he Presidenr

Quorum

Rule 9

If the President is unable to perform his functions, a new President shall
be elected.
The Preridenl shall nor vote

V

CONDUCT OF BUSINESS

Rule 17
The President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when representatives ofat least one third of the States participating in
the Conference are present. The presence ofrepresentatives of two thirds of
the States so participating shall be required for any decision to be taken.

Rule JO

Speeches

The President, or a Vice-President acting as President, shall not vote in
the Conference, but may designate another member of his delegation to
vote in his place.
III. GENERAL COMMITTEE
Composilion
Rule I I

There shall be a General Committee consisting of twenty-five members
which shall comprise the President and Vice-Presidents of the Conference,
the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the Chairman of the
Drafting Committee. The President of the Conference, or in his absence
one of the Vice-Presidents designated by him, shall serve as Chairman of
the General Committee.

Rule /8
I. No one may address the Conference without having previously
obtained the permission of the President. Subject to rules 19, 20 and 23 to
25, the President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify
their desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing up a list
of such speakers. The President may call a speaker to order if his remarks
are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
2. The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the
number of times each representative may speak on a question. Before a
decision is taken, two representatives may speak in favour of, and two
against, a proposal to set such limits. When the debate is limited and a
speaker exceeds the allotted time, the President shall call him to order
without delay.
Precedence

Subslilule members
Rule 12

Rule /9

If the President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent
during a meeting of the General Committee, he may designate a member of
his delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of absence, the
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole shall designate the Vice-Chairman of that Committee as his substitute and the Chairman of the Drafting
Committee shall designate a member of the Drafting Committee. When
serving on the General Committee, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee
of the Whole or member of the Drafting Committee shall not have the
right to vote if he is of the same delegation as another member of the General Committee.

The chairman or rapporteur of a committee, or the representative of a
sub-committee or working group, may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions arrived at by his committee, sub-committee or working group.

Funclwns
Rule /3

The General Committee shall assist the President in the general conduct
of the business of the Conference and, subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall ensure the co-ordination of its work. It shall also exercise
powers conferred upon it by rule 63.

Poinrs of order
Rule 20

During the discussion of any matter, a representative of a participating
State may at any time raise a point of order, which shall be decided immediately by the President in accordance with these rules. A representative of
a participating State may appeal against the ruling of the President. The
appeal shall be put to the vote immediately, and the President's ruling shall
stand unless overruled by a majority of such representatives present and
voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak on the
substance of the matter under discussion.
Closing of rhe Im of speakRrs
Rule 2/

IV.

SECRETARIAT

Dulies of the Secretary-General

During the course of a debate the President may announce the list of
speakers and, with the consent of the Conference, declare the list closed.
Right of repfv

Rule 14

I. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference. He, or his representative, shall act in that
capacity in all meetings of the Conference and its committees.
2. The Secretary-General shall appoint an Executive Secretary of the
Conference and shall provide and direct the staff required by the Conference and its committees.
Duties o.f the seaerariat
Rule I 5

The secretariat of the Conference shall. in accordance with these rules:
(a) Interpret speeches made at meetings;
(b) Receive, translate. reproduce and distribute the documents of the
Conference;
(c) Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference:
(d) Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;
(e) Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings,

Rule 22
I. Notwithstanding rule 2 I, the President shall accord the right of reply
to any delegation that requests it.
2. Replies made pursuant to the present rule shall be made at the end
of the last meeting of the day, or at the conclusion of the consideration of
the relevant issue if that is sooner.
3. The number of interventions in exercise of the right of reply for any
delegation at a given meeting should be limited to two per issue.
4. The first intervention in the exercise of the right of reply, for any delegation on any issue at a given meeting, shall be limited to five minutes and
the second intervention shall be limited to three minutes.

AdJournrnent of debate
Rule 23

During the discussion of any matter, a represc:ntative may move the
adjournment of the debate on the question under disc11SSion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, two re;resentativel may speak in favour of,

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Reconsidrration of proposals

and two against, the adjournment, after which the motion shall be put

immediately to the vote.

313

Rule 32
Closure of debate

RuleU

A representative may at any time move the closure of the debate on the
question under discussion, whether or not any other representative has signified his wish to speak. Pennission to speak on the closure of the debate
shall be accorded only to two speakers opposing the closure, after which the
motion shall be put immediately to the vote.
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting

When a proposal has been adopted or rejected it may not be reconsidered unless the Conference, by a two-thirds majority of the representatives
of participating States present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak
on the motion to reconsider shall be accorded only to two speakers from
representatives of participating States opposing the motion. after which it
shall be put immediately to the vote.
Jnvitations to technical advisers
Rule 33

The Conference may invite to one or more of its meetings any person
whose technical advice it may consider useful for its work.

Rule 25
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. Such motions shall not be
debated, but shall be put immediately to the vote.

Order of motions
Rule 26
Subject to rule 20, the motions indicated below shall have precedence in

the following order over all proposals or other motions before the meeting:

VI.

Rule 34

Decision-taking rights shall be exercised only by States participating in
the Conference. In decision-taking by vote each State represented at the
Conference shall have one vote.
Ma1oruy reqwred

(a) To suspend the meeting;
To adjourn the meeting;
To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;
(d) To close the debate on the question under discussion.

DECISION-TAKING

Deciswn-tak,ng rights

(b)

Rule 35

(c)

I. Decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall be
taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting.
2. Decisions of the Conference on matters of procedure shall be taken
by a majority of the representatives present and voting.
3. If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the President shall rule on the question. An appeal against this ruling shall be put to the vote immediately and the President's ruling shall
stand unless overruled by a majority of the representatives present and voting

Basic proposal
Rule 27

The draft articles on the law of treaties between States and international
organizations or between international organizations, adopted by the International Law Commission, 43 shall constitute the basic proposal for consideration by the Conference.

Meaning of the phrase ··representatives
present and voting"

Articles of the basic proposal requiring
substantive consideration
Rule .16

Rule 28

1. The Conference shall decide which of the draft articles of the basic
proposal referred to in rule 27 require substantive consideration. These
draft articles shall be referred to the Committee of the Whole and all other
draft articles shall be referred directly to the Drafting Committee.
2. After such a decision is taken by the Conference:
(a) The Committee of the Whole may decide, at the request of a representative, to give substantive consideration to a particular article of the
basic proposal that was referred directly to the Drafting Committee;
(b) The Drafting Committee itself may decide, where necessary, to
transfer particular draft articles of the basic proposal to the Committee of
the Whole for substantive consideration.

For the purposes of these rules, the phrase "representatives present and
voting" means representatives present and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Representatives who abstain from voting shall be considered as
not voting.
Method of voting
Rule 37

Except as provided in rule 43, the Conference shall normally vote b)
show of hands or by standing, but any representative may request a rollcall. The roll-call shall be taken in the English alphabetical order of the
names of the States :,articipating in the Conference, beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the President.
Conduct during voting

Other proposals and amendments
Rule 29

Rule JB

Other proposals and amendments thereto shall normally be submitted in
writing to the Executive Secretary of the Conference, who shall circulate
copies to all delegations. As a general rule, no proposal shall be considered

The President shall announce the commencement of voting, after which
no representative shall be permitted to intervene until the result of the vote
has been announced, except on a point of order in connection with the process of voting.

at any meeting of the Conference unless copies of it have been circulated to
all delegations not later than the day preceding the meeting. The President
may, however, permit the consideration of amendments, even though
these amendments have not been circulated or have only been circulated
on the same day.

Decisions on competence
Rule 30

Subject to rule 20, any motion calling for a decision on the competence
of the Conference to discuss any matter or to adopt a proposal submitted to
it shall be put to the vote before the matter is discussed or a decision is
taken as to the proposal in question.
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
Rule 31
A proposal may be withdrawn by its proposer at any time before voting
on it has commenced, provided that it has not been amended. A proposal
or a motion that has thus been withdrawn may be reintroduced.

Explanat,on of vote
Rule 39

Representatives may make brief statements consisting solely of explanation of their votes, before the voting has commenced or after t~e voting has
been completed. The representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or
motion shall not speak in explanation of vote thereon, except if 1t has been
amended.
Divwon of proposals
Rule 40

A representative ofa participating State may move that parts ofa proposal shall be voted on separately. If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon. If the motion for division is carried, those parts of the proposal that are subsequently approved
shall be put to the vote as a whole. If all operative parts of the proposal
have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered to have been rejected
as a whole.

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

314
Voting on amendments

Rule 41
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be
voted on first. When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal,
the Conference shall first vote on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original proposal and then on the amendment next furthest
removed therefrom, and so on until all the amendments have been put to
the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one amendment necessarily
implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter amendment shall
not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the
amended proposal shall then be voted upon. A motion is considered an
amendment to a proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part
of the proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word "proposal" in these
rules shall be considered as including amendments.
Voting on proposals
Rule 42
If two or more proposals relate to the same question, the Conference
shall, unless it decides otherwise, vote on the proposals in the order in
which they have been submitted. The Conference may, after each vote on a
proposal, decide whether to vote on the next proposal.
Elections
Rule 43

All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless otherwise decided by
the Conference.
Rule 44
I. If, when one person or one delegation of a participating State is to be
elected, no candidate obtains in the first ballot a majority of the votes of
the representatives present and voting, a second ballot restricted to the two
candidates obtaining the largest number of votes shall be taken. If in the
second ballot the votes are equally divided, the President shall decide
between the candidates by drawing lots.
2. In the case of a tie in the lirst ballot among three or more candidates
obtaining the largest number of votes, a second ballot shall be held. If a tie
results among more than two candidates, the number shall be reduced to
two by lot and the balloting, restricted to them. shall continue in accordance with the preceding paragraph.
Rule 45

When two or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the
same conditions, those candidates, not exceeding the number of such
places, obtaining in the lirst ballot a majority of the votes of the representatives present and voting shall be elected. If the number of candidates
obtaining such majority is less than the number of persons or delegations
to be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the remaining places.
the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the greatest number
of votes in the previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the places
remaining to be filled, provided that, after the third inconclusive ballot.
votes may be cast for any eligible person or delegation. If three such
unrestricted ballots are inconclusive, the next three ballots shall be
restricted to candidates who obtained the greatest number of votes in the
third of the unrestricted ballots. to a number not more than twice the
places remaining to be tilled, and the following three ballots thereafter shall
be unrestricted. and so on until all the places have been filled.
Equally dmded votes
Rule 46

If a vote is equally divided on matters other than elections, the proposal
or motion shall be regarded as rejected.
VII. COMMITTEES
Comm111ee of the Whole
Rule 47

The Conference shall establish a Committee of the Whole, which may
set up sub-committees or working groups. The Committee of the Whole
shall have as its officers a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and a Rapporteur.
Dra/i1ng Commlltee
Rule 48

I. The Conference shall establish a Drafting Committee consisting of
15 members representing participating States, including its Chairman who
shall be elected by the Conference in accordance with rule 6. The other 14
members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Conference on the
proposal of the (1eneral Committee The Rapporteur of the Committee of

the Whole participates ex officio, without a vote, in the work of the Drafting Committee.
2. The Drafting Committee shall consider draft articles of the basic
proposal referred to it directly pursuant to paragraph I of rule 28. It shall
also consider any draft articles referred to it by the Committee of the
Whole after initial consideration by that Committee. The Drafting Committee shall furthermore prepare drafts and give advice on drafting as
requested by the Conference or by the Committee of the Whole. It shall
also co-ordinate and review the drafting of all texts adopted and shall
report, as appropriate, either to the Conference or to the Committee of the
Whole.
Officers
Rule 49

Except as otherwise provided in rule 6, each committee, sub-committee
and working group shall elect its own officers from among representatives
of participating States.
Quorum
Rule 50
I. The Chairman of the Committee of the Whole may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when representatives of at least
one quarter of the States panicipating in the Conference are present. The
presence of representatives ofa majority of the States so participating shall
be required for any decision to be taken.
2. A majority of the representatives on the General, Drafting or Credentials Committees or any sub-committee or working group shall constitute a quorum.

Officers. conduct of business and decision-taking
Rule 51

The rules contained in chapters II, V (except rule 17) and VI above shall
be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairmen of the General, Drafting and Credentials Committees and the chairman of any sub-committee or working group may exercise the right to vote:
(b) Decisions of committees, sub-committees and working groups shall
be taken by a majority of the representatives of States present and voting,
except that the reconsideration of a proposal or an amendment shall
require the majority established by rule 32.
Vlll.

LANGUAGES AND RECORDS
Languages of the Conference

Rule 52

Arabic, Chinese, English. French. Russian and Spanish shall be the languages of the Conference.
Interpretallon
Rule 53

I. Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted
into the other such languages.
2. A representative may speak in a language other than a language of
the Conference if the delegation concerned provides for interpretation into
one such language.
Records and sound recordings of meetings
Rule 54

I. Summary records of the plenary meetings of the Conference and of
the meetings of the Committee of the Whole shall be kept in the languages
of the Conference. As a general rule, they shall be circulated as soon as possible, simultaneously in all the languages of the Conference, to all representatives, who shall inform the secretariat within live working days after the
circulation of the summary record of any changes they wish to have made.
2. The secretariat shall make sound recordings of meetings of the Conference, the Committee of the Whole and the Drafting Committee. Such
recordings shall be made of meetings of other committees, sub-committees
or working groups when the body concerned so decides.
Languages o( official documents
Rule 55

Official documents shall be made available in the languages of the Conference

IX.
IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MEETINGS

Plenary meellngs and mPetings of commiuees
Rule 56
The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of committees
shall be held in public unless the body concerned decides otherwise. All
decisions taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall
be announced at an early public meeting of the plenary.
Meetings of sub-comm11/ees or working groups
Rule 57
As a general rule meetings of a sub-committee or working group shall be
held in private.

315

Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 311152 of
20 December 1976 to participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under its auspices have the right to participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Committee of the Whole and, as appropriate, other
committees. sub-committees or working groups.
Representatives of national liherallon movements
Rule 62
Representatives designated by national liberation movements invited to
the Conference may participate as observers, without the right to vote. in
the deliberations of the Conference. the Committee of the Whole and, as
appropriate, other committees, sub-committees or working groups.

Communiques on private meetings

XI.

Rule 58

PROMOTION OF GENERAL AGREEMENT
Promotion ,,( general agreement

At the close of a private meeting, the chairman of the organ concerned

may issue a communique to the press through the Executive Secretary.
X. OTHER PARTICIPANTS AND OBSERVERS
Representatives of the United Natwns Council for Namibia
Rule 59

Representatives designated by the United Nations Council for Namibia
may participate in the deliberations of the Conference, the Committee of
the Whole and other committees, sub-committees or working groups, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly.
Representalives of the United Nations and of the organizalions that have
received an invitalionfrom the General Assembly in subparagraph 2 (e) of
its resolution 39186
Rule 60
I. Except as otherwise provided in the present rules, representatives
designated by the United Nations or by organizations referred to in subparagraph 2 (e) of General Assembly resolution 39/86, that have traditionally
been invited to participate as observers at legal codification conferences
convened under the auspices of the United Nations, shall participate in the
Conference in the following capacity:
(a) To participate in public and private meetings of the Conference, the
Committee of the Whole, sub-committees and working groups, as well as
in the process leading to general agreement;
(b) To submit documents for circulation;
(c) To intervene in the debates;
- To exercise the right of reply in accordance with rule 22;
- To explain their positions on any matter on which a decision has
been or is to be taken;
(d) To submit substantive proposals, which as such may only be put to
the vote subject to rule 63 if a formal request is made by a State to that
effect. If the proposal has been circulated in writing, the formal request
shall be circulated in the same manner;
(e) To submit procedural motions, including those referred to in rules
23, 24 and 25, which may not be put to the vote unless supported by a
State.
2. Representatives of the organizations participating in the Conference
in accordance with paragraph I of this rule may not:
(a) Object to any procedural motion put forward by a representative of
a participating State;
(b) Prevent on their own the achievement of general agreement or participate in any vote.
3. Delegations of the organizations referred to in paragraph I shall be
seated in alphabetical order following the seating of delegations of States.
Representatives of organizalions that have received a standing invitation
from the General Assembly to participate in lhe sessions and the work of
all internaliona/ conferences convened under its auspices in the capacit}'
of observers in accordance with General Assembly reso/uJions .?237
(XXIX) and 311152
Rule 61
Representatives designated by organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly in accordance with General
44 It is understood that if certain changes to the articles listed were
approved by the Conference. consequential changes might have to be introduced in other draft articles.

Rule 63
I. The Conference shall, both at the plenary and at the Committee of
the Whole stages. make every effort to reach general agreement on matters
of substance, particularly on the final results of the work of the Conference,
and there shall be no voting on such matters until all efforts to that end
have been exhausted.
2. In endeavouring to reach general agreement, all possible means shall
be used. The officers of the Conference shall chair as appropriate, coordinate and supervise meetings with a view to enhancing the prospects of
reaching general agreement.
3. If, in the consideration of any matter of substance, no general agreement appears to be attainable, the President of the Conference shall inform
the General Committee that efforts to reach general agreement have failed.
The General Committee shall thereupon consider the matter and may recommend that it be decided by a vote, indicating the date of the vote, and
place the question before the plenary or the Committee of the Whole as the
case may be.
XII.

AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE
Method of amendment

Rule 64
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives of participating States present and voting.
ANNEX II
List of draft articles of the buic proposal, for which
substantive consideration is deemed nea,ssary 44

I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

Article 245 "Use of terms"
Article 3 "International agreements not within the scope of the
present articles"
Article 5 "Treaties constituting international organizations and
treaties adopted within an international organization"
Article 6 "Capacity of internat10nal organizations to conclude
treaties"
Article 7 "Full powers and powers"
Article 9 '"Adoption of the text"
- paragraph 2
Article 11 "Means of expressing consent to be bound by a treaty"
- paragraph 2 (arts. 14 3, 16, I 8 and I 9. 2 are closely related to this
paragraph)
Article 19 "Formulat,on of reservations"
Article 20 "Acceptance of and objection to reservations"
Article 27 "Internal law of States. rules of international organizations and observance of treaties"
Article 30 '"Application of successive treaties relating to the same
subject-matter"
- paragraph 6
Article 36 bis "Obligations and rights arising for States members of
an international orgamzation from a treaty to which it is a party"
Article 38 "'Rules in a treaty becoming binding on third States or
third organizations through international custom"

45 It is noted that since draft article 2 sets out definitions. 11s provisions
should not be considered separately but in conjunction with the substantive
consideration of other articles to which those definitions are closely related.

316
General Assembly-Fortieth Session
----··-----·-·--·---------------~---------------------------14.

Article 45 "Loss ofa right to invoke a ground for invahdating, terminating, withdrawing from or suspending the operation of a
treaty"
15. Article 46 "Provisions of internal law of a State and rules of an
international organization regarding competence to conclude treaties"
- paragraph 2
-paragmph 3
-paragraph 4
16. Article 56 "Denunciation of or withdrawal from a treaty containing no provision regarding termination, denunciation or withdrawal"
17.

Article 61 "Supervening impossibility of performance"

18.

Article 62 "Fundamental change of circumstances"

19.

Article 65 "Procedure to be followed with respect to invalidity, termination, withdrawal from or suspensions of the operation of a
treaty"
-paragraph 3

20.

Article 66 "Procedures for arbitration and conciliation"

21.

Article 7 3 "Cases of succession of States, responsibility of a State
or ofan international organization, outbreak of hostilities, termination of the existence of an organization and termination of participation by a State in the membership of an organization"

22.

Article 75 "Case of an aggressor State"

23. Article 77 "Functions of depositaries"
24. Annex "Arbitration and conciliation procedures established in
application of article 66"
ANNEX III
Draft final clauses

{Based on those of the I 969 Vienna Convention on the
Law of T reaties 46 )
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 81

SIGNATURE
The present Convention shall be open for signature until ... (date,
month, year) at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Austria, and subsequently, until .. (date, month, year), at the United
Nattons Headquarters, New York by:
(a)

All States;

(b)

Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia;

International organizations invited to participate in the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organi,ations.
(c)

Artie/I' 82

RATiflCATION OR ACT OF FORMAL CONFIRMATION
The present Convention is subject to ratification by States and by
Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, and to
acts of formal confirmation by international organizations. The instruments of ratification and those relating to acts of formal confirmation shall
be deposited with the Secretary-Geneml of the United Nations.
Article 83

ACCESSION
The present Convention shall remain open for accession by any
State, by Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and by any international organization which has the capacity to
conclude treatie~.
I.

2. An instrument of accession of an international organization shall
contain a declaration that JI has the capacity to conclude treaties.
3. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary
General of the lJ nited Nations.
46 Offina/ Records of the United Nat,ons Conference un the Law ojTreaties,
Frrst and Second Sessions. Vienna, 26 March-24 May 1968 and 9 April-2:
May 1969, Documents of the Conference (United Nations publicat,on, Sales
No. E.70 V.5), p. 287

Article 84

ENTRY INTO FORCE
The present Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
following the date of deposit of the ... instrument of ratification or accession by States or by Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council
for Namibia.
2 For each State or for Namibia, represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the conditton specified in paragraph I has been fulfilled, the Convention shall
enter into force on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State or by
Namibia of its instrument of ratification or accession.
3 For each international organization depositing an instrument
relating to an act of formal confirmation or an instrument of accession, the
Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after such deposit,
provided that it shall not so enter into force before the Convention enters
,nto force pursuant to paragraph I.
Article 85

AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The original of the present Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese,
r.nglish, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, and duly authorized representatives of the United Nations Council for Namibia and of international
organi1ations have signed the present Convention.
DONE AT VIENNA this. day of. . one thousand nine hundred and
eighty-six.

40177. Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, 47
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 48
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those missions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Having considered the concerns regarding recent legislation of the host country pertaining to the travel of certain
members of the Secretariat,
Taking note of the positions of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the host country with regard to the
application by the host country of the above-mentioned
legislation,
l. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 56 of its report; 47
2. Strongly condemns any terrorist and criminal acts
violating the security of missions accredited to the United
Nations and the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to continue to take all necessary measures to ensure effectively the protection, security
47 OjJit:ial Records o( the General Assemb/.v, Fortieth Session, Supp/e,,,,,n,
No. 26 (A/40/26).
48 Resolution 22 A II).
