S/PV.9356

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9356th meeting

Thursday, 22 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al Nahyan/Mrs. Alhefeiti. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2023/443)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18129 (E)
*2318129*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2023/443)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of Somalia,
and I request the Protocol Officer to escort him to his
seat at the Council table.
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, was escorted to a
seat at the Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Catriona
Laing, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia; and Ms. Cindy McCain, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/443, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Laing.
Ms. Laing: I am pleased to address Council
members for the first time since assuming my duties
in Somalia on 5 June. I am delighted to do so alongside
the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud; the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef; and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
Ms. Cindy McCain.
2/23

22/06/2023

I am honoured to have the opportunity to serve
in Somalia and assure Council members of my
commitment to implement the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). I am
grateful for the warm welcome extended to me by the
Federal Government of Somalia, federal member states
and the Somali people. The United Nations stands by
the people and the Government of Somalia. The recent
visit of the Secretary-General to Somalia is testimony
to that strong commitment.
I am grateful in particular for the close partnership
with the African Union Commission. I pay tribute to
the dedicated service and sacrifice of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). I would like
take this opportunity to convey my sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of Uganda for the
soldiers who lost their lives and were injured in the
attack on the ATMIS forward operating base in Buulo
Mareer, Lower Shabelle. While I condemn that heinous
attack in the strongest terms, it is a stark reminder of
the real and persistent threat Al-Shabaab continues
to pose.
My briefing today will cover eight areas: first,
an update on my first two weeks in Somalia; second,
a political update; third, a security update; fourth, a
humanitarian update; fifth, an update on women and
peace and security; sixth, observations on stabilization;
seventh, observations on the transition of the Missions
and, finally, the priorities for UNSOM over the next
six months.
My first update briefly summarizes my first two
weeks on the ground.
Since my arrival in Somalia — a country I first
served in as a young United Nations staff member in the
mid-1990s — I have had the opportunity to meet with
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, the Prime Minister,
other ministers and senior Government officials and to
visit four of the five federal member states. I have met
members of civil society organizations and engaged
with international partners, including the ambassadors
from ATMIS troop-contributing countries. I have
also spoken by phone to President Muse Bihi Abdi of
“Somaliland”.
On my way to New York, I stopped in Addis Ababa,
where I met with the African Union Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security, His Excellency
Mr. Bankole Adeoye, and the State Minister of
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia, His
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

Excellency Ambassador Mesganu Arega. My travels
around Somalia have highlighted for me the tremendous
progress that the country has made in State-building
and peacebuilding. His Excellency the President has
rightly set out an ambitious vision for his country,
and while many challenges and risks lie ahead, there
are also many opportunities. I urge all international
partners to lean in and provide additional support to
the people of Somalia.
My second update covers the political situation.
Somalia has made significant progress in advancing
key national priorities. Those include, first, the
appointment of the Independent Constitutional Review
and Implementation Commission; secondly, the passage
of 11 pieces of legislation, of which 6 have already been
signed into law; and thirdly, the successful one-person,
one-vote district council elections in Puntland state.
The March and May meetings of the National
Consultative Council (NCC) resulted in three governance
proposals: first, the revision of the national security
architecture; secondly, a model for fiscal federalism;
and thirdly, an electoral model. The proposed electoral
model provides for one-person, one-vote elections at
all the different layers of Government. That aspect has
been well received. Other elements of the NCC electoral
proposal, including a shift to a presidential system,
a move to two political parties and the alignment of
electoral terms have received more mixed reactions. I
therefore welcome clarification from His Excellency
the President that proposals from the NCC are a starting
point for further consultation.
With that in mind, I urge the Federal Government
to set out its plans for a rigorous and inclusive
consultation process, including precise options for
consultation and clarity on how agreements will be
reached before decisions are codified into law or fed
into the constitution-making process. Puntland remains
outside the NCC process but has indicated it will engage
directly with the Federal Government. I encourage
that dialogue to start urgently to ensure the process is
fully inclusive.
Finally, under my political update, I would like
to express my grave concern regarding the ongoing
conflict in Laascaanood. The violence has resulted to
date in 308 civilian casualties, with 36 people killed
and 272 individuals injured. I commend the efforts
by all parties and, indeed, the Council to bring about
a ceasefire. Following press statement SC/15313 of

S/PV.9356

7 June, UNSOM good offices are at the disposal of all
parties to help agree on a peaceful way forward. To that
end, I have engaged key stakeholders and held my first
phone call with President Bihi to convey messages on
the importance of dialogue, the cessation of hostilities
and humanitarian access.
My third update covers the security situation.
The Federal Government-led counter-Al-Shabaab
operations have largely been focused on the Middle
Shabelle region, eastern Hiraan and Galmudug. During
those operations, Al-Shabaab has been degraded
militarily and dislodged from a number of areas. That
is a notable achievement. But Al-Shabaab remains a
significant threat. The remaining operations under the
current phase 1 offensive are to be completed in the
coming weeks.
Preparations for phase 2 have begun and are
also expected to be launched in the coming weeks.
Additionally, Operation Black Lion, a Somali-led
initiative with the front-line States, is also due to start in
the coming weeks. That is intended to place additional
pressure on Al-Shabaab.
Three other security challenges regarding the next
phase of operations merit attention.
First, operations will take place against a recent
resurgence in the scale, tempo and geographic
distribution of attacks from Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab’s
continuing capability and intent were demonstrated by
its attack on the Pearl Beach Hotel in Mogadishu on
9 June, which killed nine people, including one member
of the United Nations family.
Secondly, the next phase of operations, which
moves further south, presents more challenging politics
and clan dynamics. It will be essential to plan the next
phase carefully to ensure the full integration of military
and civilian efforts, including planned stabilization.
Thirdly, operations will occur concurrently with
the ATMIS drawdown, putting pressure on planning
and logistics.
My fourth update covers the humanitarian situation
and the links to conflict and climate change.
The current operation against Al-Shabaab has
created opportunities for humanitarian access to people
in need. However, insecurity has also contributed
to an extremely challenging operating environment
for humanitarian agencies. From January to March,

23-181293/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

around 430,000 people across Somalia were displaced
by conflict and insecurity. Approximately 580,000
people live within territories controlled by non-State
armed actors, and most of those displaced are women
and children.
Somalia’s overall humanitarian situation remains
precarious, with 8.25 million people — half the
population — requiring humanitarian assistance.
While famine has been averted owing to a scale-up
of humanitarian assistance and better-than-forecast
rain patterns, the rains have also resulted in flooding,
affecting at least 468,000 people and displacing
247,000 others. To address critical humanitarian needs,
the 2023 humanitarian response plan needs more than
$2.6 billion. Halfway through the year, the plan is only
29.8 per cent funded. I call on all Somalia’s friends to
increase the much-needed funding urgently.
Droughts and flooding are, sadly, becoming more
frequent in Somalia owing to recurrent climate shocks.
Traditional pastoral livelihoods are under severe
pressure, and we are seeing significant urbanization as
a result, including an estimated 800,000 more people
now in Mogadishu. That calls for durable solutions,
including through urban planning and investments in
different forms of livelihoods. Somalia urgently needs
to access large-scale climate finance for resilience
and adaptation, and that will be a priority for me
going forward.
My fifth update is on women and peace and security.
The inspirational women leaders of Somalia continue,
rightly, to advocate their rightful inclusion in political
processes and decision-making. The commitment made
by Somalia’s political leaders to a 30 per cent quota of
women representation in the previous federal elections
remains unrealized. In the recent district elections held
in Puntland, only 17 per cent of those elected were
women, down from 27 per cent in phase 1. Women’s
participation and representation needs to be codified in
relevant legal frameworks, including the Constitution.
As the first female Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, I will be putting those
issues at the forefront of my work.
For the sixth part of my briefing, I would like
to make observations on stabilization. Stabilization
activities continue to be implemented in areas recovered
from Al-Shabaab. The challenge remains to ensure the
sustainability of those gains. That will require ongoing
security, the provision of basic services, reconciliation
4/23

22/06/2023

and long-term political and State-building processes.
UNSOM has responded to the request by the Federal
Government of Somalia to step up our response on
stabilization. A stabilization cell has been created, which
will report directly to me. Our shared ambition must
be matched with the resources to deliver the necessary
stabilization response, and future military operations
must be planned alongside stabilization interventions.
For the seventh section of my briefing, I would
like to discuss our transition plans. The Council will
recall that UNSOM’s strategic review (S/2022/716,
annex) recommends that the Mission plan for a
triple transition. The first is the security transition.
The second is the possible drawdown of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and the handover
of its mission-support functions to UNSOM. The third
transition is the eventual handover from UNSOM to the
United Nations country team. Those three transitions
are interdependent, and we cannot make decisions on
one without carefully considering the consequences
for the others. But the overriding driver is the
security transition.
As we will hear from President Mohamud and the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the planned June drawdown of
ATMIS and handover to the Somali security forces is
proceeding. My provisional assessment of the transition
going forward is that the complexity, constraints and
pace of the transition process present risks, which will
be challenging. I have started by forming a transition
cell to ensure coherent mission-wide planning. That
team is now working intensively on transition in
collaboration with all relevant stakeholders. I would
like to reassure the members of the Security Council
that we are identifying the questions that need to be
addressed, but many of the solutions will demand a
collective endeavour.
For the eighth and final section of my briefing, I
will conclude by highlighting my top five priorities
for the UNSOM mission over the next six months.
My first priority will be preparing the United Nations
for the three transitions ahead, taking account of
the challenges I have outlined. Secondly, I will be
focusing on positioning UNSOM to play a lead role
in bringing together the international community’s
efforts on stabilization. Thirdly, I will be prioritizing
support for the various elements of the State-building
process, in particular those related to the elections
process, ensuring inclusive consultations, including
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

with Puntland. Fourthly, I will support the ongoing
efforts to bring the conflict in Laascaanood to a
peaceful conclusion. Fifthly, I will support the Federal
Government of Somalia to reach the completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative and an associated shift from humanitarian
into resilience-based development programming,
including on climate.
Across all priorities, I will encourage the rightful
participation and representation of women. Somalia
needs to draw on the full talent of all of its population
if it is to tackle the numerous challenges ahead.
In conclusion, the United Nations stands ready
to support His Excellency President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud in achieving his vision of Somalia as a
country at peace with itself and the world. I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Security Council for your
continued support.
The President: I thank Ms. Laing for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Souef.
Mr. Souef (spoke in French): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council today and to share with
you my analysis of the main political and security
developments in Somalia in recent months, in the runup to the renewal of the mandate of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), which expires
in a few days’ time.
Allow me, first of all, to pay solemn tribute to all
those soldiers who have lost their lives in the line of
duty in Somalia. The contribution they have made to
the service of peace in the country by sacrificing their
lives will never be forgotten.
(spoke in English)
I am also honoured to speak today alongside His
Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. On
behalf of the African Union, I would like to recognize
his stellar leadership in steering Somalia towards
lasting peace and security.
I commend ATMIS, the Federal Government of
Somalia and international partners for their good
collaboration in the fight against terrorism and in
favour of peace, reconciliation and stability in Somalia.
Speaking before me this morning was Ambassador
Catriona Laing, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United

S/PV.9356

Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. Our joint
presence in this Chamber is a reminder of the unique
partnership that exists between the African Union and
the United Nations.
On 23 May, Somalia marked an important milestone
in celebrating the first anniversary of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud’s return to office. Somalis came
together to commemorate the occasion and renew the
call for peace, stability and prosperity.
As we reflect on the past year, it is clear that
the stability ushered in last May has delivered
great dividends and, in many instances, exceeded
expectations. The progress made thus far is also a
testament to the resilience and determination of the
Somali people.
Since my briefing to the Security Council in
February (see S/PV.9267), Somalia has continued to
focus on building consensus on critical issues that will
hopefully lead to a transformative change in the country.
I am pleased to note that the vehicle for advancing change
remains the National Consultative Council (NCC). In
December 2022, the NCC agreed on a federal judicial
model, a strategic milestone towards the establishment
of an independent federal judicial system in Somalia. In
March, we saw a landmark agreement on the national
security architecture, and in May, the NCC agreed on
returning Somalia to one-person, one-vote elections.
With the national security architecture agreement,
we look forward to more work on cascading the
agreement to the federal member state level and
developing a sustainability and affordability plan.
And with Somalia’s efforts aimed at holding universal
elections, the African Union will continue to offer its
expert support as we collectively work towards a more
inclusive society in Somalia.
Since the Government’s formation last August,
I have been impressed by the collaborative working
relationship between the executive and legislative
branches. Both branches are committed to ensuring
that Somalia is governed under the protection of the
law. In that context, I applaud the signing into law of
several bills.
Encouraging steps have also been taken to signal
that completion of the constitutional review process
will be finalized during the Federal Government’s
current term. I welcome the recent announcement
by the constitutionally mandated bodies to complete
the constitutional review process in 18 months. The

23-181295/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

successful completion of that task will significantly
impact Somalia’s future. It will require a broad national
consensus that must include representatives of political
institutions, political figures, traditional elders,
civil society organizations, and women and youth
representatives, including from Puntland.
Turning to the security situation, in our ongoing
assessment, security remains relatively stable but fluid
across all our sectors. With Al-Shabaab as the main
threat to Somalia and, presently, the region, there have
been important successes in efforts to degrade the
terrorist group. Thanks to the leadership of the Somali
security forces during the current offensive, Al-Shabaab
has been dislodged from more than 70 locations
across Somalia. That outcome also benefited from
ongoing ATMIS advisory support on the importance
of compliance with international humanitarian law,
human rights law and the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy with respect to United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces and the
protection of civilians.
It is clear that the offensive led by the Somali
security forces, with support from ATMIS and
international partners, has put Al-Shabaab under
operational pressure. However, at ATMIS, we are
mindful that our campaign against Al-Shabaab is a
long-term one, requiring a holistic approach. There
will be days of great success, and there will be periods
of setbacks.
On 26 May, Al-Shabaab attacked the ATMIS Bulo
Mareer forward operating base, resulting in several
troops being killed or injured. Since the incident,
ATMIS, in joint operations with the Somali security
forces, has recaptured the Bulo Mareer forward
operating base. The next phase of operations against
Al-Shabaab will be significant, as Al-Shabaab attempts
to strengthen its weakened command-and-control
structure. I welcome the Federal Government’s decision
to extend that campaign to involve the Frontline States,
namely Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya.
The operation, while military in objective, will
have clear stabilization lines of efforts to ensure that
our existing military gains can be translated into a
strategic success. Currently, ATMIS and the Federal
Government are in regular consultation to ensure that
proper coordination exists regarding the Frontline
States’ participation in the upcoming offensive.
6/23

22/06/2023

Let me take this opportunity to update the Council
on ATMIS efforts to implement the security transition.
We now have a new leadership in place across the
Mission’s three components. As mentioned earlier,
we have successfully partnered and supported the
offensive led by the Somali security forces. In April,
we submitted the security benchmarks to the Council,
highlighting our effective collaboration with the
Federal Government.
I am pleased to report that, with steady progress in
the Federal Government’s force-generation programme,
ATMIS uniformed personnel have increased their
mentoring activities for the Somali National Army and
the Somali Police Force. To continue that activity, we
appeal to ATMIS donors to continue supporting our
police efforts in training the Somali Police Force.
Turning to a key aspect of the security transition,
I can report to the Council that the drawdown of 2,000
ATMIS troops, in accordance with resolutions 2628
(2022) and 2670 (2022), is now being implemented.
Marka Ayub was handed over on 18 June and Xaaji
Cali on 20 June, while Mirtquo will be handed over
on 23 June; Albao on 23 June; Cadale on 27 June;
Aljazeera 1 on 28 June and Gherille on 30 June.
I also welcome the strong partnership between
Somalia and ATMIS in developing the Mogadishu
document for the June drawdown of ATMIS troops.
That joint position was accepted at the Summit of the
Troop-Contributing Countries to the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia and the Federal Republic
of Somalia, held in Kampala, following comprehensive
deliberations. As a result, the June drawdown has been
advancing, with the support of the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, and will meet its deadline
of 30 June.
With the completion of phase 1, particularly the
drawdown next week, ATMIS can create quick reaction
forces and mobile forces. We also anticipate the
deployment of key enablers, such as attack and utility
helicopters and long-range intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance and counter-improvised explosive
device capabilities. That will enhance the Mission’s
operational capability, thereby enabling it to better
respond to the operational requirements of the Somali
security forces on the battlefield.
In the next 18 months, we must collectively agree
on the role ATMIS should continue to play as it begins
to draw down and finally exit Somalia. We must also
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9356

reach consensus on what exactly Somalia should
achieve in the next 18 months to ensure that the ATMIS
transition is successful.

Somalis. I was horrified and heartbroken by what I
witnessed — violence, fear and starvation are the daily
reality there.

Another issue that needs our attention is tackling
the effects of climate change. I am particularly worried
about the alarming rate of flooding and drought. As
recently highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/443), they have led to the displacement of
approximately 1.4 million Somalis, with women and
children being those most affected. In previous years,
ATMIS has offered some support to displaced persons,
particularly those in its area of operations. With the
drawdown, Somalia will need additional support,
particularly in finding durable solutions.

I spoke with mothers in a camp for internally
displaced people in Dolow. The women told me stories
of entire herds of livestock being wiped out in the
droughts; terrorists recruiting children as young as 11
and the dangers they faced every day as they fight to
survive. One woman I met, Halima, told me she had
fled 200 kilometres from her home with her family of
10, to protect her young sons. She said armed groups
had been taking boys from their families by force
to join their ranks, killing anyone who refused. For
Halima, the violence and instability had been even
more devastating than the vicious drought. She said
to me that even if one has everything one needs, one
cannot live in a place with conflict.

Let me conclude with some remarks on the
upcoming mandate renewal. I believe we have a chance
to improve on past mandates by aligning with the
Government’s security priorities. We must support
the leadership of the Somali security forces in holding
liberated areas and taking over forward operating bases.
Those forces require resources to fight Al-Shabaab and
stabilize newly liberated areas. That calls for the lifting
of the arms embargo on Somalia.
(spoke in Arabic)
Somalia needs for all its partners and friends to make
the dream of peace, stability and security a sustained
reality. I therefore commend the determination of the
Somali Government and its political will to mobilize
all active efforts to guarantee that the transitional
process is a complete success and that a new chapter in
Somalia’s future will be opened. I am convinced that
Somalia and the Somali people can always rely on the
generosity and support of the Security Council, along
with the entire international community, to build a
better present and future.
The President: I thank Mr. Souef for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. McCain.
Ms. McCain: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council on the dire
hunger emergency unfolding in Somalia. This is my first
time before the Council since joining the World Food
Programme (WFP), and I welcome the opportunity to
contribute to its vital work.
I went to Somalia just last month, and I saw for
myself how conflict and climate change are conspiring
to destroy the lives and livelihoods of millions of

I am here today to tell the Council that Halima
and her family — and the countless thousands like
her — urgently need help and hope. Somalia was
hauled back from the abyss of famine in 2022 because
the international community saw the warning signs
flashing red and raced to respond. Donors funded an
unprecedented humanitarian scale-up. But now we are
in danger of losing the precious gains we have made
since those dark days last year.
The violence and instability that scar the country
have destroyed much of the infrastructure needed to
support food production and distribution. What has
not been wrecked by conflict has been consumed by
Somalia’s climate crisis, which its people did not
cause. The longest drought on record killed millions of
livestock and decimated crops. It has recently given way
to disastrous flash flooding in the south of the country.
Inevitably, huge numbers of people have been forced
from their homes and lands in search of food and safety.
Since the start of 2022, conflict has triggered over
1 million internal displacements. Climate disasters have
fuelled a further 2.1 million displacements over the past
three years. Continually having to move has left people
impoverished, traumatized and hungry. The latest food
security data shows that food insecurity is spiralling
across Somalia. Over 6.6 million people — one third
of the population — are expected to face crisis or
worse levels of hunger. That includes 40,000 people
fighting for survival in famine-like conditions. Even
worse, 1.8 million children are expected to suffer
acute malnutrition.

23-181297/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

We need a five-pronged action plan to address
the serious and growing emergency in Somalia. First,
I call on all States Members of the United Nations to
immediately contribute to the humanitarian response
plan for Somalia, which is seriously underfunded. At
the World Food Programme (WFP), we are being forced
to cut back our life-saving assistance programmes just
when they are needed the most. By December 2022, we
were reaching a record 4.7 million people per month
with food assistance, thanks to donors’ efforts to stop
famine in its tracks. But at the end of April, we had to
reduce our caseload to 3 million per month. Without
an immediate cash injection, we will have to cut our
distribution lists again in July to just 1.8 million per
month — that is almost 3 million women, children and
men who will be denied the assistance they desperately
need simply because we do not have the money to feed
them. If we get the funds we need, we will reverse
those life-threatening cuts and continue supporting the
millions who rely on the WFP for survival.
Secondly, we all need to work together to ensure
life-saving humanitarian assistance reaches the people
of Somalia. That means ensuring operations are run
with maximum efficiency to stretch every donor dollar
as far as possible. The WFP has the largest presence
of any United Nations agency in Somalia, with 13
offices across the country. We are working hard with
our donors, partners and the Government of Somalia to
ensure that our assistance reaches those we know are in
greatest need.
Thirdly, food assistance must be matched with
investments to rebuild livelihoods, strengthen resilience
and support climate-adaptation programmes. Those
proven solutions are the only way to finally break the
vicious cycle of hunger and poverty that has so many
Somalis in its grip.
Fourthly, the Security Council must spearhead
efforts to secure unimpeded humanitarian access to
all vulnerable communities in Somalia. Too often,
civilians living in territories controlled by armed
groups are cut off from humanitarian assistance, either
because access is denied or because the safety of aid
workers is threatened. That has to end. Too many lives
are at stake.
Fifthly and finally, we all have to work together to
find political solutions to create stability and peace in
Somalia. That is what the exhausted people of Somalia
want and need above all. The WFP is ready to play
8/23

22/06/2023

its full part and help Somalia lay the foundations for
long-term food security and put an end to the scourge
of hunger. Peace requires political will and leadership.
We look to the Security Council to please provide it for
Halima and all the other people of Somalia.
The President: I thank Ms. McCain for her briefing.
I now call on the President of the Federal Republic
of Somalia.
President Mohamud: At the outset, let me take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I also want to thank the
briefers — the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme — for their broad explanation of the issues
facing Somalia and the current situation in the country.
It is an honour to stand before the Security Council
today as the President of Somalia, representing the
hopes and aspirations of the Somali people. I would
like to begin by expressing our heartfelt gratitude to
the Council for its unwavering support for and strategic
partnership with Somalia over the decades.
This is a critical moment in our country’s history
as we simultaneously pursue State-building efforts,
combat the menace of the terrorist group Al-Shabaab
and address the challenges posed by severe droughts. In
my statement, I will provide an update on the political
and security developments in Somalia and advocate
the total lifting of the 31-year arms embargo that has
limited our ability to protect our citizens, enforce the
rule of law and secure our borders. We recognize that
defeating Al-Shabaab requires a multifaceted approach
that includes capable and effective security forces,
an inclusive State-building process and the ability
of the State to provide critical services to the public.
My Administration is working diligently on all these
fronts to move our country towards durable peace
and prosperity.
Let us begin with the progress we have achieved on
the State-building front. As Council members may be
aware, , for over a decade, Somalia has faced significant
challenges in reaching high-level political agreements
on critical issues, such as the nature of intra-state
relations and how to make the transition away from
indirect elections. However, since my election in May
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

2022, we have held six successful National Consultative
Council meetings, resulting in consensus agreements
with the federal member states on the allocation of power,
the judicial model, fiscal federalism, the national security
architecture and the electoral model of the country.
Those agreements pave the way for a more inclusive and
representative governance system in Somalia.
Turning our attention to security and stability, I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Somali National
Army, in partnership with local communities, has made
significant strides in the fight against Al-Shabaab. Over
the past year, we have witnessed the recovery of more than
70 towns from the grip of the terrorist group, resulting
in the opening of the main north-south transportation
routes and vast areas of rich farmland in the country.
We have also taken significant steps to tighten
anti-money laundering regulations and combat the
financing of terrorist activities, closing over 300 accounts
that provided illicit revenue to the terrorist group. Those
efforts, along with support given to conferences of
religious leaders who contest the ideological strategy
of Al-Shabaab, have dealt a blow to its operations and
challenged its legitimacy within society.
Through a combination of our military offensive’s
ability to dislodge and disrupt Al-Shabaab and the
considerable advancements in urban security efforts
through enhanced intelligence, we are witnessing a
notable reduction in terrorist attacks against our capital
city, Mogadishu, and many other towns in southcentral Somalia. Today our capital is undergoing a
remarkable transformation. Mogadishu’s housing sector
is experiencing a boom, and businesses are opening
daily in, inter alia, the retail, hospitality and healthcare sectors. That progress not only instils hope in our
citizens, but also attracts investment and fosters an
environment conducive to growth.
In addition to those achievements, over the past
six months, we have carried out over 240 stabilization
activities in recently liberated communities in Hirshabelle
and Galmudug states. For many of the people living in
those towns, Al-Shabaab was the only authority for as
many as 15 years in the past. In the next phase of our
stabilization programme, we will focus on deepening the
extension of State authority to, and the social contract
with, recently liberated communities through the
provision of critical services, such as policing, social
services, governance and reconciliation there.

S/PV.9356

Looking ahead, the next phase in our fight against
terrorism will involve Operation Black Lion, which will
be the most critical offensive in Somalia’s history, aimed
at liberating nearly all the remaining Al-Shabaabcontrolled territories throughout the country. With
the support of our Frontline States — Kenya, Ethiopia
and Djibouti — we are confident that the campaign
will significantly degrade Al-Shabaab and pave the
way for sustainable peace and security. Although we
have encountered slight setbacks, owing to rainfall and
force-generation requirements, operations planning
is well under way. A team of multinational planning
and operational experts has been deployed to the
joint coordination command post in Mogadishu. The
Operation holds immense significance in our quest
for lasting peace and security. In addition, we will
deploy teams to actively monitor the civilian protection
component in the upcoming military operations, which
demonstrates our commitment to minimizing harm
to civilians and upholding human rights throughout
the offensive. The resilience of our success against
Al-Shabaab is evidenced by the fact the enemy has
not taken back an inch of the territory that we have
recovered from its forces over the past 10 months.
With regard to planning for current and future
operations, we are also concurrently working towards
the full withdrawal of the forces of African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), in line with
resolutions 2628 (2022) and 2670 (2022). The planning
and implementation of the drawdown of ATMIS
forces is being executed in close coordination with a
joint technical committee between Somalia and the
Mission in the country. Phase 1 of the drawdown is
nearing completion, and the Somali National Armed
Forces are assuming responsibility for four forward
operating bases, while collapsing three others. Once
phase 1 is completed, a joint assessment will be
conducted to review the impact of the drawdown. The
insights gained from the assessment will guide us
through phase 2, which is anticipated to commence
in September. I would like to take this opportunity
to express my heartfelt gratitude for the remarkable
support that Somalia has received from the African
Union and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The invaluable engagement of AMISOM
in our nation has provided us with the necessary room
to make significant strides in our peacebuilding and
State-building endeavours over the past 15 years. The
sacrifices made by the courageous men and women
from the troop-contributing countries shall forever be
etched in our collective memory in Somalia.

23-181299/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
have been able to avert famine through our sustained
partnership with the United Nations and the generous
support of the United States and other donors. However,
we remain committed to maintaining an effective and
sustained response to the ongoing drought, prioritizing
the well-being of our people. I am a strong advocate
for a genuine transition from traditional assistance
to resilience-based investment. By investing in
agropastoral communities and addressing the effects
of climate change, such as through water catchment
systems, regenerative agriculture practices and feeder
roads, we can enable the communities concerned to
sustain themselves economically and ensure their longterm well-being.
Let me share an example of the impact that such
investment can have. The completion of the 30-kilometer
Mogadishu-Afgoye road alone has not only improved
economic livelihoods for farmers in the area, but has
also made certain food staples more affordable for the
residents of our capital, Mogadishu.
On the economic front, we are nearing a significant
milestone in achieving the heavily indebted poor
countries (HIPC) completion point by the end of
this year. Over the past decade, we have undertaken
extensive macroeconomic and fiscal reforms to
position ourselves for that achievement. As we plan for
a post-HIPC environment, we are focusing on policies
that promote revenue generation and strengthen our
public financial management systems. Furthermore,
we recognize that our most valuable asset is our people.
Therefore, we are committed to scaling up access to
quality education and health services, especially for
women and youth. As a former educator, I know how
education can break the cycle of poverty. I grew up in a
small rural community, and, after my dad passed away,
my mother struggled to ensure that I get an education.
She was unable to read or write. Yet she checked my
homework regularly by checking for any red marks in
the teacher’s notes. Thanks to her determination, I went
onto to contribute to the establishment of one of the
premier educational institutions in our country. I want
all Somali children to have the same kind of opportunity
in the future. To that end, my Administration has
already undertaken a massive teacher recruitment
campaign, which will add 10,000 new teachers — 20 per
cent of whom will be women — to the system during
my term. Already, 3,000 teachers have been recruited
and are currently undergoing training. Those teachers
10/23

22/06/2023

have been dispatched throughout the country and have
been allocated to the education system of the federal
member states.
However, despite those remarkable achievements,
our journey towards a peaceful and prosperous Somalia
is facing a formidable obstacle — the prolonged arms
embargo imposed on our nation since 1992, which is
the longest arms embargo in the history of the United
Nations. Let me state clearly that the Somalia of 2023 is
not the Somalia of 1992. That must be duly considered.
It essential to highlight the challenges that the arms
embargo measures and notification processes present
for the Somali security forces. Acquiring the necessary
lethal capabilities has become an arduous task, thus
hindering their ability to effectively combat Al-Shabaab
and achieve lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
The arms embargo is in no way serving the shortterm or long-term interests of Somalia. While we
acknowledge the importance of international efforts to
maintain peace and security, we believe that it is crucial
to reassess the situation in the light of the progress
that we have made towards establishing an effective
weapons and ammunition management system, guided
by the benchmarks proposed by the technical team of
United Nations Support Office in Somalia and reflected
and endorsed in resolutions 2607 (2021) and 2662
(2022). Somalia’s national weapons and ammunition
management strategy has been effectively implemented
through results-based action plans. We have made
substantial progress in registration, record-keeping and
stockpile management thanks to the establishment of a
comprehensive and centralized national weapons and
ammunition management database in Somalia today.
We have worked tirelessly to strengthen our legal and
regulatory frameworks, including the introduction of
a firearms bill to control the possession, manufacture,
storage and use of firearms in Somalia. Those crucial
undertakings have substantially mitigated the risks
associated with the trafficking, illegal possession
and improper use of weapons and ammunition in
Somalia. Those initiatives serve as a testament
to our Government’s unwavering commitment to
improving weapons and ammunition management
frameworks in a coherent manner in accordance with
international standards.
Considering those significant developments, I
implore Council members to support our call for the
complete lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia. By
doing so, they will empower us to assert our sovereignty,
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

effectively combat terrorism and build a peaceful
and prosperous future for our nation. The menace of
terrorism in Somalia is not limited to risks in Somalia
only; it is a menace to the region, the continent and the
world at large. Together, let us seize the opportunity
to unlock the full potential of Somalia to create an
inclusive and prosperous society and to build a world
where peace and security prevail forever.
The President: I thank His Excellency President
Mohamud for his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates.
I want to begin by welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to today’s meeting. I also
wish to thank our briefers today, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Laing, Executive Director
McCain and Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia Souef.
Their briefings gave well-informed, high-level insights
on the complex challenges that Somalia faces.
The address of His Excellency President Mohamud
reminded us that Somalis themselves have the resolve
and the vision to own the solutions to those challenges
and pave the way towards a society that reflects their
aspirations. The United Arab Emirates offers its full
support to Somalia in the spirit of partnership and its
long-standing support to the country and its people.
To that effect, today I want to make three points.
First, it is important to support Somalia’s
national vision. In recent months, the Federal
Government of Somalia has shown commitment
to building State institutions that articulate a
forward-looking strategy, beginning with a focus on
reconciliation and on revamping its electoral system.
We are encouraged by the fact that the Government has
taken steps, through negotiation and dialogue, towards
reaching the needed agreements and compromises on
all those processes.
We commend in particular the focus on improving
cooperation and exchanges between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
through the National Consultative Council. Inclusive
discussions geared towards reaching a political
agreement on power-sharing and other outstanding
issues of federalism, are welcome, especially within
the context of the constitutional review process. By
adhering to the principles of mutual respect, dialogue

S/PV.9356

and compromise, and by putting in place mechanisms
for reconciliation, it is possible to build a Somalia that
reflects the aspirations of all of its people.
Despite those advances, the ongoing violence in
Laascaanood and the resulting civilian casualties are
of great concern. The United Arab Emirates strongly
supports all efforts to de-escalate the tensions through
dialogue. We commend the efforts by the Federal
Government of Somalia in that regard.
Secondly, greater emphasis should be put on
supporting efforts to counter Al-Shabaab.
Today we can all agree that Somalia’s most
significant challenge to achieving its political and
socioeconomic ambitions is international terrorism on
its soil. The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned
about the increase in attacks by Al-Shabab against
civilians and security actors, including those targeting
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS) personnel and facilities. In the first quarter
of 2023, the number of terrorism-related incidents
surpassed all previous quarterly averages on record
since 2016.
Countering Al-Shabaab is already an international
effort, and in recent months, the Government of Somalia
has undertaken steps that strengthen its security
institutions and send a clear signal that dismantling
Al-Shabaab is a priority. Those also include the progress
made in the implementation of the arms embargo
concerning Al-Shabaab, strengthening its weapons
management system and holding regular exchanges in
the context of the weapons and ammunition mechanism
working group. Much more still needs to be done.
The best chance of success will arise from striking a
balance between advancing offensive operations and
consolidating the hold on areas that have been liberated
from Al-Shabaab.
In addition, there is a need to secure support from
local communities while making further advances, in
order to prevent Al-Shabaab from exploiting security
vacuums. It is the responsibility of the Security Council
to be vigilant with regard to Somalia’s needs at this
critical juncture. That means ensuring that the tools
the Council uses are fit for purpose and that measures
adopted to constrain nefarious actors in the interest of
a State seek to help and not hinder the security needs
of its people.

23-1812911/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

22/06/2023

As discussions around the drawdown of ATMIS
progress, coordination among all parties must remain
front and centre to ensure synchronicity among the
United Nations, Somalia’s regional partners and frontline State neighbours during the transition.

millions displaced and facing crisis levels of food
insecurity. So, we cannot afford to be complacent
about the scale of humanitarian need. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, it affects
50 per cent of the population.

Thirdly, the international community must support
the scale-up of humanitarian and climate change
responses in Somalia.

Secondly, we welcome President Mohamud’s
commitment to and progress in advancing political
reforms and, if I may say, education reforms as well.
The United Kingdom supports State-building efforts
in Somalia, including the process of democratization,
and recent local elections in Puntland represent an
important milestone on that journey. An inclusive,
consultative process, in line with the constitutional
review, is necessary for those reforms to succeed. We
encourage all the parties, including Puntland, to engage
constructively to that end. Inclusive politics at all levels
will also be important in the fight against Al-Shabaab.

Moments ago, we heard in detail about the deeply
distressing situation facing millions of Somalis each
day. The situation is leading to regional spillover
and instability as the drought has driven hundreds of
thousands of Somalis to seek refuge in neighbouring
countries. As always, women and children are hardest
hit and make up more than 80 per cent of the displaced
population. Scaled-up and coordinated assistance
should be put in place to tackle the twin humanitarian
and climate crises.
The United Arab Emirates is working with the
Somali Government and its partners to help to alleviate
the humanitarian needs on the ground. During the
period from 2018 to 2023, the assistance of the United
Arab Emirates to Somalia amounted to $194.6 million.
The United Arab Emirates remains a trusted partner of
Somalia and shares a strong message of support. We
will continue to stand by the Somali people in their
pursuit of sustainable peace and prosperity.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
want to start too by welcoming President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud to our meeting today and thanking him for
his important briefing. I want to thank also to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Laing, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia Souef, and Executive Director
McCain for their valuable briefings.
Somalia, as we know, faces many interconnected
challenges, and we welcome and commend progress
that it has made.
Let me make three points.
First, on the humanitarian side, we are relieved
that the system-wide scale-up averted famine and that
the arrival of rains has ended the protracted drought.
But climate shocks and continued conflict will leave
12/23

That brings me to my third point, on security and
counter-terrorism. The United Kingdom commends the
momentum gained from Somalia’s operations against
Al-Shabaab. As President Mohamud made clear,
enduring progress will be measured by the ability to
hold and stabilize those liberated areas. I therefore
encourage Somalia to continue working with the United
Nations and partners to coordinate the stabilization
efforts and prioritize investment in reconciliation as a
foundation for long-term progress.
Alongside its hard-won security gains, Somalia has
continued to take critical steps to prepare for its security
transition. We encourage the international community
to continue to support Somalia so that a sustainable,
affordable and accountable security sector will be
able to take full responsibility for Somalia’s security
as the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS) draws down by the end of 2024. The Security
Council has an important role to play, supporting
ATMIS in delivering its critical functions and planning
a strategic drawdown, and meeting Somalia’s needs
as the country assumes responsibility. We welcome
the Federal Government of Somalia’s commitment to
strengthening weapons and ammunition management.
The benchmarks in resolution 2662 (2022) were
recommended by technical experts to prevent weapons
from reaching Al-Shabaab. We urge all partners to join
us in supporting Somalia in making further progress
against those benchmarks in order to enable the arms
controls on the Government to be lifted.
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

We support President Mohamud’s efforts to degrade
Al-Shabaab militarily, financially and ideologically.
Through the Council, and as a committed long-term
partner and friend to Somalia, the United Kingdom will
continue to stand with Somalia on its journey to peace
and prosperity.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud’s participation in today’s meeting and thank
him for his statement to the Council at this critically
important time for his country, Somalia. We would like
to thank Ms. Catriona Laing, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), and Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef, Head
of the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), for their information on developments in the
country. We also thank Ms. Cindy McCain, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, for her briefing.
Russia fully supports Somalia’s efforts in
combating extremism and in the areas of State-building
and national reconciliation. There has been positive
momentum in those processes in the past few months.
The National Consultative Council has been meeting
regularly. The Federal Government and federal
member states in Somalia were able to reach a powersharing agreement last year. This year, significant
understandings have been reached regarding the
federal fiscal policy, the future electoral model and
the constitutional review process. The strengthening
of the national security forces is under way. We hope
that all the participants in the Somali political process,
including the leadership of the states of Puntland and
Somaliland, will continue working together to develop
a sustainable model for a federal system in the country.
At the same time, we unfailingly support the need to
ensure the territorial integrity and unity of Somalia.
We note that the humanitarian situation throughout
the country remains fragile. Despite the prevention
of famine, the numbers of people in need remains
very high.
The security situation is deeply worrisome. The
extremist group Al-Shabaab still has significant
influence in the country, carries out regular raids in
the capital and on the periphery and has continued to
shell Mogadishu airport. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/443), the number of improvised
explosive device attacks in the first quarter of this year

S/PV.9356

has exceeded the statistics for recent years. We strongly
condemn all terrorist attacks and pay tribute to African
peacekeepers and the Somali National Army, including
those who have given their lives in line of duty. We
extend our condolences to Uganda in connection with
the deadly attack on 26 May by Al-Shabaab on an
ATMIS forward operating base in the Lower Shabelle
region of Somalia. However, we note that offensive
operations of the Somali National Army have made
it possible to push back the extremists’ positions in
Galmudug and Hirshabelle. The federal authorities have
also facilitated a settlement for the situation in SouthWest state. And we welcome the launch of a regional
initiative by Somalia’s neighbours aimed at combating
Al-Shabaab.
The situation in Laascaanood has been another
flashpoint in recent months. We support the mediation
efforts of the Federal Government, clan elders and
Ethiopia aimed at resolving that armed conflict. We
believe that in accordance with resolution 2592 (2021),
UNSOM has the necessary mandate to coordinate and
support inter-clan reconciliation efforts. We hope that
the situation will be resolved swiftly.
ATMIS remains a critical deterrent to extremist
and other illegal activities in Somalia. We believe it is
important to base decisions regarding ATMIS on the
actual security situation on the ground and to take into
account the priorities of the Federal Government and the
other States in the region. We believe that the Mission’s
drawdown should be carried out in accordance with the
plan adopted by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Federal Government of Somalia,
and based on the ability and willingness of Somalia’s
armed forces to independently ensure the security of
the country and its people. We commend the activities
of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, which
has been providing significant material, technical and
logistical support to ATMIS, UNSOM and the Somali
National Army.
In our view, the current priority should be to focus
the international community’s efforts on increasing the
effectiveness of the federal law-enforcement bodies in
Somalia so that by the time ATMIS withdraws from
the country, the national authorities will be able to
assume full responsibility for maintaining security
throughout the territory of Somalia. We call for those
considerations to be at the forefront in guiding our
decisions as we approach the renewals of the ATMIS
and UNSOS mandates at the end of the month.

23-1812913/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I welcome President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
to today’s meeting. His participation will help the
Security Council gain a better knowledge of the realities
in Somalia and its concerns so as to give the country
more targeted support in its efforts to achieve stability,
development and security. I also welcome the very first
briefing to the Council by Ms. Laing, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I listened
attentively to the briefings by Mr. Souef, the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Executive Director McCain of the
World Food Programme.
While Somalia has continued to register important
progress in its political process, security transition
and national reconstruction, among other things, it is
still facing major challenges. When Secretary-General
Guterres visited Somalia in April, he called on the
United Nations and the international community to
stand with the country. In the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/443), I would like to stress
three points.
First, we must continue to advance the political
process in Somalia. President Mohamud recently
presided over multiple meetings at the National
Consultative Council and actively discussed major
issues with federal member states regarding the federal
system and the national security architecture, among
other things. China calls upon the Federal Government
of Somalia to enhance mutual trust through dialogue
with federal member states in order to find solutions for
lasting peace and stability in the country.
The international community must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia,
uphold the Somali-led and Somali-owned principle and
provide constructive support. We oppose any actions
that undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Somalia and lead to disunity in the country. In
Las Anod, clashes continue to break out between the
security forces of Somaliland and local militia. We
urge the parties to the conflict to immediately cease
hostilities, withdraw their forces, engage in dialogue
and effectively protect the security of the people.
Secondly, the security transition must be
accelerated. The terrorist threat posed by Al-Shabaab
is far from having been eliminated. China strongly
condemns the recent attacks by Al-Shabaab on the Pearl
Beach Hotel in Mogadishu and the camp of the African
14/23

22/06/2023

Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), inter
alia, and offers its condolences for the peacekeepers
killed in the attacks, including Ugandan peacekeepers.
At present, Somalia’s security transition is at a
critical phase. The Somali Government should accelerate
the capacity-building of its security forces and enhance
its independent counter-terrorism capabilities. China
welcomes the Frontline States initiative reached between
Somalia, Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya, and the deepening
of regional counter-terrorism cooperation to safeguard
common security. In the light of developments in the
situation, the Security Council should review and adjust
the arms embargo measures on Somalia and support the
country in strengthening its defence capabilities.
China appreciates the significant contributions made
by ATMIS to the security and stability of Somalia. The
Security Council is discussing the issue of the ATMIS
transition. We hope that the Somali Government will step
up coordination and cooperation with ATMIS, steadily
advance the ATMIS drawdown plan and ensure the
steady and orderly handover of security responsibilities.
Pending the withdrawal of ATMIS, the European Union
and other relevant financial contributors should provide
ATMIS with adequate, sustainable and predictable
funding support.
Thirdly, we should promote development and achieve
lasting peace. During his visit to Somalia, SecretaryGeneral Guterres appealed for help to be provided
Somalia to strengthen social resilience and enhance
security and stability as it carries out counter-terrorism
operations. In areas recovered in military operations, the
Somali Government should meet the basic needs of the
people, promote a stronger sense of national belonging
and maintain lasting stability.
At present, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
is grim, with half of the population in dire need
of humanitarian aid and 6.6 million people facing
food security issues. The international community
should step up humanitarian assistance and ensure
the timely disbursement of humanitarian funding.
Somalia should also improve humanitarian access and
support international humanitarian operations. Special
Representative Laing should play a coordinating role,
mobilize international resources and create enabling
conditions for the development and stability of Somalia.
The future of Somalia should be in the hands of
the Somali people. As a good friend and good partner
of Somalia, China has always firmly supported Somalia
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

in its efforts aimed at achieving lasting peace and
development and national reconstruction, improving
its capacity to counter terrorism and maintain stability.
Since last year, we have provided two batches of
emergency food aid, engaged in practical cooperation in
such areas as agriculture, education and fisheries, inter
alia, and contributed to the reconstruction of Somalia.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to contribute even more to the achievement
of lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique (A3).
We highly commend the United Arab Emirates for
its leadership in convening today’s important briefing
on Somalia, our sister country.
We wish to recognize, first of all, the presence in
this Chamber of His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia. We welcome his participation in today’s
meeting and attach great importance to the briefing he
just delivered.
The A3 welcomes the appointment of Ms. Catriona
Laing as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). We are confident that
Ms. Laing will build on the commendable work done
by her predecessor, Mr. James Swan, and effectively
deliver on her mandate as Head of UNSOM.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, His Excellency Ambassador Mohamed ElAmine Souef and Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, Ms. Cindy McCain, for their in-depth and
informative briefings.
We commend the Government of Somalia under the
able leadership of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
for the ongoing efforts to combat Al-Shabaab and
restore peace and stability across the country. The
success achieved so far in the fight against the terrorist
group bears testimony to the Somali Government’s
commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
its citizens.
The A3 remains deeply concerned that Al-Shabaab
militants continue to pose a significant threat to
innocent people and critical infrastructure and property

S/PV.9356

in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Gabon, Ghana
and Mozambique condemn in the strongest terms the
repeated attacks by Al-Shabab against the civilian
population, humanitarian actors, the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and Federal
Government forces.
Al-Shabaab’s recent attack on the Pearl Beach
Hotel in Mogadishu serves as a sobering reminder of its
ability to elude security personnel and carry out deadly
attacks. We strongly urge the Government of Somalia,
with the support of the international community, to
step up its efforts to combat that threat and further
strengthen the ability of its security forces to prevent
attacks of that nature. We urge the Council and the
international community to continue supporting
Somalia so as to ensure that its Government is able
to effectively combat the threat of terrorism within
its borders and promote peace, security, stability and
development in the country.
We hold the view that the ATMIS mandate, which
is currently under negotiation, must be clear, realistic
and tailored to Somalia’s security needs, which will
enable the Mission to work with Somalia to ensure
peace and security in the country. We are equally
concerned about the renewed conflict in Las Anod,
particularly in the Sool region, where violent clashes
between Somaliland forces and local Dhulbahante
clan militia have resulted in significant casualties, the
destruction of infrastructure and the displacement of
civilians. In the light of that, we welcome the progress
made towards implementing the agreement reached at
the reconciliation conference in South-West state. We
urge all parties to continue working towards the full
implementation of the terms of the agreement as a
means to fostering peace and stability in the region. In
order to ensure that the people of Somalia can continue
to live in peace and make progress, it is necessary that
the democratic space, the freedom of expression and
openness be preserved.
With regard to the withdrawal of ATMIS, the current
security situation in the country remains a significant
concern. Therefore, the drawdown of ATMIS troops
needs to be conducted in a coordinated manner, based on
the force generation by the Somali security forces, so as
to avoid the creation of new security challenges. In that
context, the A3 fully supports the calls by the Somali
Government for the total lifting of the arms embargo.
It is critical that Somalia be able to raise a robust army
to take over its security responsibilities, which can

23-1812915/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

be achieved only if the arms embargo is lifted, as the
President of Somalia said earlier. The sovereign right
of self-defence against terrorist attacks must not be
denied to the Somali people and Government. We urge
the Council to heed the repeated calls and support the
measures taken by President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and his Government to liberate the territories and
ensure the safety and security of the Somali people. We
welcome the news of the completion of the ammunition
storage facility in Jazeera, Mogadishu, which is a major
step forward in the efforts being made to improve the
management of Somalia’s self-defence.
We applaud the Federal Government of Somalia
for its consistent efforts to advance its national
priorities, particularly with regard to the State-building
process through political dialogue, as evidenced by
the productive meetings of the National Consultative
Council. Achievements in State-building include the
agreement on a model for fiscal federalism, amendments
to the national security architecture and an agreement
outlining a one-person, one-vote electoral model.
They are important achievements in our view. In the
same vein, it is encouraging to note that attempts are
being made to further dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states.
The commitment to finding a peaceful and mutually
beneficial resolution to the protracted conflict has
been demonstrated by the selection of Mr. Abdikarim
Hussein Guled and Ms. Edna Adan as special envoys
for the negotiations. The stability and development of
the region depend on such efforts to resolve the dispute
peacefully. We note with regret, however, the failure of
the Puntland authorities to participate in the meetings
of the National Consultative Council. We encourage
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to continue his
reconciliation efforts to bring Puntland back to the
negotiating table. We urge the Puntland authorities
to prioritize the interests of Somalia. It is imperative
that all stakeholders engage constructively and work
towards a peaceful and successful Somalia.
Somalia’s determination and resilience in the face
of challenges in its pursuit of economic progress and
development are inspiring. Key legislation has been
enacted and fiscal federalism has advanced, putting
Somalia on schedule for the completion of the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative by late 2023.
Despite that achievement, the detrimental effect of
climate change on economic activity and the low-level
domestic revenue mobilization are just two of the many
16/23

22/06/2023

remaining obstacles that the country must overcome.
In that regard, we encourage Somalia to continue
moving forward on the path to economic growth and
development, with a focus on taking steps to strengthen
macroeconomic stability and increase domestic revenue
mobilization. In addition, we urge the international
community to maintain its support for Somalia’s
numerous economic development programmes. That
objective can be achieved through increased funding,
technical-assistance and capacity-building initiatives
and quick-impact projects. By helping Somalia in its
efforts to strengthen its economy, the international
community will contribute to the country’s peace
and prosperity.
Millions of Somalians continue to be impacted
by the drought, conflict and flooding, despite the
intensified humanitarian efforts. While there has been
some success in alleviating suffering among the people,
high levels of food insecurity, malnutrition and disease
persist. The humanitarian community has estimated
that more than 7.6 million individuals are in need of
aid. But it has only been able to finance 28 per cent of
the 2023 humanitarian response plan. In order to help in
Somalia‘s recovery, the international community must
continue to provide both humanitarian aid and longterm climate-sensitive development assistance. We
urge the continuation of the vital collaboration between
the Government of Somalia and humanitarian actors,
which is necessary for the mitigation of risks and the
alleviation of suffering.
The A3 wishes to express its gratitude to the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia for its
support to the Somali Government in its pursuit of
peace and security, despite difficulties confronting the
Mission in terms of finances and logistics.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique strongly encourage
the international community at large and the Security
Council in particular to provide assistance to ATMIS
and the Somali security forces, including through
United Nations-assessed contributions, to enable them
to fulfil their responsibilities effectively.
The A3 extends its gratitude to all those who are
contributing to the stabilization efforts of Somalia. We
urge them to continue with their support of the country
and its people. Together, we can end Al-Shabaab’s reign
of terror in Somalia and usher in a period of peace and
wealth for Somalia and its people.
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9356

Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique reaffirm their
solidarity with the people and the Government
of Somalia and their commitment to defend the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
that country. The A3 is ready to accompany Somalia on
that journey.

Brazil shares with other Council members serious
concerns about violence in Laascaanood. We reiterate
our full respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of the Federal Republic
of Somalia and call on all parties to reach a ceasefire
agreement urgently.

Mr. Moretti (Brazil): As other delegations have
done, I warmly welcome His Excellency President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud. I thank Special Representative Laing,
Special Representative El-Amine Souef and Executive
Director McCain for their valuable briefings.

We support further efforts by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) within its
mandate to foster inclusive dialogue, promote peaceful
dispute resolution and engage with all parties to
the conflict.

We acknowledge the work undertaken by the Federal
Government of Somalia towards the advancement
of key national priorities, including strengthening
dialogue with federal member states. Political unity
and effective cooperation in favour of the Somali
people are critical for further State-building, peace and
sustainable development.

We commend the vital work being carried out by the
World Food Programme and the humanitarian agencies
in Somalia. At the same time, as indicated by the
Executive Director, the humanitarian situation remains
acute. A significant part of the population is on the brink
of famine, and for many, life is a daily struggle simply to
eat. Additional and flexible funding for food security is
critical for preventing conflict.

We commend Somalia’s efforts to advance the
implementation of its national security architecture in
parallel with the ongoing phases of the drawdown of the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS).
A proper security handover is a key challenge that the
Security Council and all relevant parties must help
Somalia to overcome in a sustained manner.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in his latest
report (S/2023/443), regional cooperation remains
essential to addressing regional security concerns. We
commend the efforts undertaken to establish the Frontline
States initiative. We welcome the commitment shared
by Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia to expand
operations against Al-Shabaab, in full compliance
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and fully coordinate actions to
consolidate security gains.
Brazil reiterates its appreciation for the brave work
undertaken by ATMIS personnel and the Somali security
forces in support of peace and security in the country.
While we commend their gains in the fight against
Al-Shabaab, the increase in terrorist-related incidents
is nothing but alarming, especially with the growing
use of improvised explosive devices. In that regard,
we recognize the work carried out by the Mine Action
Service in delivering threat-mitigation services. And
again we condemn in the strongest terms the appalling
attack on the ATMIS forward operating base that
Ugandan troops staffed in Lower Shabelle. We extend
our condolences to the families of the victims.

We call on Somalia to redouble its efforts to
strengthen governance, foster community reconciliation
and provide essential services in areas deeply affected by
food insecurity. If coupled with increased humanitarian
assistance, those resources will be critical to consolidate
security gains.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its continued support
for Somalia and underscores the importance of fully
implementing the mandates of ATMIS, UNSOM and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Since this is the first time
that Ms. Laing is briefing the Council, I would like to
congratulate her on the assumption of her duties as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and wish her the best
of luck. She can count on our support. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Mohamed
El-Amine Souef, and the Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, Ms. Cindy McCain, for their
briefings. Albania welcomes the President of Somalia,
His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, to
this meeting.
We welcome the efforts that Somalia has made to
advance the implementation of its key national priorities
since President Mohamud took office last year. In
political terms, despite the restricted cooperation

23-1812917/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

22/06/2023

between Puntland and the Federal Government,
we are encouraged by the outreach between the
Federal Government and the federal member states,
resulting, among other things, in the creation of the
national revenue authority and the planning and
allocation agency.

the humanitarian situation and the number of people
affected by conflict and climate change. We join the
urgent call of Somalia and the Secretary-General to fill
the funding gap for the 2023 humanitarian response plan,
in addition to calling for the development initiatives
that are required to build community resilience.

In addition to that, the decision to adopt a
one-person, one-vote electoral model for Somalia and
the historic elections held on 25 May in Puntland were a
democratic milestone, allowing the voice of its citizens
to be heard. That progress should be followed by a
constitutional review process that is more inclusive for
women, youth and marginalized groups and that widens
and is more protective of its civic space.

Unfortunately, women and children remain the
most affected group of displaced people, as they are the
most common targets of human rights violations, sexual
violence and recruitment. We call on all the parties
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law and for the authorities to hold accountable those
responsible for violations of human rights.

Turning now to the security situation, the fight
against Al-Shabaab has been notable in terms of
liberating territories and targeting its finances. In that
vein, the agreement reached between Somalia and its
neighbours to create the Frontline States initiative could
be crucial for advancing that fight while the security
transition continues. Nevertheless, the international
community should spare no efforts in assisting Somalia
with services in the liberated areas.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Ms. Catriona Laing,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
and Ms. Cindy McCain, Executive Director of the
World Food Programme (WFP), for their insightful
briefings. I would also like to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
of Somalia and thank him for his participation in
today’s meeting.

Al-Shabaab remains a threat for the security of
the country. Albania condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack on the base of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) on 26 May.
We express our condolences to the families of the
victims and the people and the Government of Uganda.
We pay tribute to ATMIS troops, who continue to
serve and contribute to peace in Somalia. We also
recognize the progress made by Somalia on assuming
security responsibilities and force generation, as well
as its positive efforts in strengthening its weapons
and ammunition management capacity, which need to
be continued.
My delegation is also concerned about the ongoing
conflict in Laascaanood. We encourage the Government
to continue its de-escalating efforts in coordination
with multilateral and bilateral partners and call on the
parties to conflict to reach a ceasefire to put an end
to the catastrophic humanitarian consequences, the
destruction of infrastructure and the displacement
of civilians.
That leads me to my final point. Despite Somalia’s
progress under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, and the measures mitigating
the risk of famine, we are seriously concerned about
18/23

This month, Somalia reaches an important
inflection point in its security transition. As the first
phase of the ATMIS drawdown continues, the Somali
security forces now shoulder greater responsibility to
protect their own land and people. I would like to pay
tribute to all the personnel of ATMIS and the Somali
security forces for their dedication to peace and stability
in Somalia and the region. We condemn the recent
terrorist attack on the ATMIS forward operating base
in Lower Shabelle. We offer our heartfelt condolences
to those who made the ultimate sacrifice and wish a
speedy recovery to the injured.
We
welcome
the
continued
operational
advancements by the Somali National Army, with
the help of community defence forces. While further
expansion of the Somali National Army’s operations
to the south-west is expected, consolidating the
Government’s security control in the newly liberated
areas is also an essential task in degrading Al-Shabaab
so as to prevent any recurrence of its intrusion.
Developing sufficient holding forces in such areas is of
the utmost importance, and accelerating the country’s
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

security sector reform should remain a priority for that
purpose. We commend the neighbouring countries
contributing troops to ATMIS for their continued
support in force-generation for the Somali forces and
in building capacity. We further commend the essential
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia in
supporting ATMIS.
The Somalia transition plan is a long-term endeavour
that requires constant efforts aimed at achieving good
governance through institutional capacity-building.
In that regard, Japan highly appreciates and stands
by President Mohamud’s strong leadership under
challenging circumstances.
The extension of State authority should be derived
from the assurance of better social welfare through
the reliable delivery of basic services. That will help
garner the trust of the population, which is paramount
for degrading the capacities of Al-Shabaab throughout
the country.
United Nations entities and humanitarian
organizations need to promote holistic and coordinated
assistance. The emphasis that President Mohamud
himself placed on the education of the Somali people is
critically important. In that regard, the impact of climate
change should also be properly considered and addressed.
For its part, my country has contributed to the
capacity development of local government officials by
providing training programmes in Japan to help Somalia’s
institution-building efforts. We have also provided
emergency food assistance in the region through the
WFP to alleviate food insecurity and address immediate
needs. The resident coordinator system should be
effectively utilized, and it should be at the centre of our
efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission, with its unique
advising-bridging-convening capacity, can also play an
important role in the transition, to complement Somaliled State-building.
Inter- and intra-clan conflicts are another security
challenge in Somalia. Complex clan dynamics are deeply
embedded in national politics, and peaceful coexistence
among different clans should be the very foundation
of the country’s stability. The ongoing violence in
Laascaanood, which has resulted in large number of
civilian casualties and displaced people, is a serious
concern. We commend the ongoing Somali-led national
dialogue. All the parties need to exercise maximum
restraint in order to create an environment conducive
to reconciliation.

S/PV.9356

A successful transition in Somalia is essential for
peace and stability in the entire region. It requires the
continued support of the international community, and
Japan remains committed to playing its part to that end.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Mr. Souef, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, and Ms. McCain, Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, for their excellent briefings.
We extend a warm welcome to Ms. Catriona Laing as
she assumes her position as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia. She has arrived at a
critical time, and her leadership will be vitally important
in the coming months. We also extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and thank him for his contribution to today’s meeting.
We commend Somalia for its demonstrated
commitment to fighting Al-Shabaab and restoring
security and stability in the country. That is a visible
demonstration of the Somali people’s desire for peace,
stability, prosperity and good governance. Overcoming
Somalia’s remaining challenges requires sustaining
positive momentum on security, political reconciliation
and economic development. Liberating the remaining
Al-Shabaab-held territory in central Somalia and
ensuring that local communities receive the support
they need to recover is vital for creating the conditions
necessary for successful operations further south.
An inclusive discussion of the National Consultative
Council proposals on the constitution and elections
is critical to ensuring that such changes have broad
popular support.
Much is needed to achieve a ceasefire to halt the
violence in Laascaanood, allow and facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access and initiate constructive dialogue
to resolve the dispute. We welcome the Federal
Government of Somalia’s recent efforts in that regard.
Strengthening public-sector financial management,
conducting thorough, credible investigations of
corruption allegations and holding perpetrators
accountable are imperative for building public trust and
confidence in the Government. We also must continue
our collective efforts to respond to the ongoing
humanitarian emergency that, as we all heard this
morning, threatens nearly half of Somalia’s population.
We are particularly encouraged by Somalia’s
commitment to leading efforts to restore security and
stability in the country, and the United States remains

23-1812919/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

committed to partnering with Somalia to achieve those
shared goals. We continue working to finalize our
contribution to the United Nations trust fund for the
Somali security forces, and we encourage other donors
to support the Somali National Army’s efforts through
that mechanism. Despite the significant assistance
efforts that are under way, there are still gaps. We must
work together and think creatively about how to address
those gaps to enable long-term stability, economic
growth and good governance in Somalia.
Finally, we welcome Somalia’s continued progress
on the benchmarks outlined in the Secretary-General’s
September 2022 report (S/2022/698) in assessing the
country’s request for fully lifting the arms embargo on
the Federal Government. We look forward to further
progress and working closely with our partners on
the Security Council on this issue when the sanctions
regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) concerning Al-Shabaab, is
renewed in November.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome Ms. Catriona Laing, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and wish her every success in
her work. We appreciate the work done by Mr. Swan
and take note of the information provided by Mr. ElAmine Souef and Ms. McCain. I also acknowledge and
welcome the presence of the President of Somalia at
today’s meeting.
We deplore the clashes that occurred between
security forces and forces loyal to the opposition in
the town of Garoowe, where some 20 people, including
civilians, died as a result. We call for a de-escalation
of tensions and a return to calm. We encourage the
continuation of the constitutional review process
on the basis of an inclusive consensus, in order to
ensure the effective participation of women, young
people and marginalized communities with a view to
achieving lasting peace, which requires the political
will of Somalia’s leaders. That is the only way it will be
possible to overcome the recurring violence in several
parts of the country. The situation makes it difficult to
create an environment that is conducive to effectively
combating the threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group to peace and security in Somalia and in the region.
Ecuador condemns its attacks on the civilian population
and on the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), including the 26 May attack on an ATMIS
forward operating base, in which several Ugandan
soldiers lost their lives and others were seriously
20/23

22/06/2023

wounded. The recurring violence, made exponentially
worse by Al-Shabaab’s acts of terror, which we condemn,
has resulted in many casualties and tens of thousands
of people displaced. That has been compounded by
droughts and floods that have in turn further aggravated
an already precarious humanitarian situation.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/443), approximately 6.6 million people in
Somalia will face crisis-level food insecurity or worse
in the coming months. Al-Shabaab’s worrisome and
continued serious threat to peace, security and stability
in Somalia and the region makes securing a ceasefire
and starting a national dialogue conducive to stability
and political and economic recovery urgent. The efforts
and initiatives of the Federal Government of Somalia,
Ethiopia and clan elders are crucial in that regard.
Besides that, it will be important to advance the progress
made by Somalia at the National Consultative Council
in Baidoa, where agreement was reached on a model
for fiscal federalism and amendments were made to the
national security architecture.
We reiterate the need to preserve the civic space
without restrictions on freedom of expression and the
work of journalists. Ecuador considers the human rights
violations and abuses perpetrated against hundreds of
children during the reporting period very serious. We
condemn the attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as
the recruitment, abduction and displacement of children,
whose safe and voluntary return must be ensured. We call
on the international community to continue supporting
efforts to protect civilians in Somalia, including with
regard to the ATMIS transition process. We want to
highlight the key role of the African Union, subregional
organizations and regional mechanisms in the peace
operations. Ecuador welcomes their efforts and endorses
any initiative that supports the efficiency and effectiveness
of peace operations with full respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law. We also believe that
systems that enable responsible and transparent resource
management and guarantee accountability and the rule
of law are essential to addressing security challenges.
Lastly, I agree with the Secretary-General that
sustained dialogue will achieve progress on the
State-building agenda. We firmly believe that the only
way the persistent challenges in Somalia can be overcome
is through an institutional presence, the strengthening
of the peace and reconciliation processes and the
support of the international community in implementing
comprehensive solutions.
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

Ms. Gatt (Malta): We join others in welcoming
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative Laing for her briefing
and wish her every success in her new role. I also
thank Mr. El-Amine Souef, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, and Ms. McCain, the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, for their briefings.
Malta is pleased to note the positive engagement of
Somalia, which signals the country’s sustained progress,
and we are encouraged by the recent agreement led by
the National Consultative Council on a model for fiscal
federalism and the amendments to the national security
architecture. As preparations are under way for next
year’s local and assembly elections, we reiterate that
it is only through inclusive, free and fair elections
and a safe civic space that all voices can be heard and
represented. We call for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in the political, electoral and
constitutional processes. We commend the efforts being
made to implement the Somali Women’s Charter and
the national women and peace and security action plan,
including the ongoing multi-stakeholder conversation
among federal ministries, civil society and women
leaders supported by UN-Women. Nevertheless,
Malta remains concerned about the security situation
in the country, especially the ongoing violence in
Laascaanood, which has resulted in more than 300
casualties so far. We welcome the ceasefire efforts by
the Somali Government, Ethiopia and clan elders, while
reminding all the parties of their obligations under
international law.
Malta strongly condemns all the offensives carried
out by Al-Shabaab, which continue to represent a
serious threat to the peace, security and stability of
Somalia, with the surging use of improvised explosive
devices and complex attacks, of which the most recent
hit a forward operating base of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) in Bulo Mareer
on 26 May. We will remember the peacekeepers who
were injured and those who lost their lives, as well as
their families.
We welcome the commitment displayed by
Somalia and its neighbours, with Somalia’s Frontline
States initiative bringing together Djibouti, Ethiopia
and Kenya. Those efforts should encourage further
progress by ATMIS in the security transition, as well
as coordination between the Frontline States, ATMIS
and partners. Malta remains supportive of ATMIS

S/PV.9356

and its intended tasks to be completed by 2024. It will
be crucial to diversify its financial support, while
acknowledging that the European Union has supported
the mandated Mission with more than €2.2 billion since
its inception.
Somalia remains heavily affected by climate
shocks. We commend the role of the Climate Security
Adviser within the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM), whose work has enabled a
better understanding of how prolonged drought and
flash floods have exacerbated farmer-herder conflicts
and civilians’ susceptibility to radicalization and
recruitment by Al-Shabaab. While famine has been
averted thanks to sustained humanitarian assistance
from donors, 6.6 million are still projected to be foodinsecure and approximately 1.8 million children under
five are likely to face acute malnutrition and waterborne
diseases such as cholera.
We are gravely concerned about sexual and genderbased violence against internally displaced women
and girls, who make up more 80 per cent of Somalia’s
internally displaced persons. The perpetrators of such
crimes must be held accountable. In that context, we
welcome UNSOM’s support in addressing impediments
to accountability and incorporating a gender-sensitive
humanitarian response. Humanitarian partners should
ensure close collaboration between agencies to address
those dire protection needs. Malta is also alarmed by
the large number of grave violations committed against
children, including killing and maiming and their
recruitment and use as soldiers. We call on all parties
to cease and prevent such violations, while we reiterate
that child protection can be effectively ensured only
through legal frameworks and relevant action plans and
road maps.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its support for
UNSOM and Special Representative Laing. The crucial
work of UNSOM continues to contribute towards
lasting peace and security in Somalia. We remain
encouraged by the multiplicity of voices engaged in
advancing Somalia’s State-building and security goals,
and the people of Somalia should remain at the heart of
such efforts.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to express a heartfelt welcome to
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, whose presence attests to his
commitment to working with the Security Council to

23-1812921/23

S/PV.9356

The situation in Somalia

ensure that Somalia can live in peace with its neighbours
and within its own borders. I thank Ms. Laing, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Souef,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, and Ms. McCain,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their briefings. I would also like to congratulate the
Special Representative on her recent appointment and
wish her a successful term in the important current
political context.
The preliminary political agreement reached
by the National Consultative Council on adopting a
one-person, one-vote electoral model is a important
decision, and we welcome it. In that regard, a historic
step was taken in Somalia with the elections in
Puntland. Switzerland supported the local authorities,
particularly the Transitional Puntland Electoral
Commission, in educating and organizing voters.
With a view to advancing national priorities, including
closer cooperation between the federal member states
and the Federal Government, we will touch on three
major points.
First, respect for international law must be at
the heart of the response to insecurity throughout
the country. We condemn the ongoing attacks by
Al-Shabaab and other armed groups, including
Al-Shabaab fighters’ recent attacks on the forward
operating base of the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) in Mareer, Shabelle Hoose, and on
the Pearl Beach hotel in Mogadishu. We acknowledge
the efforts of the Government and ATMIS to counter
them. We call on all the parties to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law and ensure the protection of civilians, including
children. In that regard, we remain concerned about
the ongoing conflict in Laascaanood. We call on all
parties to facilitate and guarantee rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to all people in need, agree on
a ceasefire and engage in dialogue with a view to
peacefully resolving that conflict.
Secondly, a coordinated, comprehensive and
inclusive approach should guide the efforts related to
early recovery, the restoration of State presence and
peacebuilding in the areas taken back from Al-Shabaab.
That will be vital to restoring and cementing the social
contract. In collaboration with the United Nations
and non-governmental partners, Switzerland supports
promoting forums for dialogue and strengthening local
district councils so that they can deliver basic services.
22/23

22/06/2023

We also encourage the active engagement of Somali
society as a whole in strengthening inclusive local
governance and giving a voice to women, young people
and minority clans, all of whom should be heard and
included in decision-making processes.
Thirdly, we note the cumulative impact of the
threats posed by climate change and armed conflict to
Somalia’s stability. Although humanitarian aid and the
recent rainfall have provided relief to populations in
need, recovery will take time, particularly in view of
the currently severe and widespread droughts, which,
together with the recent floods, have contributed to
displacement. We must therefore invest in humanitarian
response and peacebuilding programmes that take
climate adaptation into account. Otherwise, the next
extreme-weather event caused by climate change will
again leave the country on the brink of famine and
exacerbate displacement and conflict. Finally, the risk of
famine must be reduced by breaking the vicious cycle
of violence and acute food insecurity, in line with the
provisions of resolution 2417 (2018).
I would like to congratulate the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) on the critical
role that it is playing. Switzerland will continue to
support UNSOM, Somalia and its people in their efforts
to build peace and a prosperous future.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank the briefers for
their interventions. I welcome the participation of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of Somalia in this
meeting. I want to congratulate Ms. Catriona Laing and
Ms. Aisa Kirabo Kacyira on their appointments as Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and Head of the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS), respectively, and to assure
them both of France’s full support in their work. I would
like to revisit three points.
First, Somalia’s institutional reforms and fight
against Al-Shabaab must continue. France welcomes
the new dynamic that has gathered momentum over the
past year in the work of implementing several national
priorities. That especially includes the federalist system,
which has been strengthened through renewed dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal member
states. Strengthening institutions and finalizing the draft
constitution must become a reality, and the participation
of women and young people must be ensured in all those
processes. France reiterates its firm condemnation of
Al-Shabaab’s terrorist attacks, including against the
23-18129

22/06/2023

The situation in Somalia

African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
and welcomes the Somali Government’s successful
efforts to combat that group. That work should continue
with the support of the Frontline States’ initiative,
while respecting international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. The restoration of State
authority and access to basic services in the recovered
territories will help to build peace. France is also
concerned about the ongoing violence in Laascaanood
and welcomes the Somali Government’s efforts to restore
dialogue and de-escalate the situation. It is imperative
to protect civilians and ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access.
Secondly, the most vulnerable Somalis must be
protected. In particular, the violence against children
must cease. France supports all efforts of the Somali
Government to continue to implement the action plan
to prevent the recruitment and use of children. We
also encourage the establishment of civic space that
gives a voice to civil-society actors and enables the full
participation of women in the country’s governance. The
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, with
more than half of Somalis in need of assistance. With a
view to meeting the needs of the populations that have
been affected by the drought since December 2021,
I would like to remind the Council that the European
Union has provided €170 million in humanitarian aid
to Somalia. France calls on all international partners
to step up their contributions to the United Nations
humanitarian response plan.

S/PV.9356

My third and last point is that the security transition
must be accelerated. The Security Council is preparing
to renew the ATMIS mandate. The objectives of
resolution 2628 (2022) must continue to guide the support
we provide so that the Somalis can take responsibility
for their own security in the medium term and so that
we can enable the definitive withdrawal of ATMIS by
31 December 2024. To that end, preparations for the
next phases of the withdrawal are critical and should be
stepped up. I should point out that the European Union
has been the largest direct contributor to the African
Union missions in Somalia, with a total contribution
of €2.5 billion since the first was established in 2007.
Other partners must also contribute to that effort. The
European Union will pursue its commitment, which will
continue to grow for the benefit of the Somali security
and defence forces. At the beginning of the year, the
European Union accordingly approved an additional
€25 million in aid for the Somali National Army for the
period from 2022 to 2024. The aid will provide them
with non-lethal equipment and support infrastructure
work in close coordination with the European Union
Training Mission in Somalia.
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and his
Government can count on France’s full support in
helping Somalia advance on the road to peace.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-1812923/23
