III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee should commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, which
took place in July 1979, during its preparatory sessions in
1989;
10. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoe Committee
to continue his consultations on the participation in the
work of the Committee by States Members of the United
Nations which are not members of the Committee, with
the aim of resolving this matter at the earliest possible
date;
11. Also requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoe Committee to consult the Secretary-General at the appropriate
time on the establishment of a secretariat for the Conference;
12. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a full report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including the provision of summary records, in recognition
of its preparatory function.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

43/80.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli nuclear armament, the latest of which is 42/44 of 30 November 1987,
Recalling its resolution 42/28 of 30 November 1987, in
which, inter alia, it called for placing all nuclear facilities
in the region under International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, pending the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981) of
19 June 1981, in which, inter alia, the Council called upon
Israel urgently to place all its nuclear facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting that only Israel has been specifically called upon
by the Security Council to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to
commit itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons, despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
Agency,
Taking into consideration resolution GC (XXXII)/
RES/487 of 23 September 1988 adopted by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in which the General Conference strongly condemned the
continued refusal by Israel to renounce the possession of
nuclear weapons and to submit all its nuclear facilities to
the Agency's safeguards in compliance with Security
Council resolution 487 (1981 ),
•
Deeply alarmed by the information with regard to the
continuing production, development and acquisition of
nuclear weapons by Israel,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger international peace and security as a result of Israel's development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and Israel's collaboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons
and their delivery systems,

101

Deeply concerned that the declared Israeli policy of attacking and destroying nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes is a part of its nuclear armament policy,
I. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
2. Reiterates also its condemnation of the co-operation
between Israel and South Africa;
3. Requests once more the Security Council to take urgent and effective measures to ensure that Israel complies
with Council resolution 487 (1981);
4. Demands once more that Israel place all its nuclear
facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
5. Calls upon all States and organizations that have not
yet done so to discontinue co-operating with and giving assistance to Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Reiterates its request to the International Atomic
Energy Agency to suspend any scientific co-operation
with Israel that could contribute to its nuclear capabilities;
7. Requests also the International Atomic Energy
Agency to inform the Secretary-General of any steps Israel may take to place its nuclear facilities under Agency
safeguards;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely Israeli nuclear activities and to report to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear armament".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

43/81.

Verification in all its aspects
A

COMPLIANCE WITH ARMS LIMITATION AND
DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/38 M of 30 November 1987,
Conscious of the abiding concern of all Member States
for preserving respect for rights and obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law,
• Convinced that observance of the Charter of the United
Nations, relevant treaties and other sources of international law is essential for the strengthening of international security,
Mindful, in particular, of the fundamental importance
of full implementation and strict observance of agreements on arms limitation and disarmament if individual
nations and the international community are to derive enhanced security from them,
Stressing that any violation of such agreements not only
adversely affects the security of States parties but can also
create security risks for other States relying on the constraints and commitments stipulated in those agreements,
Stressing also that any weakening of confidence in such
agreements diminishes their contribution to global or regional stability and to further disarmament and arms limitation efforts and undermines the credibility and effectiveness of the international legal system,
Recognizing in this context that, inter alia, full confidence in compliance with existing agreements can en-
