S/PV.9196

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9196th meeting

Thursday, 17 November 2022, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna
Mr. Vinito
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Mr. Heines
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 15 September 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/698

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-69881 (E)
*2269881*

S/PV.9196

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 2.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 15 September 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/698)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/865, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/698, which contains the text of a letter
dated 15 September 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Norway, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Gabon, Ghana, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 11
votes in favour, none against and 4 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2662 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I want to thank
Council members for their support today in adopting
resolution 2662 (2022). It complements the work of
2/8

17/11/2022

the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
and the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
in supporting Somalia and degrading Al-Shabaab.
It was a complicated negotiation process and I thank
members for their constructive approach and flexibility
throughout. Despite the varying perspectives and
emphasis we saw in concluding the resolution, the
overall direction is clear. In an exceptionally difficult
security and humanitarian environment, there has been
political progress in Somalia, and the Council has come
together to recognize that and support Somalia’s efforts.
The recent technical assessment highlighted the
progress that Somalia has made in improving weapons
and ammunition management. The United Kingdom
commends Somalia for that and remains committed
to working with Somalia and its partners to support
continued progress. The benchmarks identified
following the technical assessment give Somalia and
its partners a clear road map that will help the Council
make further changes to weapons and ammunition
measures in the future. The steps made today will
simplify processes for Somalia and its partners and
help to speed up the journey.
Finally, in addition to supporting Somalia,
resolution 2662 (2022) tightens the knot on Al-Shabaab.
By changing the name of the Sanctions Committee,
the Council sends a clear message that the target is
Al-Shabaab. The United Kingdom will continue to
work closely with Somalia and the region in support of
the fight against Al-Shabaab, and we look forward to
further discussions through the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning
Al-Shabaab.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to vote in favour of the extension of
the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Somalia and
the renewal of the arms embargo, travel ban and asset
freeze measures for a further 12 months. We welcome
the commendable progress made by the Federal
Government of Somalia on weapons and stockpile
management. The modifications in resolution 2662
(2022) reflect that significant progress. We hope to
see that progress continue, which would enable further
easing of the arms embargo.
The sanctions regime that was adopted today is
tailored to the Somali context to support and enable
robust action by the Federal Government of Somalia
through its three-part strategy to combat Al-Shabaab, in
22-69881

17/11/2022

The situation in Somalia

conjunction with its partnership and collaboration with
the international community to deprive Al-Shabaab
of resources, thwart the group’s exploitation of the
financial system, curb its terrorist activities and address
the underlying drivers of the long-standing conflict in
Somalia.
We urge all States Members of the United Nations
to implement the existing resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Al-Shabaab, including measures to help
curb Al-Shabaab’s ability to access funds, weapons and
the other support that it needs to carry out attacks, while
supporting Somalian security and police institutions
with the resources they need to combat terrorism and
secure their citizens. We further urge all Member
States to support the designation of individuals, groups
and their supporters on the Committee pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) concerning Al-Shabaab. Those
designations demonstrate that the international
community will support accountability and end
impunity for those who undermine peace and security
in Somalia.
We are committed to the Somali people and will
continue to work closely with the Federal Government of
Somalia, fellow Council members and all stakeholders
to facilitate peace for the country and the region.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to start by thanking the United Kingdom, as
penholder, for its tireless efforts in facilitating the
negotiations around the important resolution we have
just adopted (resolution 2662 (2022)). The United Arab
Emirates welcomes the adoption of the resolution,
which is focused on neutralizing the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab, primarily through targeted sanctions.
In doing so, the Council unequivocally condemns
Al-Shabaab’s terrorist activities, which, as we all agree,
continue to pose a serious threat to peace and security
in Somalia and the broader region.
The United Arab Emirates would like to commend
the efforts and progress made by the Government of
Somalia on weapons and ammunition management,
the development of the country’s security forces and
countering Al-Shabaab. Now more than ever Somalia
needs renewed international support as it continues
to demonstrate a willingness to implement the key
reforms needed to secure a prosperous future for its
people. The challenges faced by Somalia are complex,
and it is therefore critical to enable the Government of
Somalia to respond effectively to its evolving security

S/PV.9196

threats. The United Arab Emirates believes that
sanctions should consider the needs and the changing
environment on the ground. The Council should
continually review its sanctions and remain open to
further easing restrictions.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress a critical
aspect that must be part of any discussion we have
on countering terrorism, which is the importance
of not linking terrorism to religion. We welcome the
inclusion in today’s resolution of a paragraph jointly
put forward by the United Arab Emirates and the
three African members of the Council that condemns
terrorist groups’ attempts to craft distorted narratives
based on the misinterpretation and misrepresentation
of religion. The Council has said it before and needs to
continue saying it — terrorism cannot and should not
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to
supporting peace and stability in Somalia.
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna (Gabon) (spoke
in French): My country abstained in the voting on
resolution 2662 (2022), on the sanctions regime in
Somalia, which was just adopted. The sanctions
regime in Somalia is one of the longest-standing in the
Security Council. Beyond the challenges Somalia faces
that require a response, it is important to bear in mind
that sanctions are not intended to last forever. They
are not an end unto themselves but rather a tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As we know, today Somalia is led by democratically
elected authorities, following the election on 15 May of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, whose Government
has made considerable advances on various fronts,
including by promoting national reconciliation,
ensuring the security of the country’s entire territory,
facilitating the internationally supported security
transition in accordance with the Somalia Transition
Plan and the national security architecture. It is
therefore important that the international community
continue to support the efforts and the policies of the
Government of Somalia, particularly when it comes to
reconstruction, restoration of the State and combating
the terrorist threat posed by Al-Shabaab.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in
the voting on resolution 2662 (2022), drafted by the

22-698813/8

S/PV.9196

The situation in Somalia

United Kingdom, on the extension of the sanctions
regime against Somalia, based on our disagreement
with a number of its provisions. However, we want to
underscore that we welcome the latest step taken in
the resolution to ease the arms embargo. We deem it
essential to demonstrate to countries under sanctions
regimes that the Security Council is receptive to
their relevant requests substantiated by the urgent
need to strengthen their State authority and national
security sectors.
Countering terrorism remains a critically important
task for Somalia and the entire region, but achieving
it is inconceivable until the destructive capacities
of Al-Shabaab have been dismantled. While there
is no doubt that players outside the region can make
a valuable contribution, in the long term, no matter
how difficult it may be, the Somalis must learn to
counter that threat themselves — albeit not without
support and assistance — which will be impossible
without resolving their protracted internal conflicts
and restoring the country’s unity. Somalia’s neighbours
should provide robust foundational support for those
processes under the auspices of the African Union and
other regional associations.
At the same time, against a backdrop of the
ongoing internal disunity in Somalia, it is unacceptable
that external forces continue to use their paramilitary
presence in the country for selfish purposes, benefiting
from the country’s unique geographic position and
further militarizing the Horn of Africa. We view the
latest broad exemptions from the arms embargo not as a
privilege, but rather as a specific tool to help eliminate
threats that are common to all. We believe in the
importance of ensuring equal and fair conditions for
all and maintaining maximum transparency, including
regarding supplies designed to ensure the safety and
security of foreign military presences in Somalia.
We hope that the peoples of the African continent
will firmly reject any regression to a colonialist
mindset. It is that unfortunate phenomenon, rather
than any genuine concern for peace, that explains
the unwillingness of a number of Security Council
members to exclude questions relating to bilateral
relations between Djibouti and Eritrea from the Somali
agenda. We would like to think that those countries,
having endured various crises, will continue to
advance wisely and patiently on a path of dialogue and
rapprochement. That is the only correct choice and one
that Russia respects.
4/8

17/11/2022

We continue to be troubled by the ambivalent
approach to Al-Shabaab, which blurs the focus of
global counter-terrorism efforts. No one doubts or
disputes the truly dangerous nature of that entity and its
affiliation with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida, yet for some reason it continues to be
kept at a distance from the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), respectively. In our view, the resolution
adopted today takes another erroneous step in that
direction, as it further enshrines on paper the notion
that Al-Shabaab is to be dealt with by the Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), which is in charge of
the Somali sanctions regime. That does not take into
account the full range of views of States in the region
on the matter.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): The Kenyan delegation
thanks the United Kingdom for its able steering of the
negotiations on resolution 2662 (2022), which was just
adopted. We voted in the affirmative to demonstrate
our backing for the resolution’s tougher measures
against the Al-Qaida affiliate in Somalia. Our vote
accords with our serious security concerns, as well as
those of the region and of the international community.
This afternoon we can take some comfort in having
agreed, as a Security Council, to take a stronger stand
together against terrorism. Our efforts now join those of
the valiant people of Somalia, who have determinedly
rallied behind their President and Government to defeat
that group for its brutality, extremism and deviance
from all the moral principles that the people hold dear.
We understand that the Government of Somalia
seeks more support from the Security Council in its
just struggle, including the dropping of the parts of the
Council’s arms embargo that affect the Government in
any way. This is also the position that has been taken
by the African Union Peace and Security Council. In
this round of negotiations, the dropping of the embargo
did not meet with sufficient support from Council
members, but there is little doubt that the Somalian
forces’ conduct on the battlefield and the determination
of the Government will lead in short order to the
dropping of the embargo.
Accordingly, Kenya and the other African members
of the Security Council negotiated hard for steps to
be taken in this direction. We were instrumental in
ensuring that resolution 2662 (2022) is framed in a
way that clarifies that the enemy is a terrorist group,
Al-Shabaab. We increased pressure on the group by
22-69881

17/11/2022

The situation in Somalia

making it easier for the Federal Government to acquire
more lethal weapons, which we did by ensuring that
the resolution provides that some military items for
purchase are subject to a no-objection process and that
it completely removes others from any notification
requirements. There is now a clear road map to
completely exempting the Federal Government from
the embargo in future.
There is now an effective weapons- and
ammunition-management capability with clear and
realistic benchmarks consistent with the final report
of the Panel of Experts, reports of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and the SecretaryGeneral’s 15 September letter and recommendations
proffered following the July 2022 technical assessment
(S/2022/698). We hope that there shall be proper
tracking and storage of such military equipment and
supplies to their Somalia unit levels to ensure that none
ever falls in the hands of the terrorist groups.
We urge members, and particularly the incoming
group of elected members to the Council, to stand
alongside the Government in its demand that its every
step lead directly and promptly to the lifting of any
part of the arms embargo that negatively affects it.
The partial arms embargo in Somalia cannot exist in
perpetuity as it is counterproductive and adversely
affects the capability of the Federal Government to
eradicate the existential threat posed by Al-Shabaab.
In the past, Kenya has sought the listing of
Al-Shabaab under the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to reflect its status
as a sworn and undisputed affiliate of Al-Qaida. We
wanted to pressure the group more than the sanctions
imposed pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) allowed,
because Al-Shabaab was regarded under that resolution
as a political spoiler, not an international terrorist
group. What that approach has meant was the limiting
of Member State action in combating Al-Shabaab’s
financing, its recruitment and human trafficking,
and the increase of other forms of pressure against
it. Most importantly, we sought by seeking a listing
under resolution 1267 (1999) to send an unambiguous
message to all States and peoples that this is a group
outside political inclusion. There is no compromise to
be given to a group that has a fascist anti-human and
unceasingly violent vision of the future it wants in
Somalia and our region.

S/PV.9196

Our application for this listing under resolution 1267
(1999) was blocked by some members of the Council.
They cited as their reason the need to protect
humanitarian efforts from the effects of a 1267 (1999)
listing, given the group’s exploitation of food and other
critical supplies. We agree that every step needs to be
taken to protect the humanitarian response on behalf
of the people of Somalia, who, like the rest of the
peoples of the Horn of Africa region, are suffering the
worst drought in decades. However, when we sought
humanitarian exemptions in mentioning Al-Shabaab in
the context of resolution 1267 (1999), the same countries
refused, leaving us displeased about the transparency
of the process. Gladly, what matters most is a fight
against the terrorists in Somalia and, in this regard,
the Government and the people are showing the way
that they will give no quarter. The only way forward
for the elements in the group that seek accommodation
is for them to retreat from extremism and surrender to
the will of the people of Somalia as expressed in their
Government.
I would hasten in this context to agree with the
Russian Federation’s observation about the double
standards that apply against this Al-Qaida group and
would encourage the Council to clarify and make more
transparent and predictable its approach to terrorist
groups, so that all of them face the same standards at the
same time, and that all the clear humanitarian exemptions
needed are made available in the relevant regimes.
It is clear to us that resolution 2662 (2022) is
about supporting Somalia and exerting pressure on
Al-Shabaab. That is reflected in the provision renaming
the Committee to be henceforth “the Security Council
Committee established pursuant resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Al-Shabaab”. Kenya appreciates the efforts of
the penholder to refocus the subject matter of this regime
ever so accurately and the steadfast support received.
Finally, extremist groups, including Al-Shabaab,
must not be allowed to use religion to spread propaganda
and justify violence. We welcome the support received
from the United Arab Emirates and others to have this
language reflected in the resolution.
In conclusion, we count on the international
community to support the Government of Somalia in
its renewed efforts to counter Al-Shabaab’s narratives
and operations, and Kenya reaffirms its respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia, and our
neighbourly goodwill.

22-698815/8

S/PV.9196

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China’s position on the issue of sanctions is consistent
and clear. We believe that the Security Council should
heed the call of African countries, respond positively
to their demands and review, adjust or lift sanctions
against them in a timely manner. At same time,
China has always maintained that exemptions to arms
embargoes should maintain uniform criteria.
The resolution just adopted (resolution 2662 (2022)
provides exemptions to the arms embargo against
Somalia’s bilateral partners, which is different from other
existing Council sanctions regimes. It is inconsistent
with the principle of fairness and non-discrimination,
and furthermore it lacks effective regulatory measures
for the exempted arms and ammunition. This will
not only undermine the authority and objectives of
the Council’s sanctions regimes, but it may also lead
to the proliferation of weapons and pose a threat to
regional security.
The easing of the arms embargo should also
go hand in hand with strengthening effective
regulation. According to reports submitted by the
Secretariat, the Somali Government’s weaponand ammunition-management capacity is clearly
inadequate. The weapons-management depot is
chaotic, none of the ammunition depots have been built
and the professionalism of the security forces needs
to be improved. According to report of the Panel of
Experts of the Sanctions Committee, the illegal arms
trade and trafficking Somalia are rampant, even to the
point of impunity from the authorities for the crime
of smuggling.
Therefore, objectively speaking, Somalia is not in
a position to ease sanctions. We hope that the Somali
Government will take measures to effectively enhance
its capacity to manage arms and ammunition and
prevent weapons exempted by the Council from falling
into the hands of terrorist organizations. Given that
the relevant contents of resolution 2662 (2022) do not
reflect the reality of the country concerned, and the
selective approach and double standards on the issue of
exemptions to the arms embargo, China was compelled
to abstain in the voting on the resolution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
Ghana abstained in the voting on resolution 2662 (2022) because it was our desire to see the
total lifting of the arms embargo in line with the expec6/8

17/11/2022

tations of the Somali Government. We believe that the
total lifting of the arms embargo is in the best interest of the Government. Acquisition of the right arms
and ammunition by the Somali Government would empower the Somalia National Army (SNA) to effectively
fight against Al-Shabaab and improve the security situation in the country, particularly as the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia draws down its troops
on the ground and eventually hands over the security
mandate of the country to the SNA.
We acknowledge the fact that the resolution
provides for a systematic lifting of the arms embargo.
We are hopeful that the arms embargo will eventually
be lifted to enable Somalia to effectively deal with the
security situation in the country. We also recommend
that the Eritrea-Djibouti issue be dealt with outside the
scope of this resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, my delegation
warmly congratulates you, Madam President, and your
country, Ghana, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also
like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, for his effective management
of the Council’s work during the month of October.
My delegation takes note of resolution 2662 (2022),
which we just adopted, renewing the sanctions regime
on Somalia. We express our deep dissatisfaction with the
conduct of the negotiations on the adopted resolution. I
would like to thank Gabon and Ghana for voting against
the renewal of the sanctions on Somalia. We are proud
of their African position and their aligning their vote
with the position of the African Union.
The arms embargo was initiated by the Council
three decades ago to end Somalia’s civil war in the
1990s during the collapse of the regime. Today Somalia
has a democratically elected Government, which has
vowed to protect its people and safeguard its territory.
In that context, the Somali Government again goes
on record in seeking to lift the arms embargo imposed
on its Government since 1992. The arms embargo on
Somalia, the longest United Nations sanctions regime
with the widest mandate, is hindering our efforts to
rebuild our national security forces and our capability
22-69881

17/11/2022

The situation in Somalia

to properly counter the threat of the Khawarij, formerly
known as Al-Shabaab. In that regard, I would like to
underscore the following points.
First, as a sovereign State, the Federal Government
of Somalia has the inherent right to strengthen its
security and protect its population from violent
extremist groups. We fully implemented the weapons
and ammunition strategy in a comprehensive manner.
The national weapons and ammunition strategy was
successful in guiding the governance of arms and
ammunition, including the establishment of the relevant
national frameworks.
Secondly, after President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
declared war against the Khawarij, our national army
and the local population inflicted heavy losses and
recovered many villages and towns from the group
and its followers, Nevertheless, challenges remain
in consolidating operational gains, especially in the
liberated area.
In addition, as Council members are all aware, the
Federal Government of Somalia requested an extension
to the 30 December deadline to take over some of
the forward operating bases from the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). In the past four
months. the Somali National Army forces have engaged
in ongoing offensive operations against the Khawarij,
and they have used up a major portion of their armaments.
With the renewed sanctions on Somalia, the situation of
armaments is becoming unsustainable. That challenge
and other new developments forced the Government
to request an extension regarding initiating the first
phase of the Somali transition plan. The agreed Somali
transition plan will therefore not succeed if the necessary
international support is not properly restructured and
made available with suitable alignments to the realities
on the ground, including investment in quick-impact
projects and the re-establishment of local governance
in the recovered areas.
The present state of the army-capability imbalance
between our national forces and the terrorist groups
is a direct result of the Council’s arms embargo. Our
hands are tied by the fight against the ruthless enemy
at this most critical time. The July communiqué of the
African Union Peace and Security Council calls for the
urgent lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia. In that
connexion, as a matter of paramount importance, the
Security Council should seriously consider the request
of the African Union so that he Somali National Army

S/PV.9196

are sufficiently equipped in terms of lethal capability,
as captured in the concept of operations to defeat the
Khawarij and pave the way for the successful exit of
ATMIS by 2024.
Thirdly, not only is the arms embargo on Somalia
persistently violated, as reported, but also the Council’s
charcoal ban is violated on a regular basis, as evidenced
in the case concerning the vessel MV Fox, in which the
ship and its crew were released despite the irrefutable
and overwhelming evidence provided by the Federal
Government of Somalia. We commend the Omani
Government for seizing the vessel mentioned above in
Salalah port in Oman despite the challenges regarding
the transparency of the prosecution process for the
criminal networks involved in the illegal trade. We
will continue our active engagement with the Omani
authorities, and we count on their cooperation in
following the guidelines of the relevant Security Council
resolutions in returning the confiscated charcoal to its
rightful owner, the Federal Government of Somalia.
The Somali people, who are fighting in many
regions in Somalia, are asking the Council why it
again voted in favour of such a resolution despite the
intensified fight against the terrorist group. The victims
of the terrorist group also ask each Council member in
this Chamber why lifting the arms embargo on Somalia
is a threat to international peace and security, while
we see and witness the arming of other countries to
defend their territory and people on a daily basis. That
unjust and unfair double standard has prevented the
Government of Somalia from legally obtaining lethal
military equipment to rebuild its National Army for
decades without indefinitely having to rely on external
forces for the security of our country.
Nevertheless, the Somali people have risen against
the tyranny of the terrorist group. We will no longer
await the Council’s condolences and sympathies over
another terrorist attack with hundreds of casualties.
Somalis will continue to resist with arms and with their
bare hands in all regions of Somalian against a violent
extremist ideology until a decisive victory is achieved,
God willing.
In conclusion, it is clear that the arms embargo on
Somalia will not help to build well-equipped Somali
national security forces capable of protecting their
people and territory. As the result, it is also obvious
that the Somali transition plan and the successful exit
of ATMIS from Somalia will not take place within the

22-698817/8

S/PV.9196

The situation in Somalia

agreed timeline. What is certain, in our view, is that
there is a small closing window of opportunity for
Somalia, its neighbours and its international friends to
fully align with the Federal Government of Somalia’s
priority to defeat the transnational terrorist group once
and for all, as declared by President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud and endorsed by the African Union. There
is no doubt that the transnational terrorist group will
continue to gain power by means of violence unless we
work together bilaterally and multilaterally to provide

8/8

17/11/2022

stronger support and cooperation to counter terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.
We again thank those who did not vote in favour of
this resolution and urge those who voted in favour of it
to reconsider their positions. I will conclude with the
quote: “It is not enough that we do our best; sometimes
we must do what is required.”
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.

22-69881
