A/64/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

66

th plenary meeting
Monday, 21 December 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ali Abdussalam Treki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda items 48 and 114 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.36*)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held its debate on agenda item 48
jointly with agenda items 114, 120 and 121 at the 47th
plenary meeting, on 16 November 2009.
I would like to start by making a brief statement.
(spoke in Arabic)
The Assembly is about to take action on a very
important issue, namely organization of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly referred to in
draft resolution A/64/L.36*. That important meeting
will take place in a highly uncertain international
environment, where we have seen achievements made
on the development agenda in previous decades begin
to wither away, especially for the most vulnerable
segments of our societies. That extremely important
meeting will provide a unique opportunity for keeping
us on track towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015 and towards
achieving all the other internationally agreed
development goals.

As we take decisive steps towards honouring the
pledges we have made before the world, I am deeply
indebted to the two facilitators, Ambassador Paul Badji
of Senegal and Ambassador Carsten Staur of Denmark,
for their great and skilful leadership. I am also
indebted and grateful to all Member States for their
tireless efforts, flexibility and positive engagement in
the process.
Draft resolution A/64/L.36* requests the
Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report in
March 2010. In order for that to happen, I would like to
initiate consultations with all Member States in an
atmosphere of complete transparency so as to reach
broad agreement on all fundamental issues, including
the adoption of a concise and action-oriented outcome
to be agreed by all Member States before the summer.
In addition, I would like, in June 2010, to begin
informal interactive hearings with non-governmental
organizations, civil society and the private sector on
the entire process set out in the draft resolution. We
must take crucial measures to attain the MDGs. We are
doing precisely that today, and we can achieve more
next year.
As President of the General Assembly, I assure
members that I intend to cooperate with all Member
States so as to achieve this goal, based on transparency,
impartiality and respect.
(spoke in English)
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.36*. In connection with the draft resolution, I

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-66054 (E)

*0966054*

A/64/PV.66

now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
members that, in connection with draft resolution
A/64/L.36*, entitled “Organization of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly”, I wish to put on record the
following statement on the financial implications, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 11,
15, 16 and 19 of the draft resolution and its annexes,
the General Assembly would decide that the High-level
Plenary Meeting shall be held from Monday,
20 September 2010, to Wednesday, 22 September 2010,
in New York; decide to hold the general debate at its
sixty-fifth session from Thursday, 23 September 2010,
on the understanding that these arrangements shall in
no way create a precedent for the general debate at
future sessions; decide also that the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly will focus on
accelerating progress towards the achievement of all
the Millennium Development Goals by 2015, taking
into account the progress made with regard to the
internationally agreed development goals, through a
comprehensive review of successes, best practices and
lessons learned, obstacles and gaps, challenges and
opportunities, leading to concrete strategies for action,
and request the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report in this regard in March 2010;
decide that the High-level Plenary Meeting will be
composed of six plenary meetings on the basis of two
meetings a day, and six interactive round-table
meetings to be held in concurrence with plenary
meetings; decide also that the plenary meetings shall
be organized in accordance with the modalities set
forth in annex I to the present resolution and that the
list of speakers for the plenary meetings shall be
established in accordance with the procedure set forth
in that annex; decide further that the six round-table
sessions shall be organized in accordance with the
modalities set forth in annex II to the present
resolution; request the President of the General
Assembly to organize, in consultation with
representatives of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, civil society and the private sector, two days

2

of informal interactive hearings no later than June 2010
with non-governmental organizations, civil society and
the private sector to provide an input to the preparatory
process of the High-level Plenary Meeting; decide that
the President of the General Assembly shall preside
over the informal interactive hearings with
representatives of non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations and the private sector, and
that the hearings shall be organized in accordance with
the modalities set forth in annex III to the present
resolution, and request the President of the General
Assembly to prepare a summary of the hearings to be
issued as an Assembly document prior to the Highlevel Plenary Meeting; and request the President of
the General Assembly to continue to hold open,
inclusive, timely and transparent consultations with all
Member States with a view to reaching the broadest
possible agreement on all major issues related to the
High-level Plenary Meeting, including the adoption of
a concise and action-oriented outcome to be agreed by
Member States.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, it is the understanding of the Secretariat that
in accordance with annex IX to the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, the general debate of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly would be
held over a period of nine working days on the
weekdays between 23 September 2010 and 5 October
2010, unless a separate decision is taken. No additional
requirements would arise for the general debate of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, since
related resources have been provided in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
Pursuant to operative paragraphs 1, 3, 6, 9 and 11
of the draft resolution and its annexes I and II, the
2010 High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly and the interactive round-table sessions to be
held from 20 to 22 September 2010 would require
meeting services for six plenary meetings with
interpretation from and into the six official languages
and verbatim records to be issued in the six official
languages and six interactive round-table meetings
with interpretation from and into the six official
languages as well. They also require documentation
services for six pre-session and one post-session
document for a total of 59,500 words to be issued in
the six official languages, including a comprehensive
report by the Secretary-General and an outcome

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

document, as requested in operative paragraphs 3 and
19 respectively.
The conference servicing requirements for the
High-level Plenary Meeting and its documentation
have already been included in the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011. It is also the
understanding of the Secretariat that two other highlevel meetings — namely, the high-level review to
assess progress made in addressing the vulnerabilities
of small island developing States through the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation, and the high-level event of the sixtyfifth session of the United Nations General Assembly
to celebrate the International Year for Biodiversity —
will not meet in parallel with the 2010 High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly.
The six interactive round-table meetings have not
been planned by the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management in its draft calendar of
conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011.
Consequently, additional requirements of $87,000 in
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011 would be required under section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management ($75,000), and section
28D, Office of Central Support Services for other
support services ($12,000). It is considered that the
additional requirements for servicing the six interactive
round-table meetings could be absorbed within the
provisions to be made under sections 2 and 28D of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20102011.
Pursuant to operative paragraphs 15 and 16 of the
draft resolution and its annex III, the informal
interactive hearings would consist of a total of four
meetings over two days, that is, one brief opening
plenary meeting followed by four interactive hearing
sessions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon
each day, and require meeting services with
interpretation from and into the six official languages.
It is envisaged that these hearings would be serviced
using the resources allotted to service the General
Assembly in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011, on the understanding that the
General Assembly itself would not be meeting at the
same time.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 19 of the draft
resolution, the President of the General Assembly

09-66054

would hold consultations with all Member States. It is
envisaged that these consultations would be held as
informal plenary meetings of the General Assembly,
using resources allotted to service the General
Assembly in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.36*, no financial implications
would arise under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
representative of Sweden, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Fries (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The European Union
welcomes the imminent adoption of draft resolution
A/64/L.36* on the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly next year, and we thank the
facilitators for their dedicated and effective
management of the consultation process. Through this
draft resolution we have now jointly agreed that this
critical meeting in September 2010 must accelerate
progress in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) by 2015.
In this draft resolution we have also set out a
meeting format that entails both debate in the plenary and
discussions at round tables. The European Union attaches
particular importance to the round-table discussions, as
they allow for a frank, concrete and action-oriented
discussion among all partners. The European Union
believes that achieving the MDGs will require deep
engagement from a multitude of actors ranging from
Governments to international financial institutions,
international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector.
The themes of the round tables cover all the
MDGs as well as broader challenges affecting their
achievement. The European Union would welcome an
appropriate and balanced schedule of the MDGfocused round tables and the round tables on broader
issues respectively.
We must prepare this meeting well. The European
Union looks forward to the Secretary-General’s report

3

A/64/PV.66

laying out key achievements and key challenges to the
achievement of the MDGs. How can success stories
benefit MDG work across a country or even a region?
We need to know which policies work and how those
policies can best be implemented. The European Union
also looks forward to input from all actors involved in
realizing the MDGs. We need as much evidence-based
and analytical information as possible to produce a
meaningful outcome of the meeting.
We have given ourselves the opportunity offered
by a High-level Meeting of the General Assembly. This
opportunity must be used to its maximum. Political
commitment to the Millennium Development Goals
needs to be even stronger than before if we are to
succeed in the final stretch to 2015.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.36*, entitled “Organization of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly”. May I take that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.36*?
Draft resolution A/64/L.36*
(resolution 64/184).

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Lemieux (Canada): I am privileged to speak
today on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ). Canada, Australia and New Zealand welcome
the adoption of resolution 64/184. We would like to
thank Ambassadors Badji and Staur for so ably steering
this resolution. We would like to commend the
constructive atmosphere that prevailed throughout
those discussions.
From the outset, CANZ has stressed the
importance of holding a short, action-oriented meeting
that keeps the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) at its core. We are pleased
that the General Assembly has agreed that the HighLevel Plenary Meeting will focus on accelerating
progress towards achieving the MDGs. With 2015 fast
approaching, it is important, now more than ever, that
we turn our attention to identifying the bottlenecks to
the achievement of the MDGs and what can be done by

4

all partners to overcome them. We must put our
emphasis on the need for action.
In preparation for next year’s meeting, we have
asked
the
Secretary-General
to
provide
a
comprehensive review of successes, best practices and
lessons learned, obstacles and gaps, challenges and
opportunities. It is expected that the many partners
actively working towards achieving the MDGs will
want to share their perspectives and submit their own
reports. More important, many programme countries,
with the support of the United Nations, will review
their own national progress and will no doubt be in a
position to share their valuable experience. There will
also be a number of regional meetings that will capture
the growing body of knowledge and best practices for
the benefit of all. We believe that these perspectives
will constitute significant additions to the SecretaryGeneral’s report and should be taken into consideration
by Member States when discussing the High-level
Meeting’s outcome.
We therefore hope that the process leading to the
outcome document will start with a preliminary phase
where the information and data compiled from these
national and regional consultations are broadly shared
and discussed by the membership. As a result, when
Member States start discussing the shape and content
of the Plenary Meeting outcome document, these
crucial inputs will be available and understood and can
be factored into the discussion. We believe that this
will greatly enrich the dialogue between our leaders
during the High-level Meeting.
Let me assure the Assembly of the continued
support of CANZ for the MDG agenda. We look
forward to continuing to play an active and
constructive role in the preparation for this important
High-level Meeting and expect to see a very successful
conclusion.
Mr. Ajawin (Sudan): Allow me on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China to take this opportunity to
express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
co-facilitators, His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Senegal,
and His Excellency Mr. Carsten Staur, Permanent
Representative of Denmark, for the diligence,
commitment and enormous patience they demonstrated
during the negotiation process which resulted in
today’s adoption of resolution 64/184 on the scope,
duration, modalities, participation and framework of

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting. The Group of 77
and China likewise extends its appreciation to our
colleagues for the flexibility and constructive
participation they manifested during the negotiation
process.
The Group of 77 and China welcomes the
adoption of resolution 64/184 and believes that it will
form a strong foundation for constructive discussions
in the process leading to the commencement of the
2010 High-level Plenary Meeting. It has been nine
years since the adoption of the United Nations
Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), which
committed Member States to form a new global
partnership to reduce poverty and disease and achieve
universal primary education, to mention but a few of
its aims.
Yet the world is still far from realizing the
Millennium Development Goals in the light of the
2015 deadline. The majority of the population in
developing countries is severely affected by the lack of
implementation of the Goals. As more time is spent on
cross-cutting issues that are not of paramount
importance, many in the developing world are dying
from preventable communicable diseases. Their
children lack basic education, and their young people
lack
opportunities
to
empower
themselves
economically.
How much longer do we have to wait to rid the
world of poverty and economic imbalance?
The Group of 77 and China is fully committed to
seeing that the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting
attracts the wide participation by heads of State or
Government. Their participation in the plenary
meetings and the round tables will no doubt contribute
enormously to the success of the anticipated High-level
Plenary Meeting. The Group is looking forward to the
important report that the Secretary-General will be
issuing in March 2010 in accordance with resolution
55/162. We hope that he presents a comprehensive
report focused on the results and benchmarks achieved,
the identification of gaps, and the implementation of
strategies on the MDGs. The report, among other
reports, could provide the needed background
documentation for a constructive and successful 2010
High-level Plenary Meeting.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China
envisages an action-oriented outcome document based

09-66054

on inclusive, timely and transparent consultations with
all Member States.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): Let me express my deep
gratitude to Ambassador Carsten Staur of Denmark and
Ambassador Paul Badji of Senegal for the leadership
and great skill which have led us to a consensus on the
adoption of resolution 64/184.
Ensuring the success of the High-level Plenary
Meeting is a priority for Japan. The meeting should be
an opportunity for all of us to galvanize the political
will needed to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) by 2015 through a comprehensive
review of successes, best practices and lessons learned,
obstacles and gaps, challenges and opportunities, as
this resolution stipulates. In our view, the High-level
Plenary will offer the last chance to address the issue
of the lack of implementation on the ground. All
stakeholders who gather in New York next September
should discuss concrete ways to effectively deliver
assistance to those in need. Effective approaches
should be identified in that regard.
My delegation will participate constructively and
actively in the preparatory process leading up to the
2010 High-level Plenary. We will spare no effort to
make that meeting a resounding success and a turning
point in our drive to realize the Millennium
Development Goals.
Mr. Rossi (Switzerland): We would like to briefly
take the floor today to reiterate our full support for and
commitment to engaging constructively in the process
leading to the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting. Now
that Member States have agreed on the modality
resolution (resolution 64/184), we all have to join
forces in making this key event a success for
development.
As we become increasingly aware that nations are
more
interdependent
and
that
threats
are
interconnected, challenging individual countries,
institutions and the global governance system as a
whole, we believe that the summit will be an important
opportunity to demonstrate that the United Nations is
capable of taking these complex issues on board. It is
also a key moment to reaffirm that the United Nations
remains a universal and legitimate platform for
debating and bringing together, in one unique forum,
the various interlinked global challenges that affect
development.

5

A/64/PV.66

In the light of this, it will be critical to ensure that
negotiations on the outcome document for the meeting
be based on contributions by stakeholders, as well as
on a solid and up-to-date base of information and
evidence from a variety of sources. We would therefore
recommend that deliberations on the outcome do not
start too early next year, giving Member States time to
take note of the wealth of information that will be
produced during the first six months of 2010. The
month of June seems a reasonable point for the
membership to start engaging in negotiations.
On the format of the meeting, we believe that the
round tables will play a central role in responding to
the scope that Member States have agreed on. Heads of
State or Government should use these platforms to
show their high-level commitment to speeding up
progress towards development and the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals by contributing to
a thorough analysis of the opportunities, obstacles,
gaps and challenges affecting development, as well as
by reviewing best practices and lessons learned. Highlevel engagement by Member States will be critical for
giving political impetus to accelerating progress in
addressing development challenges.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 48 and 114.
Reports of the Second Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Second Committee on
agenda items 40, 50 to 60, 118, 133 and 170. I now
request Ms. Denise McQuade of Ireland, Rapporteur of
the Second Committee, to introduce the reports of the
Second Committee in one intervention.
Ms. McQuade (Ireland), Rapporteur of the
Second Committee: I have the honour to present, for
the Assembly’s consideration, the following reports of
the Second Committee on the agenda items allocated to
it by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to all the facilitators and negotiators who
worked so hard to bring the Committee’s work to a
successful conclusion.
Under agenda item 40, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of

6

the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 13 of document A/64/416,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 50, entitled “Information and
communication technologies for development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 16 of
document A/64/417, the adoption of two draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 51, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, the report of the Committee is issued
in five parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/64/418, and the recommendations are
contained in the following addenda.
Under sub-item 51 (a), entitled “International
trade and development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 10 of document
A/64/418/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (b), entitled “International
financial system and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/64/418/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (c), entitled “External debt and
development: towards a durable solution to the debt
problems of developing countries”, the Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/64/418/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (d), entitled “Commodities”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of
document A/64/418/Add.4, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 52, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the 2002
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference”, the
report of the Committee is issued in two parts, as
documents A/64/419 and A/64/419 (Part II). As the
General Assembly will recall, the recommendation
contained in A/64/419 was adopted by the Assembly at
its 49th plenary meeting, on 20 November. The Second
Committee now recommends, in paragraph 11 of
document A/64/419 (Part II), the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 53, entitled “Sustainable
development”, the report of the Committee is issued in
10 parts. The report under the chapeau is contained in

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

document A/64/420 and the recommendations are
contained in the chapeau as well as in the various
addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 53, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of document
A/64/420, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 53 (a), entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 20 of
document A/64/420/Add.1, the adoption of three draft
resolutions.
Under sub-item 53 (b), entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing
States”,
the
Second
Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
9
of
document
A/64/420/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 53 (c), entitled “International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/64/420/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 53 (d), entitled “Protection of
global climate for present and future generations”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of
document A/64/420/Add.4, the adoption of one draft
resolution. As the General Assembly will recall, the
recommendation contained in the report was adopted
by the Assembly at its 59th meeting, on 7 December
2009.
Under sub-item 53 (e), entitled “Implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 14 of document A/64/420/Add.5, the
adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 53 (f), entitled “Convention on
Biological Diversity”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 10 of document
A/64/420/Add.6, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 53 (g), entitled “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its twenty-fifth session”, the Second

09-66054

Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/64/420/Add.7, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 53 (h), entitled “Sustainable
mountain development”, the Second Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
7
of
document
A/64/420/Add.8, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 53 (i), entitled “Promotion of
new and renewable sources of energy”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/64/420/Add.9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 54, “Implementation of the
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 12 of document A/64/421, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 55, entitled “Globalization
and interdependence”, the report of the Committee is
issued in four parts. The report under the chapeau is
contained
in
document A/64/422,
and
the
recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.
Under agenda item 55 (a), entitled “Role of the
United Nations in promoting development in the
context of globalization and interdependence”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 21 of
document A/64/422/Add.1, the adoption of three draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 55 (b), entitled “Preventing
and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets
of illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular
to the countries of origin, consistent with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/64/422/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 55 (c), entitled “Science and
technology for development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 14 of document
A/64/422/Add.3, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 56, entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/64/423, and
the recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.

7

A/64/PV.66

Under agenda item 56 (a), entitled “Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 8 of document A/64/423/Add.1, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 56 (b), entitled “Specific
actions related to the particular needs and problems of
landlocked developing countries: outcome of the
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries
and International Financial and Development
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of
document A/64/423/Add.2, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 57, entitled “Eradication of
poverty and other development issues”, the report of
the Committee is issued in four parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/64/424, and
the recommendations are contained in the chapeau as
well as in the three addenda.
Under the chapeau of agenda item 57, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 16 of document
A/64/424, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under
agenda
item
57
(a),
entitled
“Implementation of the second United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017)”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of
document A/64/424/Add.1, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 57 (b), entitled “Women in
development”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 7 of document A/64/424/Add.2, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 57 (c), entitled “Human
resources development”, the Second Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/64/424/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 58, entitled “Operational
activities for development”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/64/425, and
the recommendations are contained in the chapeau as
well as in the two addenda.

8

Under the chapeau of item 58, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/64/425, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 58 (a), entitled “Operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 8 of document A/64/425/Add.1, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 58 (b), entitled “South-South
cooperation for development”, the Second Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/64/425/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 59, entitled “Towards global
partnerships”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 10 of document A/64/426, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 60, entitled “Agriculture
development and food security”, the Committee
recommends, in paragraph 12 of document A/64/427,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 118, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/64/428, the adoption of two draft decisions.
Under agenda item 133, entitled “Programme
planning”, as indicated in paragraph 3 of document
A/64/429, there was no action taken by the Second
Committee on the item.
Under agenda item 170, entitled “United Nations
University”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 10 of document A/64/430, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Before I conclude, I would like to request
delegations having any queries about corrections to the
text of draft resolutions that were adopted by the
Second Committee to communicate as soon as possible
with the secretariat of the Second Committee for these
corrections to be made prior to the final issuance of
texts as resolutions of the General Assembly.
Also, I take this opportunity to thank most
sincerely our Chairperson, His Excellency Mr. Park
In-kook of the Republic of Korea, as well as the ViceChairpersons, Mr. Carlos Enrique García González of
El Salvador, Mr. Mohamed Cherif Diallo of Guinea
and Mr. Dragan Mićić of Serbia, for their extraordinary
collaboration and partnership during this challenging

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

and successful session of the Second Committee. May I
also thank the secretariat of the Second Committee for
their outstanding assistance and support to me and to
all the other members of the Bureau.
Finally, and on a more personal note, I would like
to take this opportunity to offer my very best wishes to
all for a wonderful holiday season and the occasion to
spend a well-deserved break from our work with our
families and friends. Last but not least, I wish you all
peace and prosperity in the new year.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the
Second Committee for her introduction of the reports
of the Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Second
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. The
positions
of
delegations
regarding
the
recommendations of the Second Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
General Assembly decision 34/401, the Assembly
agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats. When a report contains
more than one draft resolution, delegations will have
an opportunity to explain their positions before and
after the General Assembly takes action on all of the
draft resolutions.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Second Committee, I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take

09-66054

decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified otherwise
in advance. I should therefore hope that we may
proceed
to
adopt
without
a
vote
those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
The Assembly is reminded that we will shortly be
taking action on draft resolutions and decisions
recommended for adoption by the Second Committee
and, as such, those draft resolutions and decisions can
no longer be additionally co-sponsored in plenary
meeting by Member States. Any clarification about
sponsorship should be addressed to the Secretary of the
Committee.
Any language or other corrections that
delegations may have concerning the reports of the
Committee before us, including the listing of sponsors
of draft resolutions and decisions, should be submitted
to the Secretariat of the Second Committee for
issuance of corrigenda.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of proposals contained in the reports of
the Second Committee”, which has been circulated as
document A/C.2/64/INF/1. This note has been
distributed desk-to-desk in the General Assembly Hall
as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions and
decisions recommended by the Second Committee in
its reports. In this connection, members will find in
column three of the note the order and numbers of the
draft resolutions or decisions for action in plenary
meeting, with their corresponding titles and symbols
assigned in the Second Committee in column four of
the same note.
Agenda item 40
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/416)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

9

A/64/PV.66

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.

10

Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Tonga, Tuvalu.
The draft resolution was adopted by 165 votes to
8, with 7 abstentions (resolution 64/185).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 50
Information and communication technologies for
development
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/417)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 16 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II. Draft
resolution I is entitled is “Building connectivity
through the Trans-Eurasian Information Super
Highway”. The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
64/186).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Information and communication technologies for
development”. The Second Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/187).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 50?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 51
Macroeconomic policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/418)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 51.
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/418/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II.
We will now take action on draft resolution I,
entitled “International trade and development”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros,
Congo,
Côte
d’Ivoire,
Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela

09-66054

(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Norway, Palau,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Turkey.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 122 votes to
47, with 8 abstentions (resolution 64/188).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan and
the United Republic of Tanzania advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: We will now take action on draft
resolution II, entitled “Unilateral economic measures
as a means of political and economic coercion against
developing countries”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,

11

A/64/PV.66

Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Uganda, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution II was adopted by 124 votes to 3,
with 51 abstentions (resolution 64/189).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan and
the United Republic of Tanzania advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 51?
It was so decided.

12

(b) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/418/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/190).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish
of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
(c) External debt and development: towards a
durable solution to the debt problems of
developing countries
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/418/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“External debt sustainability and development”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/191).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(c) of agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
(d) Commodities
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/418/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/192).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 51 and of agenda item 51
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 52 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/419
(Part II))
Draft resolution (A/64/L.41)
The President: Members will recall that at its
49th plenary meeting on 20 November 2009, the
Assembly considered the report of the Second
Committee on this item, contained in document
A/64/419, and adopted the draft decision contained
therein.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
11 of Part II of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Follow-up to and implementation
of the Monterrey Consensus and the outcome of the
2008 Review Conference (Doha Declaration on
Financing for Development)”. The Second Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/193).
The President: Under this same agenda item, the
Assembly also has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/64/L.41.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mexico to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.41.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I take
the floor with regard to the draft resolution contained
in document A/64/L.41, entitled “Modalities for the

09-66054

fourth High-level
Development”.

Dialogue

on

Financing

for

First, I wish express my gratitude to all
delegations thanks to whose efforts and flexibility the
draft resolution enjoys the consensus of the
membership, having determined that the Dialogue will
take place on the 16 and 17 March 2010 on the basis of
the modalities proposed in the note of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document in A/64/377.
My delegation believes that the agreed modalities
for the event will promote discussions that will make it
possible to explore the links between the various
chapters of the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha
Declaration, thus promoting its collegial and holistic
nature. It is our expectation that these modalities will
generate interest among potential participants, thus
increasing the level of attendance at this major event.
My delegation also believes that the decision we
are about to adopt is consonant with the recent
recommendation of the Economic and Social Council
with regard to the strengthening of the inclusive,
reinforced and more effective intergovernmental
process to follow up financing for development, which
reaffirms the importance of the biannual high-level
dialogues of the General Assembly as an
intergovernmental coordination forum for general
follow-up of the Monterrey and Doha Conferences,
with special stress on the new issues raised.
In this context, my delegation wishes to recall
how important it is that the follow-up to the financing
for development process maintain its broad and diverse
nature, relying on the participation of all the various
stakeholders involved, including civil society and the
private sector. Similarly, while reaffirming the central
role of the United Nations in coordinating follow-up to
financing for development and the need to maintain
that role in order to ensure the process’s continuity and
dynamism, we also believe it important to reaffirm the
necessity of continuing to strengthen the commitment
of all interested parties, including the United Nations
system, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the World Trade Organization, to following
up implementation of the commitments made in
Monterrey and Doha.
It is also important to stress the Dialogue’s utility
in generating input for the high-level event scheduled
for September 2010, which will focus on the measures
needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals

13

A/64/PV.66

on time. My delegation believes that the financing for
development process can provide most relevant input
for that discussion, as it did for the 2005 World
Summit.
In our opinion, the follow-up to financing for
development should be conducted so as to provide a
connecting thread and continuity between the various
events that make up the process. To this end, my
delegation would like to ask the Economic and Social
Council to consider both the dates and the modalities
of the General Assembly’s High-level Dialogue in
order to decide, in consultation with the relevant
institutional participants, the date and topic of its
special high-level meeting in the spring with
international financial and commercial organizations.
We should stress that the decision regarding the dates
of the Assembly’s High-level Dialogue, originally
scheduled for 23 and 24 November 2009, was informed
by circumstances beyond the intergovernmental
decision-making process, and we therefore understand
that the practice this year will not necessarily set a
precedent for the process in the future.
In addition, we should recall that various
significant discussions on economic and development
issues will take place in the first half of the coming
year, in particular in the framework of the follow-up to
the United Nations high-level Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and its Impact on
Development; the work of the special group on that
subject; and the ongoing discussions within the
framework of the Economic and Social Council to
respond to the mandate set out in the Conference’s
outcome document (resolution 63/303). While it should
be emphasized that these are parallel processes, it is
also essential to acknowledge that there are substantive
points of convergence. We hope that each will mutually
enrich the other, maximizing the effectiveness of our
deliberations.
Finally, I take this opportunity to thank the Chair
of the Second Committee, Ambassador Park In-kook of
Korea, and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas of Luxembourg,
President of the Economic and Social Council, for their
commitment to and support for our progress on this
important subject, which we hope will help build and
strengthen an effective world association for
development to the benefit of those who need it most.

14

The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/64/L.41, I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
members that, in connection with draft resolution
A/64/L.41, entitled “Modalities for the fourth Highlevel Dialogue on Financing for Development”, I wish
to put on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 5, 6 and 8 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would decide to
hold its fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development on 16 and 17 March 2010 at United
Nations Headquarters; decide that the modalities for
holding the fourth High-level Dialogue will be the
same as those used in the 2005 and 2007 High-level
Dialogues, as described in General Assembly
resolution 59/293 of 27 May 2005; decide also that the
High-level Dialogue will consist of a series of plenary
and informal meetings and three interactive
multi-stakeholder round tables; and decide that the
High-level Dialogue will result in a summary by the
President of the General Assembly that will provide, as
appropriate, an input on financing for development to
the preparatory process of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly of September 2010.
Pursuant to the aforementioned paragraphs, the
fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development would comprise a total of six meetings:
two plenary meetings on 16 March 2010, three parallel
round tables in the morning of 17 March 2010 and one
informal interactive dialogue combined with a short
plenary meeting in the afternoon of 17 March 2010,
with simultaneous interpretation from and into all six
official languages and verbatim records for the three
plenary meetings to be issued in the six official
languages. Documentation requirements are also
required for one post-session document of 10,700
words to be issued in all six official languages.
These six meetings of the fourth High-level
Dialogue on Financing for Development have not been
planned by the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management in its draft calendar of
conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011.
Consequently, additional requirements of $254,700 in

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011 would be required under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management” ($242,700), and section
28 D, “Office of Central Support Services”, for other
support services ($12,000).
It is considered that the additional requirements
to service the fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing
for Development could be absorbed within the
provisions to be made under sections 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management”, and 28 D, “Office of
Central Support Services”, of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011 by using the
resources allotted to service the General Assembly in
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011, on the understanding that the General
Assembly itself would not be meeting at the same time.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.41, no financial implications
would arise under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/64/L.41, entitled
“Modalities for the fourth High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development”. May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/64/L.41?
Draft resolution A/64/L.41
(resolution 64/194).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 52.
Agenda item 53
Sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/420)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II.
We will first take action on draft resolution I,
entitled “Oil slick on Lebanese shores”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

09-66054

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.

15

A/64/PV.66

Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Cameroon, Colombia, Fiji, Liberia,
Panama, Tonga.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 164 votes to 8,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 64/195).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: The Second Committee adopted
draft resolution II, entitled “Harmony with Nature”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/196).
The President: I call on the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for an explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Solón-Romero (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, we wish to thank all
Member States for the adoption by consensus of
resolution 64/196, entitled “Harmony with Nature”,
which was sponsored by 61 countries and
enthusiastically supported by our sister countries of the
Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas.
As part of the implementation of this resolution, I
wish to announce that, following the events in
Copenhagen, President Evo Morales will convene, in
Bolivia on 28 April 2010, a world conference of the
peoples on climate change and the rights of mother
Earth. At this conference, we will discuss a world
referendum of peoples on climate change in which
ordinary citizens will be consulted as to whether
developed countries should reduce and reabsorb their
greenhouse gas emissions domestically so that world
temperatures do not go up by more than one degree
Celsius, and as to whether the funds that are currently
spent on wars should be allocated to preventing climate
change. As a result, much work remains to be done on
the topic of harmony with nature, particularly in the
dissemination of information, during the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of agenda item 53.

16

(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 20 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution III, entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development”, is postponed to a later date to allow
time for review of its programme budget implications
by the Fifth Committee.
We will now take action on draft resolutions I
and II. We will first take action on draft resolution I,
entitled “Agricultural technology for development”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Somalia.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam,
Comoros,
Cuba,
Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Yemen.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 146 votes to 1,
with 32 abstentions (resolution 64/197).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania advised the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote in favour; the delegations
of Algeria, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Egypt and Jordan advised the Secretariat that they
had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Second Committee adopted
draft resolution II, entitled “Midterm comprehensive
review of the implementation of the International
Decade for Action, ‘Water for Life’, 2005-2015”. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, I wish to thank
the 89 sponsors of resolution 64/197, “Agricultural
technology for development”. On behalf of the
sponsors, I extend Israel’s thanks to all 145 delegations
that voted in favour of this important resolution. I also
wish to thank Mr. Daniel Hirsch of the Permanent
Mission of Norway. His determined efforts and tireless
work on behalf of this resolution were instrumental in
creating today’s positive outcome.
The wide spectrum of sponsors in support of this
resolution from developing countries and developed,
from both North and South, demonstrates the
importance and wide appeal of the issue before us.
Such diversity, along with the smooth nature of the
negotiation process, reflects the human desire to make
the world a better place — to engage in what we call in
Hebrew tikkun olam. This humanitarian value
transcends borders, cultures and politics.
Today’s resolution reaffirms our belief that
developing and disseminating agricultural technologies
for development is important, possible and necessary.
Yet such conviction is not enough to achieve our goals.
We must now seek practical ways of implementing this
resolution. Collectively and individually, each State
must work with partners and stakeholders to share and
receive life-altering agricultural technology. In
promoting such activity, this resolution will have
positive economic, social and environmental impacts
far beyond food production. It will improve the
economic future of many who struggle to survive. It
will empower women and other vulnerable
populations. It will advance research and development
of important agricultural technology and production. It
will promote the establishment of sustainable
agricultural systems and management practices.
Mr. Bairagi (Nepal), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/198).

In moving forward, Israel stands ready to work
with all partners to turn the words of this resolution
into reality. We look forward to its becoming a
biannual exercise so that we can ensure that our work
related to this important issue will continue to fulfil
humankind’s needs.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to make a statement in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 53.

09-66054

17

A/64/PV.66

(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/199).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Rangel (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to speak
concerning resolution 64/199, entitled “Follow-up to
and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”.
We wish to confirm the commitment of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to supporting small
island States in their efforts to deal with their limited
financial resources and reduce poverty levels and the
social problems that arise from them, as well as their
vulnerability to the impact of climate change and
related phenomena. In our region this commitment has
been manifest principally via PetroCaribe, whereby the
political will of member countries has made it possible
for this integration scheme to become a united energy
platform.
From this point of view, PetroCaribe has
complied strictly with strategic objectives that are of
the greatest importance to its member countries, such
as devoting special attention to reducing existing
asymmetries by making the most of available resources
and potential in the region in order to ensure energy
security and fair trade. We are also making integration
a reality and strengthening the capacities of members
of the organization to respond fairly to the demands
inherent in growth.

18

PetroCaribe is more than an agreement to supply
energy with payment facilities for member countries.
Among its achievements, we would point to social
projects in the areas of tourism, education, health,
housing, the environment, roads, sport and agriculture.
In the framework of South-South cooperation, we
joined in the consensus adoption of the resolution.
However, we did so without prejudice to our country’s
position on the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, paragraphs 26 and 27 of which refer to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We wish to confirm that these paragraphs, as
established under international law, are binding only on
States parties to the Convention. We therefore stress
that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a State
party to the Convention, the standards of which do not
apply to it under customary international law, other
than those that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
may have expressly recognized or will recognize in the
future through their incorporation in its domestic
legislation.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/200).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

(e) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “United Nations Decade for Deserts and the
Fight against Desertification (2010-2020)”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
64/201).
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Implementation of
the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/202).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.6)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/203).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.

09-66054

(g) Report of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme on its twentyfifth session
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.7)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/204).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
(h) Sustainable mountain development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.8)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/205).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
(i) Promotion of new and renewable sources
of energy
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.9)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?

19

A/64/PV.66

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/206).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 53.
Agenda item 54
Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/421)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/207).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 55
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/422)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 55.

20

(a) Role of the United Nations in promoting
development in the context of globalization and
interdependence
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/422/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I to III.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “Development cooperation with middleincome countries”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
64/208).
The Acting President: We will now take action
on draft resolution II, entitled “Towards a New
International Economic Order”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Draft resolution II was adopted by 124 votes to
none, with 50 abstentions (resolution 64/209).
[Subsequently the delegations of Colombia and
Senegal advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft resolution III, entitled “Role of the
United Nations in promoting development in the
context of globalization and interdependence”. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
64/210).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 55?
It was so decided.

09-66054

(b) Preventing and combating corrupt practices
and transfer of assets of illicit origin and
returning such assets, in particular to the
countries of origin, consistent with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/422/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. I should like to
inform Members that action on the draft resolution is
postponed to a later date to allow time for review of its
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 55.
(c) Science and technology for development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/422/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “Creation of a global culture of cybersecurity
and taking stock of national efforts to protect critical
information infrastructures”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
64/211).
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Science and
technology for development”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/212).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 55?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 55.

21

A/64/PV.66

Agenda item 56
Groups of countries in special situations
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/423)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 56.
(a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/423/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Fourth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries”. The Second Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/213).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
(b) Specific actions related to the particular needs
and problems of landlocked developing
countries: outcome of the International
Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor
Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/423/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Groups of countries in special situations:

22

specific actions related to the particular needs and
problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome
of the International Ministerial Conference of
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation”. The Second Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/214).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 56 and of
agenda item 56 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 57
Eradication of poverty and other development issues
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/424)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 16 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution entitled “Legal
empowerment of the poor and eradication of poverty”.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/215).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 57.
(a) Implementation of the second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (20082017)
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/424/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution entitled “Second
United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008-2017)”. The Second Committee adopted the

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/216).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): This year, Bangladesh
coordinated the process leading to the adoption of
resolution 64/216 on the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. It is indeed a
great pleasure for us to see that the resolution enjoyed
the consensus of all fellow Member States.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing multifaceted
crises worldwide, the question of poverty has taken on
new dimensions. As we speak at this gathering, one
billion people will go to bed hungry tonight. Since the
multiple crises appeared on the surface of this planet,
50 million more people have been driven to extreme
poverty. In this dismal scenario, the world has spoken
in unison for the need to fight against poverty under
the aegis of resolution 64/216.
Bangladesh has championed the United Nations
cause of fighting poverty because we believe that
seeking a world free of poverty is not an act of charity,
but the responsibility of each country and the United
Nations at large. Accordingly, I would like to state that
our leader, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, believes that
the right to food is a basic human right. While fighting
against poverty, the development agendas of many
countries, including the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), have been halted
midway. To achieve the MDGs by 2015, the particular
issue of poverty eradication, namely MDG 1, remains
at the top of the list of priority actions.
In Bangladesh, despite our limited resources, the
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, has been planning, implementing and
evaluating myriad programmes in different sectors
aimed at poverty eradication. All these plans and
programmes have been devised towards fulfilling the
ultimate vision of the Government — Vision 2021 —
of a Bangladesh free of poverty; a Bangladesh where
human faculties flourish in a democratic, secure, free
and progressive society; a Bangladesh free from all
forms of racial and religious discrimination, extremism
and exclusion.

09-66054

We feel confident that, as we have reached a
consensus on the resolution on fighting poverty, all
Member States will join us in our endeavours. We
believe that that is a step forward in translating Vision
2021 into a reality. The delegation of Bangladesh
wishes to express its thanks to all Member States,
especially the delegation of experts of the Second
Committee, for their sincere endeavours in this regard.
We especially thank the Group of 77 and China for
supporting us throughout the negotiation process for
the resolution. We also thank all partners — including
the United States of America, Japan, Canada, New
Zealand, Australia and the European Union — for
taking a renewed interest in the cause of poverty
eradication, which greatly helped us to reach a
consensus. We believe that the spirit that we saw in the
process of negotiating a consensus on the resolution
will also be manifest in its implementation phase.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.
(b) Women in development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/424/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/217).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.
(c) Human resources development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/424/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second

23

A/64/PV.66

Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/218).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 57 and of
agenda item 57 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 58
Operational activities for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/425)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Appointment of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Population Fund”. The Second Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/219).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 58.
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/425/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/220).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 58?
It was so decided.

24

(b) South-South cooperation for development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/425/Add.2)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.37)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “SouthSouth cooperation”. The Second Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/221).
The Acting President: Under this agenda item,
the Assembly also has before it a draft resolution
issued as A/64/L.37. May I take it that the General
Assembly agrees to consider the draft resolution
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Daoud (Sudan): We have a small correction
to the draft resolution on the Nairobi outcome
document of the High-level United Nations Conference
on South-South Cooperation, contained in document
A/64/L.37. The words “on South-South cooperation” in
the final sentence of sub-paragraph (l) of paragraph 21
of the annex should be corrected to read “for SouthSouth cooperation”.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.37, entitled
“Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.37, as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/64/L.37, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 64/222).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan in explanation of position on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): It is a great honour to deliver
a statement on behalf of the Government of Japan
following the adoption of resolution 64/222 on the

09-66054

A/64/PV.66

Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation.
Japan has recognized the value of South-South
cooperation and actively supported countries in the
South in engaging in it through triangular cooperation
for more than 30 years. We are glad to see South-South
and triangular cooperation being widely recognized as
an indispensable means of development today.
At the High-level Conference held in Nairobi, we
observed a wide range of interpretations of the term
“South-South cooperation”. For certain countries, it is
a concept of solidarity among developing States; for
others, it is an activity that comes under the aideffectiveness agenda. In our view, however, this
difference should not prevent us from moving forward
with concrete actions on South-South and triangular
cooperation. In such an endeavour, all stakeholders —
including Governments, civil society and the private
sector of developing and developed States alike —
should join hands to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, despite serious setbacks caused by
multiple crises.
Japan is willing to further support South-South
and triangular cooperation while respecting the
ownership of the host country and emphasizing
capacity-building of the participants. We encourage the
increased involvement of the other bilateral donors in
supporting South-South cooperation and implementing
triangular cooperation.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 58, and of
agenda item 58 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 59
Towards global partnerships
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/426)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/223).

09-66054

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 59?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60
Agriculture development and food security
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/427)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/224).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 60?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/428)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft decisions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take action on draft decisions I and II.
The Second Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Programme of work of the Second Committee
for the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft decision II, entitled “Rotation of the post
of Rapporteur of the Second Committee”. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
item 118.

25

A/64/PV.66

Agenda item 133 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/429)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
133.
Agenda item 170
United Nations University
Report of the Second Committee (A/64/430)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution entitled
“Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations
University”. The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/225).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Japan in explanation of position on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): As the host country of the
United Nations University headquarters, Japan
welcomes the adoption by consensus of resolution
64/225, which enables the United Nations University to
expand its activities by granting advanced academic
degrees. The United Nations University postgraduate
programme will contribute in particular to capacitydevelopment in developing countries.
I would like to express my gratitude, on behalf of
the Government of Japan, to the 112 sponsors that
supported the expeditious adoption of the resolution.
My delegation’s special thanks go to Mr. Markus
Weidling of the Permanent Mission of Germany, who
facilitated informal consultations within the very tight
schedule at the end of the Second Committee’s work
for this session.

26

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 170?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr.
Park In-kook, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea to the United Nations and
Chairperson of the Second Committee, as well as
members of the Bureau and representatives, for a job
well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Second
Committee before it.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the
current session. Members will recall that, at its 63rd
plenary meeting, on 11 December 2009, the General
Assembly decided that the sixty-fourth session would
recess on Tuesday, 22 December 2009. However, in
view of the work that remains to be done for this part
of the session, I would like to propose that the
Assembly postpone the date of recess of the current
session to Wednesday, 23 December 2009. If there is
no objection, may I take it that the Assembly agrees to
this proposal?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I would also like to
consult Members regarding an extension for the work
of the Fifth Committee. Members will recall that, at its
63rd plenary meeting, on 11 December 2009, the
General Assembly approved the recommendation of the
General Committee that the Fifth Committee complete
its work by Friday, 18 December 2009. However, the
President of the Assembly has been informed by the
Chairman of the Fifth Committee that the Committee
was not able to finish its work by Friday 18 December.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly agrees to
extend the work of the Fifth Committee until Tuesday,
22 December 2009?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

09-66054
