Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1 Decides to defer until the twenty-seventh session
the question of new construction and major alterations
at United Nations Headquarters;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to unde~ak~ a
detailed and comprehensive study of the situation
created by the shortage of s~ace at H~a<iquarters,
including the prospects of execu_ting the proJect referred
to in General Assembly resolution 2618 (XXIV), and
to submit a report to the Assembly at its twentyseventh session, together witJi the co~crete propo~als
and recommendations he might consider appropriate
to meet that situation in the light of any new development;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to present
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session,
in a detailed and comprehensive manner, the stu~ies
mentioned in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of resolution
2618 (XXIV), which were to have been submitted
at the twenty-sixth session.
2031 st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.
2896 (XXVI). Mural commemorating the World
Youth Assembly

The General Assembly,
Considering that the World Youth Assembly, held
within the framework of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, recognized the important role
that youth should play in the world,
Taking into account that youth constitutes more than
half the population of the world,
Recognizing that the World Youth Assembly served
a most useful purpose in bringing together the youth
from nearly all the countries of the world, irrespective
of the political or ideological systems to which those
countries belonged,
Noting that the World Youth Assembly paved the
way for a better understanding among youth designed
to contribute to efforts for bringing about peace, justice
and progress in the world,
1. Decides that a mural shall be painted at United
Nations Headquarters to commemorate the World
Youth Assembly;
2. Decides that the cost of such a mural shall be
financed from the surplus voluntary funds of the World
Youth Assembly, within the maximum amount of
$10,000.
2031st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.
2897 (XXVI). Review and reappraisal of United
Nations information policies and activities

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the review and reappraisal of United Nations
information policies and activities, 111 the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions 52 and the relevant statements made
111 A/C.5/1320/Rev.1 and Add.I.
52 0-/ficial Records of the General

Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 8 A (A/8408/Add.1-30), document
A/8408/ Add.4.

127

in the Fifth Committee by the representatives of the
Secretary-General,
Reaffirming its resolutions 13 (I) of 13 February
1946 and 595 (VI) of 4 February 1952 and subsequent resolutions on public information in the United
Nations,
Bearing in mind that various United Nations bodies
make recommendations on policy guidelines related
to information in their area of concern,
Reaffirming the importance of United Nations information centres as appropriate instruments for informing the peoples of the world about the Organization's
objectives and activities,
Stressing the need for maintaining central control
and direction in the implementation of information
policies and guidelines,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Secretary-General on the review and reappraisal
of United Nations information policies and activities;
2. Decides that the basic principles laid down in
General Assembly resolution 13 (I) and confirmed
in resolution 595 (VI) do not need to be revised,
amended or enlarged and that they should continue
to be applied, subject to such directives as the Assembly
has already given or may give from time to time;
3. Approves the Secretary-General's proposals for
the acquisition and replacement of equipment for 1972,
as set out in annex I of the addendum to his report,118
and decides to consider ,at the twenty-seventh session
the balance of the Secretary-General's programme of
future acquisition and replacement;
4. Endorses the proposals contained in subparagraphs 261 (iii), (iv), (viii), (x), (xii) and (xiv) of
the Secretary-General's report;114
5. Approves in principle the Secretary-General's
proposal on the establishment of a regional production
bureau1111 and decides to consider all aspects of its
implementation at the twenty-seventh session;
6. Recommends that the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 1405 (XIV) of 1 December 1959, should
review the composition of the Consultative Panel on
Public Information to ensure that it reflects the present
situation in the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to convene the Panel before the twentyseventh session to advise him on the information policies
and activities of the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain the
publicity and promotional needs of the various bodies
of the United Nations which undertake universal
causes approved by the General Assembly, in order
that those needs may be taken into account when
considering the budgetary requirements for the Office
of Public Information for 1973 and subsequent years;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint to
the United Nations information centres highly qualified
Professional staff in the field of information, who should
give their undivided attention to the dissemination of
information and the building of public support for
United Nations activities, particularly in the economic,
social and political fields;
53 A/C.5/1320/Rev.l/ Add.I.
54 A/C.5/1320/Rev.1.

55 Ibid.,

para. 216.
