V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

145

the revised recovery programme which have not yet
attracted the support of the international community,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international
action to assist the Government of Uganda in its continuing efforts for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development,
Encouraged that the economic policies of the Government of Uganda and the support assistance provided by
the donor countries and international organizations have
produced positive signs of economic recovery,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Uganda;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to those States and
organizations that have provided assistance to that country;
3. Reiterates its endorsement of the assessment and
recommendations contained in the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session;9 3
4. Invites the international community, in particular
the United Nations system and donor countries and organizations, to make available more resources to implement
the country's revised recovery programme (1982-1984)
and meet the remaining needs described in the SecretaryGeneral's summary report;
5. Urgently renews its appeal to all Member States,
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and international economic and financial
institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral and
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development needs of Uganda and to its emergency
requirements;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Uganda and to report periodically to the SecretaryGeneral on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to help that country;
7. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the International Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and the
World Bank to bring to the attention of their governing
bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of
Uganda and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes in Uganda;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Uganda;
(b) To keep the situation in Uganda under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental

organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Uganda;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation in Uganda and in organizing international assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
I 7 December I 984

9 , N37/121
94 A/33/167 and Corr. I. A/341372 and Corr I, A,35,332 and Corr. I. A:
361265. A.'.37/124 and A/38 216, sect. V
9 ) See Proceedmgs o( th<' l 'mtcd l 1./atwm ( ·on_/erent'e on Trade and Dcl-'clopmcnt, Snth Session, vol. I, Report and 1,1rww1 (l ln,ted Nations puhhcatlon, Saks Nn E.81.11 D.6l. pan one, seer \

96 Report of the ['nited Na/Ions Conference on lhe Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 Septemher /981 (United Nations publication. Sales,
No. F.82.1.8). pan one. sect. A.

39/189. Assistance to Cape Verde
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on assistance to Cape Verde, in
particular its resolution 38/219 of 20 December 1983, in
which the international community was requested to provide an appropriate level of resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape Verde as
envisaged in the reports of the Secretary-General, 94
Recalling resolutions 142 (VI) and 138 (VI) of 2 July
1983 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development95 on the progress in the implementation of
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the Least Developed Countries, 96 and on activities in
the field of island developing countries,
Noting that Cape Verde is one of the least developed
countries and a small archipelagic State, with a fragile and
open economy, aggravated by endemic and severe
drought,
Reiterating that increased substantial, continuous and
predictable assistance from the international community is
needed for the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (1982-1985),
Gravely concerned at the critical food situation in Cape
Verde resulting from the failure of seasonal rains, the continuing recurrence of drought and the spreading desertification,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and people of Cape Verde in the process of the
economic and social development of their country despite
existing constraints,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 97
to which is annexed the report of the review mission sent
to Cape Verde in response to General Assembly resolution
38/219;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in mobilizing resources for the
implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape
Verde;
3. t:xpresses its gratitude to States and to international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
4. Reaffirms the need for all Governments and international organizations to implement their commitments
undertaken within the framework of the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, particularly those undertaken at the roundtable conference of Cape Verde's partners in development,
held at Praia from 21 to 23 June 1982;

9 ' \ ,9 1~9

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

146

5. Urges Governments and international, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
organizations to extend and intensify substantially their
assistance for the early implementation of the programme
of assistance to Cape Verde;
6. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to support the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (I 982-1985) of Cape Verde;
7. Requests the organs, organizations, and bodies of
the United Nations system to continue and increase their
assistance to Cape Verde, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to mobilize resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the measures they have taken and
the resources they have made available to help that country;
8. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde, or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system, to help it cope
with the critical situation in the country;
9. Once again draws the attention of the international
community to the special account established at United
Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
10. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to continue to consider,
through their governing bodies, the special needs of Cape
Verde and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1985, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation in
Cape Verde and, in consultation with the Government of
Cape Verde, to make a substantive report on the implementation of the special programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde to be considered by the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
IOJrd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/190. Assistance to Yemen
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/ 166 of I 7 December 1982
and 38/204 of 20 December 1983 and resolution 150 (VI)
98 A/39/380.
99 A/39/404.

of 2 July 1983 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 45
Fully aware of the grave devastation and substantial loss
of life and property caused by the earthquake that struck
large areas of Yemen on 12 December 1982,
( ·oncerned about the damage caused to infrastructure,
which has a far-reaching effect on the implementation of
the national development plan in that country,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 98
which outlines the reconstruction programme of the Government of Yemen. the cost of which is estimated at $620
million,
raking into account that the various phases of reconstruction have placed a strain on the Government of Yemen. largely exhausted the resources available and hindered
development plans,
Recognizing that Yemen, as one of the least developed
countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of the
relief efforts and the reconstruction of the affected areas,
I. Appeals to all countries, especially the developed
countries, to continue to contribute generously to the relief
efforts and the reconstruction of the affected areas through
financial contributions and the provision of the construction materials and equipment necessary to restore infrastructure and basic services in the affected areas;
2. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
expand their programmes of assistance to Yemen;
3. Expresses its gratitude to the States, the international and regional organizations and the non-governmental organizations that have participated in the ongoing
efforts undertaken for the reconstruction of the affected
areas in Yemen;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1985, and the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, of
the progress made in the implementation of the present
resolution.
IOJrd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/191. Assistance to Madagascar
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
3 of 11 May 1984 on measures to be taken following the
cyclones and floods in Madagascar in December 1983 and
January and April 1984,
Recognizing that these climatic phenomena have
resulted in loss of life and the destruction of several towns
and have inflicted serious damage on the economic and
social infrastructures and on the agricultural, stock-farming. transport and industrial sectors,
( ·oncerned by the fact that the damage caused by these
natural disasters is hampering the development efforts of
Madagascar,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Madagascar, 99 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/3,
Having considered the special economic assistance programme prepared by the inter-agency mission which visited Madagascar from 24 May to 5 June I 984, 100
1IIO Ibid .. annex.
