S/PV.7030

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7030th meeting

Thursday, 12 September 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Huseynli
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2013/521)

13-47179 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1347179*

S/PV.7030

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2013/521)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas Kay, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, to
participate in this meeting. On behalf of the Council,
I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Kay, who is today
giving his first briefing to the Council in his capacity
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedures, I invite Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/521, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kay.
Mr. Kay: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council for the first time since
assuming my appointment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, and in fact my
first time ever. I am particularly glad to be here today
with Ambassador Annadif of the African Union, whose
presence represents our close collaboration as we
discharge our two mandates from the Council.
This is a good time for some stocktaking on
Somalia, one year after the new Federal Government
was established and 90 days after the establishment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM).
Before going into some detail on political and
security issues, let me start by answering the question

2/7

12/09/2013

all Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
probably hear the most: “Are you optimistic?” The
answer in my case is a resounding “yes”. Behind the
twists and turns, the crises and the standoffs, Somalia
has the foundations for progress. The international
community is united behind a credible, legitimate
Federal Government. There are resources available to
meet the most immediate needs. There is the political
will to compromise and manage disputes without
resorting to violence, and the Somali people I have
met are tired of war and deprivation and fed up with
brinkmanship and predatory politics.
The heart of the political challenge is simple to
describe, if rather difficult to solve. After 22 years of
conflict, power and control of resources and revenue
are fragmented. The strong centralist State has ceased
to exist. Different regions and different people now
hold different bits of power. That is why Somalis have
decided that a federal model is the only system that will
work in this new reality. The task now is to reconcile
and agree among themselves exactly how federalism
will work in practice. How will they share power,
revenue, resources and responsibilities in a way that
benefits all of Somalia? Those are difficult issues, but
ones that need political solutions.
That is why, in my first three months, I have
prioritized the need for progress on the constitutional
review and constructive engagement with the regions,
travelling to Puntland and Somaliland and engaging
closely with stakeholders on the Juba question.
If a week is a long time in politics, the 90 days of
UNSOM in Somalia is an age. Allow me to brief the
Council on a number of important recent developments
since the issuance of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/521).
The situation in the Juba regions was one of the
most serious issues to face the Federal Government. In
early June, the risks were very high of a collapse in
security and political stalemate in Kismaayo, as well as
between the Juba parties and Mogadishu. However, an
agreement was finally reached on 28 August in Addis
Ababa, under the active mediation of Ethiopian Foreign
Minister Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on behalf
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which set out interim governance, security and
economic arrangements. I supported the negotiations in
the closing stages and attended the signing ceremony in
Addis Ababa. Some outstanding issues still remain, and

13-47179

12/09/2013

The situation in Somalia

implementation will require goodwill from all parties
and significant support. UNSOM, I am glad to say,
has established a presence in Kismaayo to ensure it is
able to help as required across all areas of its mandate,
working closely with the African Union (AU). We are
concerned to hear of the attack today on the convoy
of the interim leader of the Juba administration, and I
have called for calm and restraint from all sides.
To the north, the relationship between Somaliland
and Somalia remains sensitive and fragile. Nevertheless,
there is progress to report. With the mediation of
Turkey, the two parties have had two sessions of talks
this year. The agreement on the shared management of
airspace could be a model for other areas of mutually
beneficial cooperation. We urge both sides to focus on
solutions, however modest, rather than problems. The
presence of UNSOM in Somaliland is still on hold at
the request of the local authorities, who do not accept
that UNSOM has a mandate in Somaliland. I remain
committed to finding a way to break that impasse. I am
also offering my good offices to Puntland for its internal
political processes, and to assist in confidence-building
between the Puntland administration and the Federal
Government. I am again working closely with the Chair
of the IGAD Council on this.
One of the key tasks facing Somalia is agreement
on a final Federal Constitution. The United Nations is
supporting a broad process of popular consultations
that should clarify several key areas that remain
contentious. A long, hard process of consultation and
negotiation lies ahead, which we shall support. On
2 September, UNSOM backed the launch of a national
political conference entitled “Vision 2016’, at which the
President of Somalia restated his commitment to a new
Constitution and elections by 2016.
In less than a week from today, another key
building block of Somalia’s stabilization will be put
in place. Some 200 delegates will gather in Brussels
on Monday, hosted jointly by the European Union and
the Federal Government. The New Deal compact is
a Somali-led and Somali-owned set of priorities and
milestones for achieving them, and an architecture for
international support, coordination and funding. In
Brussels, the Somali Government and the international
community will endorse the compact to confirm mutual
commitment to those priorities. The true test of the
compact will be in how it makes a difference in people’s
daily lives. The United Nations in Somalia will play its
part to the full, especially in helping the Government

S/PV.7030

to coordinate international assistance. I thank the
European Union for its key role in the process and will
continue to work closely with it in this and other areas
of our support to Somalia in general. I hope that we
will see real commitment from partners, especially to
the new financial and coordination mechanisms being
proposed.
So there is progress on the political front. Parliament
has shown itself to be a key driver. But there is no room
for complacency. There is still time to agree on a new
Constitution through an inclusive process, vote on it
and then hold free and fair elections in Somalia. But it
is a big hill to climb and we must all pick up the pace.
Other than politics, much of our initial focus has
been on security. Our presence in Mogadishu is to a
large extent possible only because of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and I pay tribute to the
courage, determination and sacrifice of the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the leadership of the
African Union Commission. The next phase will require
more support. The exact needs for force enablers and
multipliers, sufficient and predictable financing and a
new concept of operations will emerge from the report
of the joint United Nations-AU benchmarking mission
in October. As the Council will hear from my friend
and colleague Ambassador Annadif, the military and
security dimension of defeating Al-Shabaab in Somalia
is by no means over. The Somali national army is ready
to do its part, and must be properly backed. I call on
the Council to ensure that greater priority is given to
strengthening the Somali national security forces and
their ability to deploy and sustain joint operations
with AMISOM. I trust that will be one of the main
conclusions of the benchmarking team.
Beyond the challenges of politics and security,
the United Nations is also actively engaged on
other issues of vital importance to Somalia and the
region — addressing humanitarian needs, human
rights, gender equality and piracy. Access remains
a major impediment and has contributed to the rapid
spread of polio. Somalia now has more than 160
confirmed cases, more than half the world’s caseload.
Vital national immunization campaigns have taken
place with local health-care workers negotiating access
to hard-to-reach communities. The pullout of Médecins
sans frontières is a severe blow to the health sector and
a reminder of the importance for all parties of respect
for international humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles. While we have seen some improvements,

13-471793/7

S/PV.7030

The situation in Somalia

the food-security situation remains precarious. For the
first time in five years, the number of people in crisis is
below 1 million, but the number of people on the margin
of food insecurity has increased to 2.3 million. That
may be further exacerbated if the lifeline of Somali
diaspora remittances is cut by international banks.
Some 1 million refugees are hosted in Somalia’s
neighbouring countries. While there has been a push
lately for refugees to return to Somalia, it is not yet
time for a large-scale repatriation. Spontaneous and
voluntary returns in safe areas, however, must be
supported with durable solutions.
We are pleased to be backing the Government’s
human-rights road map, its plan of action to be brought
to the Human Rights Council in Geneva later this
month. As a critical step in that action plan, I have called
on the Somali Government to ratify the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Childhood in Somalia can
be a frightening experience. We continue to monitor
with concern numerous grave violations of children’s
rights. In a more positive note for Somalia’s children,
a United Nations-supported go-to-school campaign
was launched last Sunday, aimed at getting 1 million
children into classrooms in the next three years. As a
first step, for the first time in a decade, free schooling is
being provided by the Government to 100,000 children
today.
Sexual violence is one of the most serious and
urgent human rights challenges facing the Government
and people of Somalia. The commitment of both the
Somali President and the leadership of AMISOM to a
policy of zero-tolerance of sexual abuse is encouraging.
It is clear, however, that much more robust systems of
investigation and prosecution are needed, which should
include the protection of survivors and witnesses.
While piracy is on the decline, the onshore networks
that profited from it have not been dismantled. Law
enforcement and corrections systems on land, as well
as job opportunities, must be supported so that we treat
the root causes of the problem. At a conference hosted
by the United Arab Emirates in Dubai just yesterday,
a maritime strategy covering security and sustainable
resource management was strongly endorsed. The
United Arab Emirates deserves our thanks for that
valuable initiative.
I want to thank the Council for its vision in
establishing UNSOM. We are making good progress in
setting up the Mission, with about 50 staff on board

4/7

12/09/2013

so far. Much greater capacity is needed to discharge
the mandate, but we will expand only at a pace that
allows us to be effective and reflects the Government’s
capacity to absorb our help.
Our effectiveness depends on our relationships. I
have focused in particular on our relationship with the
Federal Government, which I believe is strong. Second
is the United Nations relationship with AMISOM.
Ambassador Annadif and I are determined that our
teams should work hand in hand. It is not a coincidence
that we have come to brief the Council together today.
We also work closely with IGAD. I look forward to the
IGAD Partners Forum, to be hosted here in New York
on the margins of the General Assembly.
Within the United Nations system I have also
focused on relationships, which are key to UNSOM’s
mandate to provide one United Nations door for
the Federal Government. We are on course to be
formally integrated as a mission by 1 January, and are
already working on the rule of law and security and
constitutional review and human rights in joint teams.
We are already working as a single United Nations
senior management team.
Our United Nations family in Somalia experienced a
dark hour when our common compound was attacked on
19 June. We lost one staff member of the United Nations
Development Programme and seven contractors and
guards. That tragedy has only deepened my resolve and
commitment to the Mission. We are reviewing security
arrangements for our staff, and I remain urgently in
need of a fully functioning guard-force capacity, as
has been recommended by the Council. The African
Union-United Nations benchmark exercise looked at
some options, which are currently being considered.
I would like to leave the Council with three key
messages for its consideration. First, in Somalia the
people, Government and international partners are on
the brink of achieving great things — truly great things.
In terms of rebuilding a shattered State and rescuing
millions of people from conflict and poverty, we are
standing on the very edge of great success.
Secondly, where we stand is also precarious.
Success is not guaranteed. In no sense at all is the
Somalia crisis over. We cannot afford to lessen our
focus or investment, despite the many competing claims
for our attention in the rest of the world. If we fail and
Somalia slips back and Al-Shabaab prevails, we shall

13-47179

12/09/2013

The situation in Somalia

feel the security impact from Bamako to Bangui and
beyond Africa. Ideology respects no borders.
Thirdly, to get over the threshold and achieve great
things, we need more. Much has been given in terms
of support — and even more promised — but there are
three areas in which we need to boost our effort if we
are not to fail. First is support for the Somali National
Security Forces — we have not achieved critical mass
in terms of building their capacity; second are enhanced
capabilities for AMISOM; and third is a well-resourced
and coherent United Nations role in the exit strategy for
AMISOM, which includes support to UNSOM and the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM, as well as
the work of United Nations agencies in Somalia.
Working in Somalia is expensive. Keeping our staff
safe costs real money. Ensuring success will cost more,
but not very much compared to what the international
community has spent in Iraq, Afghanistan and more
recently Mali. Failure in Somalia is, however, still a
risk. It is, I submit, a risk we cannot afford.
The President: I thank Mr. Kay for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, I would
like to thank the Council for giving me the unique
opportunity to update members on the situation in
Somalia. I agree with my colleague Ambassador Kay
that the evolution of the situation calls for optimism.
Nonetheless, like all optimism, it should be tempered
by the challenges that have to be met. Therefore, rather
than dwell on the positive aspects that he so widely and
brilliantly presented during his briefing, I would like
to focus on the challenges that the Government must
address and the challenges that face the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

S/PV.7030

in place on the ground. The military component, as
the Council knows, is today made up of troops from
Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti and Sierra Leone
amounting to approximately 17,000 troops. There is
a civilian component, with approximately 100 troops
from different African countries. Their work is often
complementary to the tasks of our friends in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia on the ground.
There is also a police component, which is made up of
two units — one from Nigeria with 140 police officers
and the other from Uganda, also with 140 police officers.
They patrol on a daily basis and help the Somali police
with their mission. We also have instructors and trainers
from Ghana, Gambia and other African countries, all of
whom help our brothers in Somalia to ensure security.
For the time being they are in Mogadishu, but they will
soon move into other areas, including Kismayo, Baidoa
and Beledweyne.
Since its inception, AMISOM has been undertaking
its mission through the military, police and civilian
components. Indeed, thanks to the Council’s support
and the proactive mandate entrusted to AMISOM,
today we have achieved significant progress in the
security and political arenas. Ambassador Kay has
already ready briefed the Council on these, so I will
not go into them, but I would just like to say that while
we are currently seeing a positive dynamic unfolding
in Somalia, there are still a number of challenges to be
met.

Before continuing with my presentation, I
would like to convey the regrets and the apologies of
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, who is not able
to speak to the Council today. As members know, he
was just appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs of his
country, Algeria. He asks the Council to accept his
apologies.

On the political level, we are encouraged by the
Government’s determination to implement its policies.
In that regard, Ambassador Kay also underscored a
number of positive developments, some of which have
been under way only since the beginning of the month.
Those events were recently crowned by the important
agreement of 28 August between the political leaders of
Jubaland, in particular Ahmed Madobe, and the Somali
Government. However, the entire positive dynamic is
undermined by a number of challenges that, as I said,
if not resolved, could lead to a reversal that would be
regrettable for the entire international community.
Indeed, contrary to the previous years of a failed State
and anarchy in Somalia, today there is a responsible
Government that, while beset by its own problems, is
evolving in the right direction.

With regard to the situation in Somalia, it is thanks
to the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council that today AMISOM is able to achieve its
mission with the support of three components that are

The first challenge is related to security. Despite
the рrogress achieved against Al-Shabaab, especially
in 2012 and early 2013, AMISOM wishes to stress
that Al-Shabaab still has the ability to destabilize the

13-471795/7

S/PV.7030

The situation in Somalia

country and to derail our efforts. Since the beginning
of the year, Al-Shabaab has deployed increasingly
sophisticated harassment tactics that are the outcome of
thorough preparation and training and enjoy financial
support from sources that we are very close to being
able to identify. The report of the Monitoring Group
on the issue (S/2013/413) contains a number of leads in
that respect.
We would draw attention to the suicide attack
carried out on 19 June against the United Nations
complex. More recently, an attack was perpetrated on
7 September against a very popular village restaurant
frequented by civilians. Those are indications that
setbacks could occur if we are not vigilant.
Indeed, extremist groups move freely throughout
some 50 per cent of Somali territory, in particular the
rural areas, where they continue to organize and train
and where they have access to logistical support as well
as to weapons and ammunition. The endeavours of the
United Nations, though the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, which complement ours, must
be underscored, because numerous efforts are currently
under way to identify those sources and, ultimately, to
cut them off.
The second challenge is within the Somali
Government, namely, how to streamline the federal
structure as stipulated in the provisional Constitution.
Several regions are competing to be autonomous from
the central Government, and interpretations often
differ from one region to the other. But I think that
we can welcome the agreement of 28 August between
the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the
authorities of Jubaland, which is reassuring to all of
us and offers positive prospects for the relationship
between the FGS and the various regions that are
making such claims.
The third challenge also pertains to the Government
and is linked to its insufficient capacity. When AMISOM
liberates areas, officials are appointed by the Somali
Government who sometimes are not accepted by the
local population and have no administrative structures
in place to support them. Thus internal coordination
among such structures remains a key challenge. That is
compounded by the lack of understanding resulting from
such contradictions among Government representatives
or officials.
In addition, the Somali Government continues to
face the humanitarian situation of which Ambassador

6/7

12/09/2013

Kay spoke, which includes displaced persons, refugees,
unemployed youth and so on. The people are very keen
to see their problems solved, and if, despite the hopes
in that respect, there are no signs of improvement in
the near future, those difficulties, which have become
chronic, could lead to conflict. Indeed, the seeds of
conflict are already there.
As Ambassador Kay has said, we are preparing
for Brussels and the New Deal. We must ensure that
in the wake of that event, the country enjoys a level of
security adequate to ensure progress towards peace as
well as the political and, especially, economic stability
to which the Somali people aspire. Considerable efforts
at the military level remain necessary and must go
hand in hand with the political strategy. However, those
efforts and objectives require consultation and further
support on the part of all of Somalia’s partners, because
the challenges involved could have a negative impact on
AMISOM’s effectiveness.
As the Council is no doubt aware, the situation as
concerns military operations must remain a top priority.
Unfortunately, the strategic concept currently guiding
AMISOM’s operations is out of date. It is important that
the Council be able to consider the issue of the number
of elements receiving support, as well as the support
provided to the Somali National Security forces, which
Ambassador Kay spoke about earlier.
Two strategic considerations continue to pose
real challenges. Despite the Council’s vote for force
multipliers, to date AMISOM has not really been able to
mobilize the necessary force multipliers. Furthermore,
the United Nations support mechanism, symbolized
by the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA), has procedures
that often lead to our having problems obtaining the
necessary support in a timely manner.
It is also extremely important from that standpoint
to provide strong support to UNSOA so that it can meet
the often difficult challenges on the ground, without
which it will be very difficult to achieve the significant
military objectives that we are aiming for. Furthermore,
UNSOA support mechanisms should, thanks to the
Council, be expanded to include training, which is
currently provided by AMISOM to Somali forces.
We can therefore say that AMISOM and the Somali
forces currently have a presence in the principal towns
and provide security on key routes. However, the more
territory we liberate, the more we become dispersed,

13-47179

12/09/2013

The situation in Somalia

so we cannot at this time carry out many expansion
operations. High hopes remain for AMISOM to provide
greater security. However, AMISOM’s campaign is
experiencing difficulties, which it is important to
meet so that we can truly take the last few steps, even
though it is said that often the last few steps are the
most difficult.
Recently the Chairperson of the AU Commission
sent a letter to the Secretary-General, outlining
requirements that remain pertinent. We welcome in
advance the recommendations of the joint African
Union-United Nations Information Support Team, which
has just completed its mission in line with paragraph 19
of resolution 2093 (2013). We are convinced that with
support for AMISOM and the Somali National Security
Forces that is focused on carefully-thought-out goals,
we will be able to achieve the decisive progress that is
expected in combating Al-Shabaab and improving the
security situation, as well as averting any setbacks in
Somalia, which is something that everyone fears. Such
support should include, as I said earlier, an increase in
the number of troops as well as logistical support for
and intensive training of the Somali National Security
Forces.
Before concluding, I would like to inform the
members of the Security Council that the latest
allegations of rape, made by a Somali woman against

S/PV.7030

the Somali national forces and AMISOM, proved
unfounded following several internal and external
investigations. We in AMISOM have adopted a zerotolerance policy on such issues. We now have at our
disposal early-warning mechanisms and permanent
investigation structures. We are also carrying out
awareness-raising campaigns, both for AMISOM
military staff and Somali populations. It that context,
we have helped the Somali Government put in place a
gender policy that will soon be presented to Parliament
for a law to be adopted.
Finally, let me once again take this opportunity
to convey, on behalf of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, the gratitude of the
African Union and AMISOM, which represents the AU
on the ground, for the Council’s unwavering support
and tireless efforts to find solutions to the situation
in Somalia. As my colleague has said, we remain
optimistic. With a little effort, we can achieve the same
thing that was accomplished recently in Mali so that the
2016 elections can take place throughout the whole of
Somalia’s territory.
The President: I thank Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

13-471797/7
