S/2015/741

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 September 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 43 of Security Council
resolution 2211 (2015). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 26 June 2015 (S/2015/486), including with regard to
the situation on the ground and progress made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the implementation of its commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of t he Congo and
the Region; the electoral process; and progress made by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in the implementation of its mandate. The report also includes an
assessment of the outcomes of the strategic dialogue with the Congolese authorities
on the exit strategy of MONUSCO.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
Consultations between the Government and stakeholders across the political
spectrum on the electoral process continued. In his Independence Day speech on
30 June, President Joseph Kabila indicated that this would eventually lead to a
national dialogue among the ruling majority coalition, the political opposition and
civil society. According to the Government, the dialogue would focus on the
electoral calendar; the registration of several million voters who had become
eligible since 2011; the financing of the electoral process; and elections security.
The Government indicated that the possibility of international mediation or
facilitation of the dialogue was still under consideration.
3.
The announcement of the holding of the dialogue prompted mixed reactions.
On 26 June, the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo issued a communiqué
expressing support for a national dialogue that would respect the existing
constitutional and institutional framework. The Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo also suggested that local elections be postponed until after the holding of the
2016 national elections. The media quoted a number of political actors, including

15-16030 (E)

300915

*1516030*

S/2015/741

some from the ruling coalition, expressing concern that a national dialogue risked
paving the way for a modification of the Constitution, including with regard to the
provisions relating to the presidential term limit. On 13 August, the opposition party
Union pour la nation congolaise warned in a statement that a dialogue would
endorse a “constitutional coup d’état”. A number of opposition parties announced
that they would not take part in the proposed dialogue, arguing that it could be used
to justify postponing presidential elections to extend the President’s term.
4.
The opposition party of Etienne Tshisekedi, Union pour la démocratie et le
progrès social (UDPS), reaffirmed that it would participate in the dialogue, provided
that it was held under international mediation. On 17 August, the Secretary -General
of UDPS, Bruno Mavungu, reiterated that it would not compromise on the
constitutional deadline for the holding of the presidential polls. On 13 September,
UDPS pulled out of the consultations with the Government on the dialogue and
called upon national stakeholders to ensure the elaboration of a consensual electoral
calendar in line with the Constitution and a peaceful transfer of power.
5.
Controversy continued to surround the technical feasibility of holding local
elections, scheduled for October 2015. In addition to the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo, several political stakeholders from both the ruling majority
coalition and the political opposition called for local elections to be postponed until
after the national elections in 2016. In doing so, they underscored the risk of
additional delays resulting from significant financial, logistical, legal and technical
requirements for the organization of local polls across the country and their impact
on the holding of the 2016 elections.
6.
The Government continued to press for rapid adoption of the draft law on the
allocation of seats for the local elections. On 4 July, the National Assembly and the
Senate opened an extraordinary session to examine the law. Despite continued
criticism by members of the opposition regarding the text, it was adopted without
debate by the National Assembly on 25 July. The Senate failed to reach consensus.
However, during a second, short extraordinary session, on 11 August, the Senate
adopted the law without debate in the absence of the opposition parties that
boycotted the vote. On 13 August, the opposition party Mouvement pour le
renouveau challenged the adoption of the law by filing a complaint with the
Constitutional Court, claiming that the second extraordinary session of the Senate
had been held in violation of constitutional provisions and the Senate’s internal
rules. President Kabila promulgated the law on 25 August.
7.
Preparations for both local and provincial polls scheduled for 25 October by
the national independent electoral commission were hampered by delays in the
adoption of outstanding legislation; the découpage (increasing the number of
provinces from 11 to 26); the lack of consensus about the sequencing of the polls;
and insufficient funding. As at 20 August, some 10 per cent of the approximately
$900 million estimated by the Government for elections had been disbursed,
totalling $95.18 million. The adoption of a disbursement plan by the Government
for the $900 million budgeted for the local, municipal, provincial, general and
presidential elections is still outstanding.
8.
At the request of the national independent electoral commission, the
International Organization of la Francophonie carried out an audit in July, with the
participation of political parties and civil society, of the 2011 nation al voters’
register, which had been deemed flawed by some national stakeholders and

2/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

international observers. The progress report on the audit, made public on 31 July,
highlighted several major issues affecting the voters’ register, including the need to
update it to include persons having reached the legal voting age since 2011. The
national independent electoral commission’s initial assessment was that addressing
these issues could lead to further delays in the electoral process.
9.
There were also delays in the organization of the gubernatorial elections. As
the installation of the 21 new provinces proceeded as part of the découpage, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior Evariste Boshab requested the national
independent electoral commission to begin planning the election of new governors.
On 28 July, the commission issued a calendar setting 6 October as the date for the
gubernatorial polls.
10. During hearings held before the Constitutional Court on 4 September
following a request from the national independent electoral commission for an
advisory opinion, the Prime Minister, Augustin Matata Ponyo, stated that the
Government did not have the funds needed for the gubernatorial elections. On
8 September, the Court issued its decision, ruling that the combination of legal
ambiguities in the relevant laws and the lack of funding from the Government
constituted circumstances of force majeure, rendering it impossible to organize the
gubernatorial elections. In its ruling, the Constitutional Court ref erred to the
Government’s position that the inability to comply with the time frame foreseen for
the découpage process created a chaotic situation that threatened public security and
order. As a result, the Court ordered the Government to put in place tran sitory
governing arrangements to ensure security and order in the 21 provinces and to
disburse the funds necessary for holding the gubernatorial polls. The Court also
directed the national independent electoral commission to revise the global electoral
calendar, while stipulating that the gubernatorial elections must precede the holding
of provincial elections. On 14 September, reacting to the extraordinary session of
the Senate on 11 August and the ruling of the Constitutional Court on 8 September,
a group of seven political parties (the “G7”) from the ruling coalition wrote a letter
to President Kabila warning of the risks of destabilization of the country if the
Constitution was violated and called for local elections to be held after the national
and provincial elections. On 16 September, the “G7” was expelled from the ruling
coalition.

B.

Progress in the implementation of national commitments under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
11. The Government, through the National Oversight Mechanism, took steps to
help to ensure that priority actions identified to further the implementation of the six
national engagements of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework were
allocated sufficient funding in the draft 2016 budget.
Decentralization
12. The administrative establishment of 21 new provinces was formally completed
on 19 July. The total number of provinces now stands at 26. As at 1 August, the
11 previous provincial assemblies were restructured into 26 and established their
provisional bureau, as envisaged by the Constitution. However, they lack the

15-16030

3/19

S/2015/741

necessary resources or infrastructure to function. As outlined in paragraph 10 above,
the gubernatorial elections have been postponed and there is currently no provincial
executive.
13. Tensions began to emerge in the context of the découpage and gubernatorial
elections. In the territory of Katako-Kombe in Sankuru province, the local
population opposed the installation of a new police sub-station. Clashes on 7 July
led to the killing of one police officer and the woun ding of another; one police
sub-station and a number of homes were also burned down near the locality of
Tomana. In Ituri province, various sectors contested the legitimacy of the Head of
District remaining in place as the interim executive, given his appointment by the
Governor of the former Province Orientale. On 8 September, 100 Ituri citizens sent
an open letter to President Kabila, pressing for gubernatori al elections to be held
immediately.
14. The remaining laws to implement the decentralization process, including the
law on public administration at the national, provincial and local levels, were
approved during extraordinary sessions in Parliament between 4 July and 2 August.
Despite the consensus in support of decentralization as a means of bringing the
governing institutions closer to their constituencies, increasing accountability and
channelling more revenues to local development, the installation of the new
provinces, with no additional resources to support them, drew criticism from various
political actors.
Security sector reform
15. In the absence of an approved national strategy, there was limited headway in
the overall reform of the security sector. However, there was some progress on key
activities foreseen under the 2012-2017 action plan for police reform, including
sensitization of the public on the reform process, the establishment of the structure
supporting police reform and implementation, training and reinforcement of
specialized police personnel, and the construction of infrastructure despite
budgetary constraints. The legal framework for police reform is yet to be completed.
Seven key decrees needed to further police reforms are still pending, including,
most importantly, the decrees on the organization and functioning of the Police
Inspectorate General, the responsibilities of administrative authorities in
maintaining public order, and joint operations of the armed forces and police in
maintaining public order.
Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
16. The Government began implementing the Provincial Stabilization Strategy and
Action Plan for North Kivu with the development of a stabilization programme for
the Kitchanga area, focusing on land management, sec urity, the restoration of State
authority, economic recovery and democratic dialogue. The first meeting of the
Board of Directors for the Stabilization Trust Fund, co -chaired by the Ministry of
Planning and the United Nations, was held on 23 July. The Board allocated the
contribution of $8 million by the Peacebuilding Fund to the International Security
and Stabilization Support Strategy, of which $5 million was earmarked for the
Kitchanga programme.

4/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

Structural reforms, including financial reforms
17. On 2 August, President Kabila promulgated the Oil and Gas Code, which
contains some innovative provisions aimed at improving governance in this resource
sector, such as a simplified process for granting oil blocks. The report on the
compliance by the Democratic Republic of the Congo during 2013 with the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, published on 30 June, suggests that
there has been a trend towards growing transparency within the mining and oil
sectors. According to the report, companies working in those sectors paid
$1.8 billion in taxes and other payments to State revenue agencies during 2013.
Reconciliation, tolerance and democratization
18. As outlined in paragraph 2 above, President Kabila continued to reach out to
stakeholders from across the political spectrum in preparation for a national
dialogue to reach consensus on the electoral process. However, an increase in
arbitrary arrests and reports of harassment of civil society activists and media
representatives, in particular in the western part of the country, raised concerns
about the restriction of political space and violations of freedom of expression and
opinion.

C.

Security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and operations against armed groups by national security forces
19. In North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continued to pose a
security threat in Beni territory despite progress made in the Sukola I military
operations by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC), with support from
MONUSCO. From 26 June to 6 September, ADF staged several attacks against
civilians, killing 51 people and looting property from 156 houses and shops. ADF
also continues to demonstrate its capacity to adapt to the sustained pressure from
these operations, now preferring to operate in larger groups. On 26 June, ADF
attacked Mayi-Moya village, south of Eringeti, in two groups, with one group
attacking FARDC positions and the second looting the village. On 23 July, ADF
again attacked Mayi-Moya, killing three civilians and burning and looting property.
Between 4 and 6 September, ADF killed and decapitated nine civilians in the
villages east of Mbau. During the reporting period, FARDC reportedly killed 32 ADF
elements.
20. The FARDC Sukola II operations against the Forces démocratiques pour la
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) continued at a slow pace across North and South
Kivu, without support from MONUSCO. In August, FARDC renewed its efforts,
targeting FDLR strongholds in North Kivu at the intersection of Masisi, Rutshuru
and Walikale territories. Part of that effort, which has resulted in security voids in
other parts of the province, was aimed at targeting FDLR leadership, as the
command and control structures of the group have remained largely intact. On
3 August, during a clash near Ihula village, 10 FARDC soldiers and 7 FDLR
elements were allegedly killed, with FDLR elements reportedly vacating nearby
villages. On 10 August, FDLR attacked an FARDC position east of Walikale centre.
One FARDC soldier and three FDLR elements were killed. Renewed clashes
between FARDC and FDLR triggered the displacement of several hundred civilians

15-16030

5/19

S/2015/741

in the area. On 31 August, six Tanzanian imams, reportedly kidnapped from
Katwiguru, Rutshuru territory, at the beginning of September by FDLR elements,
were released. Their release is believed to have followed an FARDC offensive on an
FDLR position. In South Kivu, FDLR has largely gone into hiding in the Itombwe
forest in Mwenga territory. FDLR elements also continued to move from South
Kivu into the Mitumba mountain chain in Tanganyika province, mainly to exploit
mining sites in the area.
21. The results achieved so far by the Sukola II operations are difficult to confirm.
Despite the continuous and consistent efforts of my Special Representative, the
Government has not yet agreed to resume joint planning and operations against
FDLR. On 4 August, the Government announced that about 400 FDLR elements
remained active across the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 28 August,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond Tshibanda, indicated, in a meeting with
the diplomatic corps, that the number of FDLR elements left to be neutralized
ranged between 600 and 700. MONUSCO is not in a position to confirm any of
these figures. However, the Mission has recorded a slight increase in FDLR
surrenders since June. Nevertheless, FDLR remained active in North and South
Kivu and continued to perpetrate human rights abuses. There were reports
suggesting that FDLR continued to form alliances with Congolese armed groups,
mainly Mayi-Mayi Nyatura in North Kivu. On 5 July, FDLR and suspected MayiMayi Nyatura elements looted a centre where Rwandan refugees were being
biometrically registered.
22. In addition, in late June, in North Kivu, FARDC undertook limited operations
against Mayi-Mayi Nyatura around Tongo, in Rutshuru territory, triggering the
displacement of several thousand civilians. Mayi -Mayi Nyatura elements retreated
into Virunga National Park. However, in order to replenish supplies, the group
conducted raids on villages, sometimes in collaboration with FDLR, and attacks on
underresourced FARDC and Congolese national police posts. In Walikale territory,
Mayi-Mayi groups such as Nduma Defence for Congo/Cheka and Mayi-Mayi Raia
Mutomboki took advantage of the security vacuum created by the redeployment of
FARDC troops and clashed with each other over illegal taxation rackets, prompting
the displacement of hundreds of civilians.
23. The security situation remained volatile in some parts of South Kivu. Armed
elements believed to be Forces nationales de libération du Burundi (FNL), mainly
concentrated in Uvira and Fizi territories, reportedly increased activities from June
to July. Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki factions and other Congolese armed groups
took advantage of new security gaps resulting from the redeployment of three
FARDC regiments to North Kivu for operations against ADF. In Fizi territory, in the
Ngandja forest, Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba continued to clash with mainly
Banyamulenge armed groups in the region. FARDC has reinforced its presence in
this area and MONUSCO has increased patrolling to enhance the protection of
civilians.
24. In Ituri province, FARDC operations continued against the Forces de
résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri (FRPI), with air and ground support from
MONUSCO. During the reporting period, 49 FRPI elements were killed, while
153 others surrendered, and 33 weapons were seized. Despite some progress, there
was increasing harassment of the population by the FRPI elements. On 15 and
16 July, FRPI elements allegedly raped three women and two girls at Koni village

6/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

near Aveba and, on 1 August, set fire to the houses of a local chief and religious
leader near Gety. FRPI also continued to clash with FARDC, with a number of
reports of ambushes by FRPI reported from 6 to 8 August in the Gety area, in which
at least two FARDC elements were killed.
25. In the provinces of Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé, banditry activities by remnants of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continue to be reported, with a higher incidence
of ambushes and looting in the Azande Hunting Domain, Garamba National Park
and the areas close to the Mbomu forest. LRA continued to be active on the DunguDuru-Nambiapay and Dungu-Faradje-Aba axes. On 6 August, LRA elements
reportedly kidnapped two hunters in Nagilidanwe and on 9 August, LRA elements
allegedly kidnapped five civilians in Bamunga. FARDC, supported by MONUSCO
and the United States Africa Command, continued to conduct operations against
LRA in affected areas. MONUSCO supported the operations by establishing a
mobile operating base in Nagero, Garamba National Park, from 10 to 25 July. There
were also reports of presumed poachers from South Sudan operating in the Park. On
6 August, they reportedly looted a village north of Faradje and kidnapped eight
civilians, all of whom were later released.
26. In Tanganyika province, there was an apparent de-escalation in the conflict
between the Luba and the Twa communities, largely as a result of the intervention
of local and national authorities alongside mediation efforts by MONUSCO, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and local
actors. FARDC special forces were deployed to Nyunzu and Manono territories.
This seems to have yielded initial results, although there were still some targeted
killings of women and children reported in both communities, as well as reported
human rights violations attributed to the FARDC special forces. On 6 July, around
330 Twa militia elements and their dependants (around 900 people altogether)
surrendered to FARDC in Mukebo, north-east of Manono. However, as at 15 August,
Twa militia commanders refused to surrender, despite an appeal from the most
prominent Twa militia leader, Nyumba-Isha.

D.

Humanitarian situation
27. The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate in North Kivu and parts of
South Kivu during the period under review as a result of armed group activity,
ongoing military operations against a number of these groups, inter-community
clashes and the refugee influx from Burundi. On 12 July, unidentified armed
elements burned a site sheltering internally displaced persons in Bwalanda, in
Rutshuru territory, North Kivu, causing more than 30,000 people to flee. Th e
incident also resulted in a temporary suspension of humanitarian activities in the
area.
28. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as at
30 June, the total number of internally displaced persons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was estimated at 2.9 million. Also according to the Office, an
estimated 7 million people are in need of protection and humanitarian assistance in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Of these, approximately 6.6 million are food
insecure. North Kivu, South Kivu, Tanganyika and Ituri provinces continue to face
high levels of food insecurity and malnutrition.

15-16030

7/19

S/2015/741

29. As at 31 July, around 243,000 refugees had been recorded by UNHCR in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including over 99,000 fro m the Central African
Republic and some 115,000 from Rwanda. While the Government has reported the
presence of 245,000 Rwandan refugees on Congolese territory, the biometric
registration of Rwandan refugees is being carried out to confirm the exact numbers .
As a result of the crisis in Burundi, as at 31 August, almost 15,000 additional
refugees had arrived in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, bringing the
total number of Burundian refugees to some 23,600.
30. As at 31 August, the Humanitarian Response Plan was funded at only 44 per
cent or a total of $306 million. My Assistant Secretary -General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Kyung -wha Kang, visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from 31 August to 4 Septemb er to assess the
scope of the humanitarian crisis and ensure that the crisis remains on the agenda of
donors and the greater international community.

E.

Economic developments
31. Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo maintained relative
macroeconomic stability during the reporting period, the Government announced on
27 August that the forecast for the gross national product growth rate for 2015 was
being revised down from 9.2 per cent to 8.4 per cent, mainly owing to lower copper
and oil prices. The annual inflation rate increased from 1.38 per cent to 1.4 per cent
in the third quarter of the year.
32. Concerns persisted about the continued decline in commodity prices,
especially for copper and gold, and the related impact on export revenues, as well as
delayed investments in the private sector. On 26 August, the Fédération des
entreprises congolaises announced that the country’s copper production, along with
that of other metals, is expected to decline in 2015, mostly owing to unreliable
power supplies. On 7 September, the Swiss-based company, Glencore, announced
the suspension of copper production in several mines in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Zambia for 18 months against the backdrop of a continued decline
in the price of copper on the world market.

F.

Regional developments
33. Progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations of 12 December
2013 was limited. However, some efforts were made to help to expedite the
repatriation of former elements of Movement of 23 March (M23) in Rwanda and
Uganda, in accordance with the relevant decisions of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. On 5 August, the Governments of Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the International Conference signed an
agreement to, inter alia, establish a task force and prepare a plan for coordinating
the voluntary repatriation of the ex-M23 elements from Uganda to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Although the task force subsequently met in Kampala from
15 to 23 August and undertook four field missions to Bihanga camp, where the
ex-M23 elements are cantoned, the leadership of the ex -M23 refused to support the
planned repatriation process unless other aspects of the Nairobi Declarations
relating to amnesty, the release of ex-M23 prisoners and the return of refugees,

8/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

among other issues, were addressed. On 3 September, the Ministry of Justice issued
a decree granting amnesty to 94 former M23 elements cantoned at the Bihanga
camp in Uganda.
34. In a bid to reinvigorate the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, a number of initiatives were taken by my Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region, as reflected in my report on the
implementation of the Framework (S/2015/735).

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Strategic dialogue between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
35. As outlined in my previous report, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations undertook effective steps to enter
into a regular strategic dialogue to jointly develop a road map and exit strategy for
MONUSCO. This included the conduct of joint assessments of the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, considering aspects related to the
security situation, the protection of civilians, the restoration of State authority and
the activities of MONUSCO and FARDC.
36. The review of the findings of the joint assessments of the securi ty situation in
the 28 assessed territories in North and South Kivu, the former Province Orientale
and North Katanga was followed by intense discussions both at the working level
and in plenary sessions co-chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and my
Special Representative. Working group meetings to discuss the findings and reach
agreement on the conclusions and recommendations were held on 6, 9 and 10 July.
37. During those discussions, the Government highlighted progress registered over
the past 10 years in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
military defeat of M23; the reduction of the threat posed by other armed groups; and
the increased capacity of FARDC and the national police as well as a decline in the
number of human rights violations committed by their personnel. The Government
noted a decrease in the number of armed elements affiliated with ADF, FRPI and
FDLR, although it recognized that those groups continued to pose a threat to
civilians in some areas. The Government agreed that the security situation had either
worsened or remained static in 21 out of the 28 assessed territories. It highlighted
that operations conducted by FARDC in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo to neutralize armed groups had been welcomed by the local population,
while the lack of resources continued to hamper the effective restoration of State
authority, in particular with regard to police, justice and corrections. With regard to
the perception of MONUSCO by the local population, the Government concluded
that it was positive in North Kivu and Katanga, mixed in Province Orientale and
negative in South Kivu.
38. As a conclusion to the joint assessments, the Government recommended an
additional reduction of 1,865 MONUSCO troops which, i n its view, are not located
in conflict zones or directly involved in offensive operations. It proposed the
reduction of specific units in the former province of Katanga, South Kivu, the
former Province Orientale (including in Ituri) and in Kinshasa, altho ugh the

15-16030

9/19

S/2015/741

situation in the western Democratic Republic of the Congo was not reviewed as part
of the joint assessments. The Government also noted that the deployment of the
MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade was still useful and should be maintained.
39. In keeping with the parameters outlined in resolution 2211 (2015) guiding any
further gradual reduction of the MONUSCO troops, the Mission underscored the need
for tangible progress on the ground that would allow for a recommendation on further
reductions. MONUSCO underlined the need to reach a common understanding of the
main threats from armed groups and violence against civilians, as well as national
capacities to address them, based on which to determine specific targets whose
achievements would trigger the gradual and progressive withdrawal of MONUSCO.
To that end, the Mission proposed the development of a common campaign plan to
address armed groups in a sustainable manner, which should include non -military
measures aimed at restoring State authority and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, while taking measures to transform the
MONUSCO Force and making it more effective. MONUSCO also emphasized the
need to factor in the political risks of instability when developing the road map,
which should also outline the exit strategy for the Force Intervention Brigade.
40. The two separate sets of recommendations were subsequently discussed during
plenary sessions, chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, on 11 and 21 August
in Kinshasa. Reiterating the request for an immediate further reduction of the
MONUSCO Force, the Government expressed disappointment over the lack of
progress in the strategic dialogue and the Mission’s intransigence in that regard,
while disagreeing with the conditions for troop reductions outlined in resolution
2211 (2015). The Government also conveyed that the resumption of security
cooperation between MONUSCO and FARDC would depend on concrete progress
in the strategic dialogue. MONUSCO reiterated its proposal for a structured
discussion, which would lead to the development of a joint exit strategy for
MONUSCO and a road map in accordance with the parameters outlined by the
Security Council.
41. On 28 August, at a meeting with the diplomatic corps, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs reiterated the need for a progressive but significant reduction of MONUSCO
troops as a result of the improved security situation on the ground and to prevent
MONUSCO from becoming an “occupation force”. Minister Tshibanda expressed
frustration regarding the Mission’s intransigence on the issue of troop reduction and
the divergence of views. Interaction with the Government continued at all levels
with a view to seeking its views on the way forward. Discussions also continued
between the FARDC military hierarchy and the MONUSCO Force Commander.
42. Although the formal talks within the framework of the strategic dialogue have
stalled, the process of jointly developing an exit strategy for MONU SCO, as
mandated by the Security Council, remains an important shared objective for both
the Government and the United Nations. Given the numerous political and security
challenges that remain or that may emerge in the coming months, further
discussions are needed to develop a common vision for how MONUSCO will
eventually be able to leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo without reversing
the gains achieved. Continued strategic discussions with the Government will also
be needed to develop the recommendations on the reconfiguration of MONUSCO
and its gradual drawdown, including the Intervention Brigade as requested in
paragraph 43 of resolution 2211 (2015).

10/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

B.

National processes and the good offices role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
43. In keeping with the good offices mandate of my Special Representative,
MONUSCO held meetings with representatives of the Government and relevant
institutions as well as a range of political stakeholders and representatives of civil
society in the context of the implementation of the national commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and elections; the neutralization of
armed groups; and the stabilization of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Elections
44. MONUSCO intensified contacts with a range of political actors across the
political spectrum and civil society in the context of the electoral process. The
Mission continued to assist the national independent electoral commission with
limited technical assistance, pending the provision of strengthened technical
assistance from other United Nations entities and international partners. The “Projet
d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo”, to be funded at $123.3 million, was approved
by the Election Partnership Committee and the local approval committee and signed
on 27 July. The project, however, remains largely unfunded.
Security sector reform
45. Through existing coordination mechanisms, MONUSCO continued efforts to
ensure greater coherence in security sector reform assistance and advice provided by
international partners to the Government. MONUSCO also assumed the
coordination of international partners involved in police reform.
46. MONUSCO contributed to the development of the strategic training plan for
the Congolese national police, while providing accelerated basic training to
513 officers, including 29 women, in the provinces of North and South Kivu,
Tanganyika and Ituri. In addition, 450 officers, including 14 women, received
refresher training on maintaining public order and human rights in Beni, Bukavu,
Bunia, Goma and Kisangani.
47. Through its prosecution support cells, MONUSCO continued to support
Congolese military justice authorities in North Kivu province in investigating
crimes allegedly perpetrated by ADF between 2014 and 2015, including through
interviews with over 1,150 victims. Technical support was provided to the military
justice authorities in North Kivu, South Kivu and the former Orientale and Katanga
provinces for investigations and prosecutions of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes allegedly perpetrate d by other armed groups,
FARDC and the national police.
48. The Mission and the United Nations Development Programme, together with
the Government, continued implementing the joint justice support programme,
including through the preparation and validation on 15 August of new oversight
benchmarks for improving the efficiency and accountability of justice and
corrections institutions.

15-16030

11/19

S/2015/741

49. The Mission also continued to support the re-establishment of prisons in areas
cleared of armed groups. In addition, it assisted in improving prison conditions and
enhancing prison security in North and South Kivu, as well as the former Orientale
and Katanga provinces. MONUSCO personnel were co-located in 14 prisons in
those provinces to advise national penitentiary staff a nd conducted regular
monitoring visits to other prisons. MONUSCO supported the rehabilitation of
prisons in Kalehe, Mambasa, Masisi, Mitwaba and Walikale territories.
Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
50. On 22 August, a delegation composed of representatives of the Stabilization
and Reconstruction Plan for the Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, national
non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies and MONUSCO carried
out a joint field review of the stabilization project supported through the
Peacebuilding Fund in Mambasa territory, Ituri province. The project is aimed at
promoting dialogue between communities and Government authorities and
supporting the restoration of State authority and economic recovery.

C.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
51. The protection of civilians remained a key area of focus for MONUSCO. The
Mission maintained a significant military presence in Ituri province, where civilians
are under threat from FRPI despite ongoing joint military operations against the
group. MONUSCO carried out regular missions to assess the situation in areas of
concern. At the same time, it made use of existing tools and mechanisms for the
protection of civilians, including the community alert networks, for the timely
identification of threats to civilians and to promote community resilience. The
protection task force of Ituri also developed a contingency plan to mitigate threats,
an integrated mapping of hotspots and a prevention-protection strategy plan for
areas earmarked for operations along the Bukiringi-Aveba-Gety axis.
52. In Beni territory, North Kivu province, the plan for the protection of civilians
was updated in the context of FARDC-led operations against ADF. The aim is to
better combine military actions with non-military initiatives and community-based
protection tools such as the community alert networks and to enhance engagement
with local populations through outreach, sensitization and dialogue activit ies.
53. In Tanganyika province, MONUSCO and United Nations agencies continued
to work with local authorities and other actors to de-escalate the conflict between
the Twa and Luba communities. The Mission also reinforced its deployment in
Nyunzu. This included a Force deployment to support FARDC patrolling and
presence, small-scale conflict resolution initiatives, support for the activities of
humanitarian agencies, conducting a human rights investigation and advocating for
a strengthened response by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Within the scope of the resolution of the Twa and Luba conflict,
MONUSCO police in Manono sensitized the Congolese national police in several
localities on the concept of community policing.
54. Community focal points transmitted an average of 200 early warning alerts per
month through the community alert networks established by MONUSCO. The
Congolese authorities responded to 47.5 per cent (FARDC and the Congolese
national police — 40.7 per cent; local civilian authorities — 6.8 per cent) of the

12/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

alerts and MONUSCO to 12.5 per cent. In the case of about 27.8 per cent of the
alerts, the related incidents often occurred in remote, inaccessible areas. Other
obstacles included the relatively small army and police deployments in the nearby
areas, often without logistics, or the immediate withdrawal of assailants before a
response could be organized. Over 100 community protection committees continued
to manage local protection plans in conflict-affected areas aimed at improving
preventive responses by Congolese authorities, United Nations agencies and
MONUSCO.

D.

Transformation of the Force
55. MONUSCO is finalizing its Force transformation plan, which is designed to
achieve a more robust, agile and mobile Force, matching military capability to
operational requirements on the ground. This transformation will encompass new
capabilities to help the Mission to more effectively implement its mandate,
including enablers and rapidly deployable battalions.

E.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel within the context
of operations of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
56. There was no discernible increase in threats to United Nations personnel in th e
country as a result of their military operations against armed groups. Following a
reassessment of security risks in the Beni area, North Kivu and the implementation
of additional security measures, non-essential staff who had been previously
relocated returned to Beni on 25 June. In keeping with the usual procedures, threat
and security risk assessments for the eastern part of the country were reviewed on a
monthly basis in order to reflect any changes and adjust security measures
accordingly.

F.

Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
57. The Mission continued its efforts to monitor the arms embargo, including
through supporting the Group of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1533 (2004). Relevant information on flows of military personnel, arms
and related materiel across the eastern border of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was shared with the Group of Experts.

G.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
58. Progress in the implementation of the third national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan was hampered by a lack of funding from the
Government. The Unité d’exécution du programme national de désarmement,
démobilisation et réintegration continued to conduct reinsertion activities in
Kamina, Lomami province and in Kitona, Kongo -Central province and has
demobilized, with the support of MONUSCO, 5,385 combatants and dependants

15-16030

13/19

S/2015/741

since 25 June. In addition, the camp in Kotakoli, Nord Ubangui province, was
finally closed on 26 June by the Government with support from MONUSCO. With
the closure, 1,411 ex-combatants and dependants were transported by the
Government, with logistical support from MONUSCO, to the Kamina camp. This
brought the total number of ex-combatants in Kamina to 2,648 accompanied by
408 dependants, while in Kitona, there are 2,216 ex-combatants and 19 dependants.
59. From 15 June to 15 September, MONUSCO bore the full costs of the logistical
support, including food and reinsertion kits, for up to 5,385 former combatants and
dependants currently sheltered in the camps in Kamina and Kitona. On 20 August,
MONUSCO informed the Government that it would be obliged to stop covering
these costs by mid-September and that the Government would need to assume this
responsibility as envisaged under the third national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration plan. Subsequently, on 20 August, the Government informed
MONUSCO that it was making a second pledge of $1.5 million to the plan, which,
if committed, would represent 30 per cent of the total $10 million it had originally
promised.
60. The Mission continued to support efforts to encourage the disarmament of
foreign and Congolese combatants. From 25 June to 14 August, 385 former
members of Congolese armed groups (232 adult ex-combatants, 139 children and
14 dependants) and 72 members of foreign armed groups (25 adult ex -combatants,
6 children and 41 dependants) voluntarily entered the disarmament, demobiliz ation,
reintegration, repatriation and resettlement programme. With regard to the stalled
FDLR voluntary disarmament process, as at 14 August, 308 FDLR combatants and
1,028 dependants remained in assembly camps in Kanyabayonga (North Kivu
province), Kisangani (Tshopo province) and Walungu (South Kivu province).
Despite the commitment of the Government to support the operation of the
Kisangani camp, in July, its support ceased owing to a lack of funds. Although the
Mission continued to provide emergency support, including food and medicine,
MONUSCO may not be in a position to continue such support beyond the end of
September.

H.

Mine action
61. The United Nations Mine Action Service conducted clearance activities to deal
with explosive remnants of war throughout the area of operations of the MONUSCO
Force. The Service destroyed 39 explosive remnants of war in North Kivu, South
Kivu and Ituri provinces.

I.

Promotion and protection of human rights and the fight
against impunity
62. An increase in reported cases of arbitrary arrests and harassment of civil
society activists and media representatives was observed, particularly in the western
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as violations of the rights to
freedom of expression, assembly and association.
63. Agence nationale de renseignements agents reportedly arrested three civilians
working for the national newspaper CNews on 13 July in Kinshasa. They also

14/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

reportedly harassed and summoned four individuals working for the independent
television and radio station Radiodiffusion et télévision debout Kasaï in Mbuji Mayi
(Kasai Oriental province) on 12 August, who were involved in reporting on
activities of the political opposition or on alleged corruption involving high -ranking
officials.
64. Since the beginning of 2015, over 123 human rights violations have been
documented in the context of the electoral process. They were mainly registered in
the provinces of North Kivu, Kinshasa, South Kivu and the former province of
Kasaï Oriental. These violations were primarily committed by the Congolese
national police and the Agence nationale de renseignements, while the victims were
mostly associated with political parties, media representatives and civil society
activists. Slow progress was made in the judicial proceedings in the cases of several
human rights defenders and political activists detained at the main prison in
Kinshasa, who had been arrested for their involvement in political activities.
65. Armed groups continued to commit human rights abuses throughout the
eastern part of the country during the period under review. From July to August, the
main alleged perpetrators were FRPI (82 abuses), FDLR (71 abuses) and LRA
(68 abuses). The most common abuses committed by these groups were related to
the right to physical integrity, such as beatings, ill treatment and rapes. FARDC
soldiers were also responsible for human rights violations against civilians, most of
which took place in areas of ongoing operations. The violations were often
perpetrated in connection with the victims’ perceived affiliation with armed groups.
During the reporting period, grave human rights abuses, including killings,
abductions and rapes, were also committed by ethnic militia in the context of the
Luba and Pygmy conflict in Tanganyika province.
66. MONUSCO continued to monitor, analyse and report on the human rights
situation. The Mission also reviewed its implementation of the United Nations
human rights due diligence policy and updated its standard operating procedures in
consultation with relevant authorities.

J.

Sexual violence
67. MONUSCO documented 114 victims of conflict-related sexual violence,
including 19 girls. Armed groups were responsible for 83 per cent of the incidents.
FRPI attacks on villages in Irumu territory (Ituri province) continued and almost
systematically led to conflict-related sexual violence, including mass rapes. At least
11 out of the 13 victims of sexual violence incidents documented during July were
gang raped by FRPI elements. Five of the victims were children.
68. FARDC soldiers were also allegedly involved in 12 incidents of conflict related sexual violence, including three minors. During the reporting period, six
FARDC soldiers and three Congolese national police officers were convicted for
sexual violence crimes and received sentences ranging from 3 to 20 years in prison.
69. MONUSCO and other United Nations agencies continued to provide technical
support and advice in respect of the implementation of national policies aimed at
fighting sexual violence, including the implementation of the national action plans,
the fight against impunity and improved coordination of responses.

15-16030

15/19

S/2015/741

K.

Child protection
70. The continued recruitment of children by armed groups, attacks on schools and
the displacement of children, mainly in North Kivu and Ituri provinces, remain a
cause for concern. As at 10 August, the Mission had facilitated the separation of
277 children (253 boys and 24 girls) from both foreign and Con golese armed
groups. Over two thirds of the total were separated from FDLR (84), followed by
Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki (68) and FRPI (41).
71. On 24 August, MONUSCO met with the Office of the Prime Minister to share
a list of key presumed child recruiters, most of whom are affiliated with armed
groups. As a result, the Government promptly informed MONUSCO that it would
open prosecutions against all alleged perpetrators on the list.

IV. Observations
72. I am concerned about the prevailing political tensions in the context of the
electoral process, as well as the related incidents and human rights violations.
I welcome the continued efforts by President Kabila to reach out to stakeholders
across the political spectrum and initiate a national dialogue aimed at forging
consensus around the unfolding electoral process. I am encouraged that national
stakeholders from across the political spectrum were given the opportunity to
express their views and I urge the Government to consider all opinions in moving
forward. I call upon all parties and institutions to work together to resolve their
differences in a peaceful manner and to achieve a lasting consensus on the elections
that genuinely reflects the will of the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in accordance with the Constitution.
73. Reaching consensus on the electoral process will require a genuine
commitment to hold elections within the limits of the Constitution and to address
outstanding issues that risk undermining public confidence in and t he credibility of
the process. It also requires creating political space for the opposition and civil
society to participate, including by respecting the freedom of assembly and
expression. All segments of society should also refrain from any action that i s likely
to exacerbate tensions in the context of the elections. Following the decision of the
Constitutional Court, there is a need for a new and realistic electoral calendar and
decision on the registration of voters who have become eligible since 2011. A
commitment by the Government to secure adequate funding and support to ensure
timely preparations is also required. The precipitous découpage of the provinces has
added an additional layer of complexity to the process. I urge the Government to
provide the necessary funding and support to ensure the installation and
administration of the new provinces in accordance with the Constitution. The United
Nations and the wider international community stand ready to support all Congolese
stakeholders as they seek to build consensus around an electoral process that
respects the Constitution, human rights and fundamental political rights and
freedoms.
74. I remain concerned about the continued violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where armed groups continue to attack civilians with
impunity. I strongly condemn the atrocities committed by armed groups, in
particular in the Beni area. The threat from armed groups remains real and deadly

16/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

for the men, women and children living in large parts of the e astern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. More needs to be done to reduce the threat posed by
Congolese and foreign armed groups, particularly FDLR, and bring down violence
against civilians to a level that can be effectively managed by Congolese justice an d
security institutions. This will not only require more effective military operations
but also sustainable initiatives to address the underlying causes of violence, through
national reforms and the establishment of an effective presence of the State in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I commend the national security forces
for their efforts in conducting military operations against ADF, FDLR, FRPI and
some Mayi-Mayi groups. I encourage the Government to join forces with
MONUSCO to increase the effectiveness of the overall effort to neutralize these
armed groups and reduce further loss of life among civilians. I also urge FARDC,
through military operations and non-military initiatives, to restore State authority
and find lasting solutions for former combatants.
75. The lack of progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations of
12 December 2013 carries risks both for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. More than 18 months have passed since the signing of the
agreement which formally ended the M23 rebellion. However, the envisaged
repatriation of ex-M23 members from Rwanda and Uganda remains stalled,
aggravating mistrust among some regional actors. I commend the continued
leadership of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on this matter
and the commitment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda
to cooperate and move the process forward. I encourage all concerned stakeholders
to translate their commitments into action and find durable political solutions to the
obstacles preventing the repatriation of former M23 combatants and their reinsertion
and reintegration in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is a risk that
further delays in implementing the Nairobi Declarations could lead to a
re-emergence of the group.
76. Preventing former combatants from taking up arms again is an important
factor in stabilizing the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I encourage the
Government to build on its national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, which was an important step, and demonstrate its commitment by
providing the necessary funding to support the programme and the voluntary
disarmament process of FDLR. The importance of a well-planned, funded and
executed disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, including
sustained support for the reintegration of former combatants and their families,
cannot be overemphasized. It is essential to the consolidation of State authority in
the eastern part of the country and to efforts to reconcile local communities. These
are important obligations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
national commitments of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I urge
the Government to disburse the needed funds rapidly and take steps to begin the
longer-term sustainable reintegration of these former militia and their families,
which should go hand in hand with efforts to support and rebuild local communities,
which are the most affected by armed conflict.
77. I would like to thank the Government for its efforts to constructively engage
with MONUSCO on issues of concern in the context of the strategic dialogue. I take
note of the position of the Government that MONUSCO should further red uce its
troops before the end of 2015. A gradual and progressive withdrawal of MONUSCO
that preserves gains made to date is a shared objective that we must continue to

15-16030

17/19

S/2015/741

strive to achieve. This will require further structured discussions between the
Government and the United Nations and the broader international community.
I encourage the Government to pursue discussions with the United Nations in a
spirit of mutual trust and confidence. I urge it to clarify its vision for the coming
years, including on how to ensure that MONUSCO is eventually able to leave the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without reversing the gains that have been
achieved. The dialogue is an opportunity to redefine and strengthen the partnership
between the Government and the United Nations. A strong partnership and close
cooperation, including on military operations, would greatly facilitate the transfer of
responsibilities from MONUSCO to the Government and the Mission’s eventual exit
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A jointly agreed, realistic road map
would also contribute to reassuring international partners and the Congolese people
that the country is on an irreversible path to stability and development.
78. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to my Special Repres entative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Martin Kobler, and all staff of MONUSCO
and the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, as well as
other international and regional organizations. I also wish to thank the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their active engagement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the service of peace.

18/19

15-16030

S/2015/741

15-16030

19/19
