A/62/PV.37

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

37

th plenary meeting
Monday, 29 October 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck (Palau),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 87 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/62/258)
Draft resolution (A/62/L.5**)
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Let me start by
thanking Director General ElBaradei for his
comprehensive report on the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Iceland is among the States sponsoring the draft
resolution on the report of the IAEA.
The IAEA celebrated its fiftieth anniversary last
July. Iceland would like to reaffirm its commitment to
the organization and its valuable role in international
nuclear cooperation and nuclear safety. The three
pillars of the IAEA’s Statute — safety and security,
science and technology, and safeguards and
verification — remain solid. But the verification of the
peaceful uses of nuclear materials in order to curb the
proliferation of nuclear weapons is currently facing its
greatest challenge. We as Member States cannot spare
any effort to secure a high level of safety in all nuclear
and radiological applications and installations. My
country strongly supports international cooperation in
order to maintain and improve safety in that area, and

(The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

reiterates the important and indispensable role of the
IAEA in that respect.
Iceland attaches great importance to the IAEA’s
technical cooperation work aimed at the use of nuclear
technology in a safe, secure and sustainable manner.
That includes the areas of human health, food and
agriculture, nuclear science and the management of
radioactive waste. Nuclear technology plays an
important role in combating the spread of disease and
hunger, in particular in developing countries. Iceland
recognizes that valuable work, an makes an annual
voluntary contribution to the IAEA’s technology fund.
We welcome recent developments with regard to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Iceland
appreciates the swift response by the IAEA in February
following the diplomatic breakthrough. The shutdown
of the Yongbyon nuclear facilities and the
implementation of verification and monitoring
measures by the IAEA are important first steps. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
resume the implementation of its comprehensive
safeguards agreement under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
With respect to the nuclear activities of Iran, we
hope that the current work plan between the IAEA and
Iran will lead to a resolution of outstanding questions.
Effective implementation of the work plan is of course
a prerequisite for any progress. However, we still have
strong concerns concerning the implications of Iran’s
nuclear programme. We regret that Iran has not
fulfilled its obligations under Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-57052 (E)

*0757052*

A/62/PV.37

resolutions or the requirements established by the
IAEA. The Government of Iran must take steps to
build confidence with regard to the scope and nature of
its nuclear programme. We urge Iran to ratify and bring
into force the additional protocol to the comprehensive
safeguards agreement.
In conclusion, the IAEA is indispensable for
nuclear cooperation and global nuclear safety. I
reiterate Iceland’s full support for the organization, and
our willingness to contribute to its work and
cooperation efforts.
Mr. Gumbi (South Africa): My delegation would
also like to thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the
very insightful annual report of the Agency covering
the year 2006. We commend the Agency for yet
another elaborate and user-friendly report on
achievements and shortcomings in the areas of
technology, safety and verification, which are the three
pillars of the Agency’s mandate to accelerate and
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world.
The annual report of the Agency for 2006 has
once more strengthened our correctness in recognizing
the Agency as the leading multilateral institution for
ensuring the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as set out
in article II of the IAEA’s Statute. This annual report
has also reaffirmed my delegation’s belief that the
peaceful application of nuclear energy has the potential
to make a meaningful contribution to the improvement
of living standards, the fight against poverty and the
promotion of sustainable development, thereby
strengthening international peace and security and
facilitating the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Our meeting is taking place at a time when there
is a worldwide increase in the number of countries that
are considering the nuclear power option in their
national energy mix to meet their energy demands. We
are indeed in an era where nuclear power is suddenly
gaining prominence because of the potential it has to
place countries in a better position to enhance the
security of energy supplies and to mitigate the
discharge of carbon into the atmosphere, as the energy
produced from fossil fuel accounts for about half of
human-made greenhouse gases.
The rise in the demand for nuclear power comes
with challenges and responsibilities. Nuclear material

2

and its production have become harder to control.
There is an increase in the number of countries seeking
to master the nuclear fuel cycle to ensure a supply of
nuclear fuel. In turn, mastering the fuel cycle, and the
ability arising therefrom to enrich uranium or separate
plutonium, brings more countries closer to a nuclear
weapons capability. Needless to say, this all has a
direct bearing on the Agency’s verification activities,
technical cooperation assistance, nuclear fuel
management and nuclear safety and security.
My delegation is concerned that in budgeting for
the Agency there are always inadequate funds for
necessary technological innovation investments. South
Africa believes that that situation needs to be corrected
in order to extricate the Agency from the predicament
of having to rely on one or a few countries’ technical
resources to carry out its verification mandate. That
unjustified dependency has the potential to put into
question IAEA’s verification findings and will
ultimately undermine the credibility of its verification
function.
That near-crisis situation is further exacerbated
by the small number of safeguards agreements between
the Agency and its member States. That matter requires
our urgent and serious attention, because there are
some States that have yet to take the first basic step
required by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to put into force
comprehensive safeguards agreements with the
Agency. We call on those States to fulfil their
obligations under article III of the NPT as soon as
possible.
The Agency’s safeguards system is not a static
one, but it needs to be adapted to changing
circumstances. It is for that reason that South Africa
supported — unfortunately, to no avail — attempts at
the recently concluded IAEA General Conference
aimed at strengthening the safeguards system through
the incorporation into the safeguards resolution
language directly derived from article III.B, paragraph
1, of the IAEA Statute, as well as from step 10 of the
13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament agreed at
the 2000 NPT Review Conference. The rejection of
these proposals is a cause for concern for my
delegation and seems to represent a tendency by some
Member States to renege on commitments made when
joining the Agency and on their previous undertakings
made in the NPT. We also wonder if these negative
developments are not a manifestation of complacency

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

and the false belief that the safeguards system has been
perfected.
Notwithstanding, South Africa recognizes the
indispensable role that the Additional Protocol can play
as an additional measure to provide the necessary
confidence and the desired assurances that Member
States apply their nuclear technology solely for
peaceful purposes and that no declared or undeclared
material is diverted to weapons programmes. South
Africa believes that countries with access to advanced
technologies bear a greater responsibility to provide
such assurances and to build confidence in the peaceful
nature of their nuclear programmes.
Inasmuch as the Additional Protocol is voluntary,
South Africa believes that it is an important
confidence- and security-building measure that
continues to play an essential role in creating an
environment conducive to nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation but that it should not be used
as a condition for supplying nuclear material. As stated
in previous occasions, South Africa will continue to
reject that discriminatory attempt.
In addition to strengthening the Agency’s
verification function in these challenging moments,
South Africa believes the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Fund deserves urgent and decisive action.
This Fund is a statutory and political commitment that
needs to be realized. The technical cooperation projects
of the Agency constitute important building blocks to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals in the
areas of water security, environmental sustainability,
maternal and child health and the combating of disease,
hunger and poverty.
Over the years, the developing countries have
repeatedly stressed that the funding of the Agency’s
technical cooperation projects must be sufficient,
predictable and assured. They have also stressed the
need for the technical cooperation budget to be
increased, as it is clearly not sufficient. South Africa
believes that the time has arrived to conclusively
correct the mistake of the past fifty years by
incorporating the funding of technical cooperation
projects into the regular budget.
Likewise, my delegation expresses its fullest
support for the proposal of the Director General to
engage a high-level panel of experts to study, review
and consider options for financing the Agency’s
requirements. South Africa is of the view that the

07-57052

findings of this process should be engaged in a
constructive manner and be carefully considered with a
view to making appropriate recommendations.
The supply of nuclear fuel is a factor that will
play a prominent role in the anticipated future growth
of nuclear power. In this connection South Africa has
been following with keen interest the debate and
various proposals on multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle, as well as developments in the area
of research reactor conversion and highly enriched
uranium repatriation.
With regard to the nuclear fuel cycle, South
Africa has noted with deep concern that a number of
proposals made on this matter during the last few years
are geared towards restricting the right of countries to
develop domestic capabilities. Such conditionalities do
not only contradict the inalienable right of States to
pursue nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as
provided for in the NPT, but also exacerbate existing
inequalities, including through the creation of another
kind of cartel that would exclude full participation,
particularly by States in full compliance with their
safeguards obligations.
South Africa thinks that it is imperative to ensure
that no unwarranted restrictions are imposed. What is
required is a non-discriminatory approach that would
assure the reliable supply of nuclear fuel, while fully
respecting the choices of States and protecting their
inalienable right to pursue peaceful nuclear
programmes, consistent with their non-proliferation
obligations.
South Africa is considering options for
cooperation with other countries over the entire
nuclear-fuel cycle, from the mining and processing of
uranium through to nuclear power generation, fuel
reprocessing and the disposal of nuclear waste. South
Africa has also produced a draft nuclear energy policy
and strategy paper for public comment. Given the scale
of the intended South African nuclear programme and
the need for regulatory efficiency, it is envisaged that
all the regulatory functions — such as environmental,
design, construction, operations, decommissioning and
decontamination processes — will be centralized in a
single nuclear and radiation safety statutory agency.
While South Africa acknowledges that prevailing
proliferation concerns have prompted others to propose
restrictions and controls over the legitimate peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, it is important that such

3

A/62/PV.37

concerns be matched by reinforcement
obligation to achieve nuclear disarmament.

of

the

My delegation would also like recall, for the
benefit of this gathering, its position on research
reactor conversion and highly enriched uranium (HEU)
repatriation. As South Africa pointed out at the
International Symposium on HEU in Norway in June
last year, we are supportive of national efforts towards
the conversion of civilian facilities from HEU to low
enriched uranium (LEU), but we caution against
attempts aimed at efforts related to the reduction of
HEU for peaceful civilian purposes. Such national
decisions are indeed laudable and, in our view, are
contributing in a very real way towards minimizing the
inherent risks associated with HEU.
However, if we are indeed concerned about and
committed to reducing threats to our collective
security, and not merely the real or perceived threats
against a select few, we cannot exclusively focus on
reducing reliance on HEU for peaceful purposes,
without any real commitment and progress towards the
elimination of HEU and other fissile materials that are
primarily being used for military purposes. In South
Africa’s view, the threat to our very existence
constituted by the continued utilization of such
material for weapons purposes remains as real as ever.
Nuclear safety is fast proving to be an integral
part of nuclear programmes and will require serious
consideration as more countries are considering the
introduction or expansion of nuclear power. South
Africa commends the Agency for its work in the area
of nuclear safety and supports the various safety
standards, guides and requirements. South Africa
welcomes the networking practices to improve the
global nuclear safety regime and has taken the
initiative to establish an African forum of nuclear
regulators to share experiences and has requested the
Agency to provide guidance and assistance in this
endeavour.
South Africa is committed to the use of IAEA
Safety Standards as a benchmark in the implementation
of our regulatory mandate and supports the IAEA
initiative related to the rationalization and
harmonization of the Safety Standards. South Africa
would like to recommend a greater harmonization of
the requirements related to safety and those related to
security, as those requirements are interdependent in
many cases.

4

South Africa remains seriously concerned and
shares the international community’s concern over
nuclear security. South Africa agrees that the threat of
nuclear terrorism is one of the challenges the world
faces in reaching our common goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons. Although each and every State has
the responsibility to control and secure fissile material
or other nuclear materials and to prevent such materials
from being illegally obtained or used, relevant
instruments can and should play an important role in
strengthening our national and collective efforts in this
regard.
The issue of protection against nuclear terrorism
lies very much at the heart of South Africa’s concerns
as we may draw from the Agency’s expertise and
require equipment for the array of security measures to
be put in place for the soccer world championship in
South Africa in 2010.
In conclusion, South Africa believes that
continuous and irreversible progress in nuclear
disarmament and other related nuclear arms control
measures remain fundamental to the promotion of
nuclear non-proliferation. The systematic and
progressive elimination of all nuclear weapons and the
assurance that they will never be produced again
remains the only assurance against their use. That
should remain our goal.
Nuclear
disarmament
and
nuclear
nonproliferation are two sides of the same coin, and are
mutually reinforcing. The verifiable and irreversible
elimination of nuclear weapons should prevent the use
of nuclear weapons, irrespective of whose hands they
are in. That would effectively curb their proliferation,
because one cannot proliferate what one does not have.
Last but not least, my delegation associates itself
with the statement made this morning by the
Ambassador of Benin on behalf of the Group of
African States. South Africa will also support, and has
co-sponsored, the draft resolution on the IAEA, which
was introduced by the Chairperson of the Agency’s
Board of Governors.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me, at the outset, to express our gratitude to Mr.
ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his tireless efforts
and for the insightful report to the General Assembly
on the main activities of the Agency during the year
2006.

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

The report indicates that the Agency is
increasingly developing its activities in many areas of
nuclear technology that are of great interest and
importance to the human community. The IAEA was
established with the principal objective of accelerating
and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. The
ever-increasing demands of member States for the use
of nuclear science and associated technology to
sustainably meet their socio-economic requirements
underscore the need to ensure comprehensive
fulfilment of the Agency’s main responsibility.
It is a well-recognized fact that nuclear
technology has broad peaceful applications in
numerous fields — ranging from food production,
human health, water resources management and
agricultural and industrial applications to providing a
renewable source of energy. In particular, the IAEA has
a specific mandate in relation to nuclear power. Access
to reliable and adequate sources of energy is essential
for development. The demand for energy around the
world continues to increase rapidly. That has led a
number of countries, in particular developing
countries, to embark upon planning for the
construction of nuclear power reactors, as well as for
significant expansion in their existing programmes.
As the report indicates, for the first time, the
latest projections recognize that nuclear power will not
only help to meet the increased demand for energy
supplies but will also mitigate the discharge of carbon
into the atmosphere. In that context, efforts to
strengthen the Agency’s technical cooperation
activities aimed at improving the capabilities of
developing countries in nuclear energy production, as a
component of their energy mix, should be pursued as a
matter of priority.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) reaffirmed the important objectives of
the Agency and recognized the inalienable right of all
States parties to the NPT to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. Under article IV of the NPT, States parties
undertook to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, materials and scientific and technological
information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In
fact, the inalienable right of all NPT States parties to
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, without
discrimination, constitutes one of the three major
pillars upon which the NPT is founded.

07-57052

Notwithstanding
such
requirements,
the
cooperation of developed countries — as the main
suppliers of sophisticated nuclear technology — with
developing nations has remained at an unsatisfactory
level. In fact, nuclear cooperation between suppliers
and recipients has been beset by restrictions, obstacles
and disruptions. Instead of promoting cooperation, the
club of nuclear haves, which is laden with
discrimination and a lack of transparency, was created,
inter alia, to hamper the access of developing members
of the NPT to nuclear power technology, under the
pretext of non-proliferation concerns. To remedy that
shortcoming, the IAEA could and should play a
decisive role by vigorously pursuing balanced and
non-discriminatory application of the provisions of the
NPT and IAEA safeguards.
Moreover, it is unfortunate that, after 50 years of
existence, the budget of the international cooperation
section of the Agency remains unsteady due to its
voluntary nature and the conditionality imposed by
certain member States on its allocations.
The application of safeguards is among the main
functions of the Agency. While great efforts have been
made by the Agency to apply and promote the
universality of the safeguards system to all relevant
nuclear activities, it is distressing that some members
of the Agency have yet to conclude their
comprehensive safeguards agreements. We call on all
such members to fulfil their obligations at the earliest
possible time.
Furthermore, there is a dangerous trend at work
that is moving in the opposite direction of safeguarding
the NPT and ensuring its universality. Under that trend,
those who have chosen not to accede to the NPT not
only are not subject to any pressure to do so, but are
also encouraged and rewarded in different ways. For an
example, the Zionist regime has been allowed to
acquire a large stockpile of nuclear weapons in the
volatile Middle East region, and to defy the will of all
the States of the region and the international
community to turn the Middle East into a zone free of
nuclear weapons.
The Islamic Republic of Iran considers the
development of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes to be its inalienable right. We have therefore
invested extensive human and material resources in the
field of nuclear power, within the framework of the
country’s overall economic plan.

5

A/62/PV.37

As we have stressed time and again, Iran’s
nuclear programme is completely peaceful. All reports
issued by the IAEA since November 2003 have been
indicative of the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. The Agency has repeatedly reaffirmed that
it “has not seen indications of diversion of nuclear
material to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices”. That assertion has also been attested to by the
Director General of the IAEA in his various public
statements. Nevertheless, in an unwarranted move
orchestrated by a few of its permanent members, the
Security Council has taken unlawful, unnecessary and
unjustifiable actions against the peaceful nuclear
programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Indeed,
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme poses no threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, dealing
with this issue in the Security Council is unwarranted
and void of any legal basis or practical utility.
Without a doubt, the move to bring the Iranian
nuclear file to the Security Council and the intention of
the co-sponsors of the resolutions adopted thus far
have been derived from their ulterior motives and
narrow national considerations in order to deprive the
Iranian people of their inalienable rights, rather than
emanating from so-called proliferation concerns.
Despite the politically motivated actions by a few
countries, which have led to the deadlock and
interruption of negotiations, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has, once again, taken a new initiative that has
received worldwide support and appreciation. In that
context, Iran agreed to take a major step in negotiating
with the Agency on the modalities of dealing with the
few outstanding issues. As a result of intensive
negotiations which were held between the two sides,
the final text of the mutual understanding, reflected in
the Agency’s document INFCIRC/711, was concluded
on 21 August 2007 in Tehran.
Bearing in mind past experience in dealing with
such technical issues with the Agency, it was agreed
that all issues should be taken up in a sequential and
well-defined time frame, rather than dealing with them
simultaneously and without prioritization. In a very
short period of time, two of the major remaining issues,
namely
plutonium
experimentation
and
the
contamination at the Karaj facility, were resolved.
According to the agreed work plan, the issues of
P-1 and P-2 centrifuges are under extensive discussion.
In order to carry these discussion forward, several

6

meetings have been held between Iranian and IAEA
officials in a professional and cooperative atmosphere.
At present, the new round of such meetings is taking
place in Tehran.
As the IAEA Director General reported to the
Board of Governors, the agreed work plan is “a
significant step forward”. Therefore, it is essential to
note that Iran’s initiative has created a new and
positive environment that necessitates the return of its
nuclear dossier to the Agency’s framework in full. In
our view, the right path for the peaceful resolution of
the nuclear issue goes through dialogue and technical
elaboration within its proper and legal context, which
is the framework of the IAEA.
In the same vein, I wish to echo the view
expressed by many delegations that the Iranian nuclear
issue needs to be settled through multilateral means,
and that resorting to unilateral measures would only
exacerbate the situation and complicate its resolution.
There is no doubt that the recent United States
unilateral measures against Iran only seek to
undermine the current negotiations and cooperation
between Iran and the Agency. In this respect, it suffices
to make it clear that no number of irrational United
States policies will be able to dissuade us from
pursuing our legitimate rights and interests. We have
already enunciated our position on this issue in detail,
both here in New York and in the capital.
Finally, the people and the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran are determined to exercise
their inalienable right to nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes and to build on their own scientific
advances in developing various peaceful aspects of this
technology. Iran commits itself to its obligations under
the NPT and does not request anything more than the
exercise of its inalienable rights.
Mr. Park Hee-kwon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation would like to express its sincere
appreciation to Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
comprehensive report on the Agency’s activities. We
are pleased to take note of the Agency’s recent
achievements in the fields of technology, safety and
security and verification, which are described in the
annual report of the IAEA for 2006. In addition, my
delegation commends the Director General and his
staff for their dedication to fulfilling their
responsibilities with integrity and professionalism.

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

As a strong supporter of the work of the IAEA,
the Republic of Korea underlines the importance of
promoting the safe, secure and peaceful uses of nuclear
science and technology, and is committed to
maintaining full cooperation in all areas of the
Agency’s activities. In this regard, my delegation
would like to highlight some issues that we consider
relevant to the future development of the IAEA.
First, we believe that the universalization of the
Model Additional Protocol is an essential means for
improving the current safeguards and verification
regime. We fully share the Director General’s view that
only for those States with comprehensive safeguards
agreements and the additional protocols in place will
the Agency’s ability to detect undeclared nuclear
material or activities be fully realized. In this regard,
my delegation hopes that those States that have not
done so will sign, ratify and fully implement additional
protocols without undue delay.
Secondly, the Republic of Korea attaches great
importance to the development of a new multilateral
framework for the nuclear fuel cycle. My Government
supports initiatives to develop a mechanism to provide
reliable and equitable access to nuclear technologies
and fuel while limiting proliferation risks. As a major
user of nuclear energy, the Republic of Korea will
continue to participate in and make positive
contributions to the relevant discussions on this issue.
Thirdly, we believe that the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy should be promoted, ensuring a high
standard of nuclear safety and security. In this regard,
the Republic of Korea will continue to support the
Agency’s efforts to build and strengthen an
international nuclear safety and security regime and
further enhance its cooperation with the Agency.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to briefly highlight the recent developments in the SixParty Talks process. Since the resumption of the Fifth
Round of the Six-Party Talks in February of this year,
there has been significant progress in realizing the
Joint Statement of 19 September 2005. On 13 February
2007, the Six Parties agreed on the Initial Actions for
the Implementation of the Joint Statement, taking that
consensus forward another step by laying out specific
actions to implement the Joint Statement.
The 13 February agreement paved the way for
re-establishing the relationship between the IAEA and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, resulting

07-57052

in visits to that country by Agency teams and an
agreement between the two parties on an ad hoc
arrangement for monitoring and verification of the
Democratic People’s Republic’s Yongbyon nuclear
facility. Since July of this year, the Agency has been
able to verify the shutdown of the Yongbyon facility
and is continuing to implement the ad hoc
arrangement, with the cooperation of the Democratic
People’s Republic.
My delegation welcomes the Agency’s successful
implementation of the ad hoc arrangement and
reiterates its support and appreciation to the Director
General and his staff for conducting the monitoring and
verification activities in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in a timely, impartial and
professional manner.
Following the 13 February agreement, another
step forward was taken during the Second Session of
the Sixth Round of the Talks, held in Beijing from 27
to 30 September 2007, at which the Six Parties reached
agreement on the Second-Phase Actions for the
Implementation of the September 2005 Joint
Statement.
According to that agreement, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will complete the
disablement of the 5-megawatt experimental reactor,
the reprocessing plant and the nuclear fuel rod
fabrication plant at Yongbyon by the end of this year. It
is expected that the actual disablement process will
start in early November. In addition, the Democratic
People’s Republic will provide a complete and correct
declaration of all of its nuclear programmes, in
accordance with the 13 February agreement, within the
same time frame. The other five parties also agreed, in
turn, to take corresponding measures in accordance
with the 13 February agreement.
If the declaration and the disablement measures
are smoothly implemented, we believe that we can
achieve the main process of abandonment of these
nuclear facilities by next year. Completing these
second-phase actions in a timely manner will give
impetus to the negotiations aimed at achieving the
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula in
a peaceful manner. To that end, my delegation hopes
that the Six Parties will continue to take further steps
without delay, in accordance with their commitments,
towards the full implementation of the Joint Statement.

7

A/62/PV.37

As the Six-Party Talks process continues, my
Government will continue to work closely with all
parties concerned for a peaceful resolution of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear issue
and trusts that the international community will
continue to render its valuable support in that regard.
Mr. Figueiredo (Angola): On behalf of the
Republic of Angola, it is my pleasure to congratulate
the President on his well-deserved election to preside
over the work of the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly. Allow me also to extend my
congratulations to the other members of the Bureau.
We are confident that under his able leadership the
session will successfully conclude its work. He can be
assured of our full support and cooperation.
This year, we are celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of the foundation of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). For the past 50 years
the organization has carried out its mandate with
efficiency and credence. The Nobel Peace Prize
awarded in 2005 to the Agency and to its Director
General, Mohamed ElBaradei, was a tribute to the
professional and impartial performance over the last
half century. The Angolan Government would therefore
like to reiterate its support for and full confidence in
the Director General and the secretariat.
The Agency’s report in document GC(51)/5
correctly reflects the work carried out by the
organization during the year 2006 under the three
pillars of its mandate, namely, technology, safety and
security, and verification. It clearly illustrates that the
Agency continued to carry out a wide range of
activities related to the application of nuclear
technologies in areas such as human health, food and
agriculture, industry, water resources management, the
environment, knowledge management and nuclear
energy planning and production, thereby contributing
to sustainable development in Members States,
especially in the developing countries.
The Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme
is the main statutory vehicle for cost-effective transfer
of nuclear technologies and know-how to Member
States. To encourage greater self-reliance, the Agency
helps to build, strengthen and maintain national and
regional capacities for using nuclear technology in a
safe, secure and sustainable manner.
The Technical Cooperation Programme helps
developing countries in matching appropriate

8

technologies to identified needs and in building
relevant national technical competencies and expertise.
In that context, we wish to underscore that the
promotion of the peaceful applications of atomic
energy constitutes a fundamental element of the core
activities of the Agency and is of the utmost
importance to developing countries for the
improvement of their socio-economic condition. We
therefore believe that insufficient and unpredictable
funding of the Technical Cooperation Programme
would have a negative impact on the promotional
activities.
In that connection, we wish to recall a resolution
of the Agency’s General Conference, resolution
GC(50)RES/12, which in its preamble states that the
financing of technical cooperation should be in line
with the concept of shared responsibility, under which
there is a common engagement towards financing and
enhancing the activities of the Agency.
The Angolan Government encourages all Member
States to pay their contributions to the regular budget
and the Technical Cooperation Fund in full and on
time. The payment of extrabudgetary contributions for
the financing of projects that are Board approved but
for which no immediate funds are available for
implementation should not be neglected. The Republic
of Angola became a member of the IAEA eight years
ago, and we are among the States which regularly pay
their assessed contributions to the organization. The
Angolan Government appreciates the assistance from
which the country benefits within the framework of the
IAEA’s technical cooperation programme.
At present, the ongoing technical cooperation
programme consists of nine projects dealing with the
establishment of the first radiotherapy centre,
introduction of nuclear medicine techniques to clinical
practices, veterinary drug residue monitoring, isotope
techniques to study the effect of bio and inorganic
fertilizers, mutation breeding and the establishment of
non-destructive testing laboratories for industrial
applications.
Angola is also taking part in several regional and
interregional projects included in the African Regional
Co-operative Agreement for Research (AFRA)
programmes. In this context, we would like to
underline the importance of the IAEA project on
coastal zone management, which addresses the adverse

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

effects of harmful algal blooms and in which Namibia
and the Republic of South Africa are also participating.
In addition, the IAEA has provided assistance to
my country in establishing the legal framework and
regulatory infrastructure for the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. On 28 June a national atomic energy law was
promulgated as an important step towards the
establishment of a national radiation protection
institute, which will become a reality in the near future.
In this regard, we wish to thank the IAEA for its
valuable support.
For the 2009-2011 technical cooperation
programming cycle, the Angolan Government has
submitted for the IAEA’s consideration six project
concepts in the areas of nuclear physics, agriculture,
human health, water resources, industrial applications
and radiation protection. The projects involve the use
of nuclear control systems, isotope hydrology for
sustainable management of groundwater resources,
sustaining national capability in maintenance and
repair, improvement of beans through mutation
breeding, the extension of a nuclear physics teaching
laboratory to phase II and the strengthening of national
capacity in medical physics. For considerations of
efficiency, the IAEA organizes training courses,
seminars, workshops, scientific visits and fellowships
and provides expert advice and equipment.
My Government recognizes that the strengthening
of the IAEA’s technical cooperation activities relating
to the peaceful use of atomic energy, and its practical
applications, will substantially contribute to the wellbeing and quality of life of the peoples of the world,
particularly those of developing member States.
However, we believe that for many developing
countries, in particular Africa, the reduction of extreme
poverty and hunger by 50 per cent by 2015, as foreseen
by the United Nations, requires especially the
eradication or control of cancer, tsetse flies and
trypanosomiasis, HIV/AIDS, anopheles mosquitoes
and malaria, and locusts, among other things. All these
factors are additional hindrances to socio-economic
development.
Global warming as a consequence of the
atmospheric pollution resulting from human activity,
which has been causing dramatic and dangerous
climate changes, has become a serious threat to
development and the security of humanity. We believe
that as a first step to countering this scourge, all

07-57052

countries should sign and implement the international
protocols relating to the protection of the environment,
such as the Kyoto and Montreal Protocols. In this
regard, my Government welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General in inviting the countries that are
major polluters of the atmosphere to contribute to its
protection more resources.
With regard to cancer, we appreciate the policy of
seeking to develop a strategy for the implementation of
the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT).
We encourage the IAEA to proceed in its collaboration
with other relevant national, regional and international
organizations to foster the development of costeffective systems for radiation treatment of cancer. In
the same vein, we appeal to all member States to
continue making contributions to PACT to enable the
achievement of its goal, inter alia, to assist developing
countries in integrating radiotherapy into the broader
framework of cancer prevention and control. We also
welcome the voluntary contributions of some member
States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries Fund for International Development, the
United States National Cancer Institute and private
corporations.
Regarding the tsetse fly and the trypanosomiasis
disease it transmits, my country supports the IAEA’s
activities aimed at the eradication or control of the
tsetse fly through the use of the Sterile Insect
Technique (SIT). We appreciate its continued support
to African member States in their efforts to build
national capabilities and further develop techniques for
applying SIT in the creation of tsetse-free zones. We
also appreciate the Agency’s support for the African
Union’s Pan African Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis
Eradication Campaign in its contribution to the
implementation of plan of action in some countries on
the continent.
Taking into account the progress achieved in the
application of SIT in combating tsetse fly in some
African countries, Angola wishes to encourage the
IAEA, in partnership with other relevant organizations
such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the World Health Organization, to
further strengthen their research with a view to
utilizing SIT in the control or eradication of the
anopheles mosquito and malaria, locusts and other
insects which hinder the socio-economic development
of the continent. In the same context, we welcome the
decision of the United Nations Regional Consultation

9

A/62/PV.37

on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, held
in Algiers in July 2006, where methods and techniques
for the integrated campaign against locusts were
discussed and where recommendations emerged for the
integration of nuclear applications in eliminating these
insects and in establishing regional centres for studies
and training in this field.
Last but not least, HIV/AIDS has been one of the
most serious public health problems in modern history
since its discovery in 1981. This disease is a far worse
problem in some parts of the world than in others.
Most people infected with AIDS live in the developing
countries of Asia and Africa, while most of the deaths
occur in sub-Saharan Africa. AIDS retards economic
growth by destroying human capital and, consequently,
increasing poverty.
In this context, we encourage the IAEA, in
partnership with relevant national, regional and
international organizations, to explore new possibilities
to counter this ever-growing scourge. The Angolan
Government notes with appreciation the regional
project, Initiatives in HIV — molecular epidemiology
and immunology, in support of the WHO/UNAIDS
African AIDS Vaccine Programme.
With regard to nuclear verification, the nuclear
non-proliferation and arms control regime continues to
face a broad set of challenges. The Government of
Angola is of the view that it is important to reinforce
the monitoring of the application of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to move
towards global disarmament. We appreciate all
pertinent initiatives taken in compliance with United
Nations Charter, according to the concept of
multilateralism and the principles which govern
relations between States. That means the equality of all
States.
Angola, like the great majority of other members
of the Assembly, recognizes the inalienable right of all
States to produce nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
In this context, my Government appreciates and
supports the initiative to assist developing countries
interested in small and medium-sized reactors, in order
to address economic development while protecting the
environment and ensuring safety and security.
The Angolan Government associates itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Benin
on behalf of the African States.

10

To conclude, the Government of the Republic of
Angola recommends the approval of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency by the General
Assembly.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his
presentation to the Assembly of the annual report of the
Agency for 2006.
Malaysia highly appreciates the IAEA’s role in
assisting developing Member States in planning for and
in the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology
for peaceful purposes. However, more should be done
to advance the inalienable rights of developing
Member States, especially to develop the research,
production and use of nuclear energy, as well as the
right to participate in the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, material and technology for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination and in conformity
with their respective safeguards agreements, as
enshrined under article IV of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
With regard to cooperation concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology, I am pleased to
inform the Assembly that Malaysia is one of those
countries that has greatly benefited from the IAEA’s
Technical Assistance and Cooperation Programme.
Initially a Programme recipient, Malaysia is now
providing experts for IAEA missions to other
developing countries under the Programme. In
addition, we are an active supporter of the Programme,
particularly in terms of hosting various IAEA
conferences, seminars, workshops, meetings and
regional training courses, as well as training Agency
fellows. A substantial amount of the local
organizational costs are absorbed by the Government
of Malaysia. We do this because we see much value in
the Programme, particularly for developing Member
States, in developing nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes.
Despite our commitment to the Programme, we
are somewhat disappointed that at times we are unable
to secure places for our scientists and engineers to be
trained in the nuclear field in countries with more
highly developed nuclear technology and programmes.
This could be attributed to a tightened control regime
by those countries on the transfer of nuclear and
nuclear-related material, equipment and technologies.

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

While appreciating the concerns of those
countries with more advanced nuclear sectors,
Malaysia wishes to reaffirm that our intention in
seeking to develop indigenous expertise in peaceful
uses of nuclear technology, in line with our nonproliferation and safeguards commitments under the
NPT, is with a view to further contributing to the
Agency’s Technical Assistance and Cooperation
regime. Malaysia therefore urges the IAEA to look into
this matter with a view to finding a way forward on the
issue.
Having forsworn nuclear weapons, Malaysia is of
the view that developing non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the NPT deserve to be accorded preferential
treatment in terms of access to nuclear equipment,
material and technology for peaceful civilian uses over
States not parties, whether through the IAEA Technical
Assistance and Cooperation Programme or through
bilateral arrangements.
We are now witnessing increased interest in
nuclear energy as an alternative source of energy.
Currently, among the developing countries, particularly
in Asia, there is a strong interest in harnessing nuclear
power for meeting future energy needs. As indicated in
the IAEA report, 15 out of the 30 nuclear reactors
currently being constructed in developing countries are
located in Asia.
The three factors fuelling this interest, as
identified by the Director-General in his statement to
the fifty-first regular session of the IAEA General
Conference, on 17 September 2007, are the steady
growth in energy demand, the increasing concerns
about energy security and the challenge of climate
change. Malaysia shares that view. Currently, Malaysia
depends on natural gas resources for over 70 per cent
of its power generation. But, as a rapidly developing
country, it will need to keep its future energy options
open.
In this connection, Malaysia maintains a keen
interest in any possible progress in the development of
equitable multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel
cycle. Malaysia is of the view that such arrangements
regarding the nuclear fuel cycle would be beneficial to
developing countries in the long term, especially in
cases where those countries would need to eventually
embark on a nuclear power programme to help meet
future energy demands. In that context, Malaysia views
any such multilateral approach as a means of

07-57052

minimizing the investment costs required for any
country to embark on nuclear power generation to help
meet its future energy demand, while also guaranteeing
supplies.
Malaysia is also of the view that a temporary
voluntary waiver of such rights as a precondition for
participation in any such multilateral approach could
be considered. We wish to emphasize, however, that
the application of such a waiver should be effective
only for the duration of the multilateral arrangement.
Furthermore, such a waiver should also be paired with
an assurance of continued supply to the relevant
nuclear fuel cycle services and material, as well as with
appropriate guarantees, including guaranteed financial
and other relevant compensation for failure of supply
for reasons other than violation or breach of nuclear
non-proliferation commitments.
That notwithstanding, Malaysia also firmly
believes that any multilateral approach to the nuclear
fuel cycle should not adversely affect the fundamental
inalienable rights of the NPT States parties to develop
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, either by
imposing a mandatory permanent suspension of any
part of such rights as a precondition for participation
by any NPT State Party in any such multilateral
approach, or otherwise.
Notwithstanding Malaysia’s support for moves
towards improving the assurances of supply in the field
of nuclear power generation technology, which in our
view would significantly contribute towards reducing
the risks of the further proliferation of sensitive
technologies, such moves should also not distract
global attention away from the obligation of nuclearweapon States to undertake to pursue negotiations in
good faith on effective measures relating to nuclear
disarmament.
Despite the overwhelming attention and emphasis
placed on ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, Malaysia
remains firmly convinced that the pursuit of general,
complete and irreversible nuclear disarmament under
strict and effective international control is the most
effective way of removing the threat of nuclear
weapons proliferation, and that the total elimination of
such weapons remains the only guarantee against their
use or the threat of their use.
In the context of pursuing the aim of total
elimination of nuclear weapons, Malaysia remains
concerned that a majority of the nuclear-weapon States

11

A/62/PV.37

have yet to conclude the Protocol to the Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone. In this
regard, we welcome China’s readiness to accede to the
Protocol, and call upon the remaining nuclear-weapon
States to consider acceding to the Protocol at the
earliest opportunity. On a related note, we welcome the
establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia as the first such zone to be established in
the Northern Hemisphere.
Malaysia also wishes to call for the prompt
establishment of a similar nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 487 (1981) and 687 (1991), and relevant
General Assembly resolutions adopted by consensus.
Malaysia also calls on Israel to accede to the NPT and
promptly place all of its nuclear facilities under IAEA
full-scope safeguards, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 487 (1981).
On the implementation of the NPT Safeguards
Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia
reiterates its recognition of the IAEA as the sole
competent authority for the verification of the
safeguards obligations of that country as well of other
member States. Malaysia believes that Iran’s
willingness to allow continuous IAEA inspection and
verification of its nuclear facilities will help in gaining
the trust and in building the confidence of the
international community in the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. In this regard, Malaysia welcomes
the
positive
developments
concerning
Iran’s
cooperation with the IAEA and hopes that all
outstanding questions over the Iranian nuclear
programme can be resolved in an amicable and
mutually agreeable manner.
Similarly, Malaysia welcomes the positive actions
taken on the part of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, particularly its decision to shut down the
Yongbyon nuclear facility and in allowing IAEA
inspectors access to its nuclear facilities, pursuant to
the 13 February agreement. Malaysia views such
actions as significant confidence-building measures
that could contribute towards efforts aimed at
achieving the denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula. Malaysia remains convinced of the value of
the Six-Party Talks process, particularly in terms of
reaching a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear issue,
and we hope that all concerned parties will continue to
remain committed to the process.

12

In conclusion, Malaysia would like to express
once again its appreciation to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the IAEA, as well as to the IAEA
secretariat for their significant and valuable work in
upholding the three pillars of the Agency’s mandate —
namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to congratulate the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on its fiftieth
anniversary this year and for its achievements, notably
the progress made on the workplan with Iran and the
monitoring, verification and disablement of the
Yongbyon nuclear facilities in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We strongly encourage and support
Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
continue their cooperation with the IAEA in order to
maintain the momentum of creating an environment
conducive to peace and prosperity in the region.
Thailand also wishes to express its support for the
broadening of the IAEA’s mandate in promoting and
regulating the peaceful uses of nuclear power for
development. Thailand stands ready to work with the
IAEA in improving nuclear safety and security towards
the objective of nuclear non-proliferation through
effective safeguards and verification measures. In this
connection, we welcome the IAEA’s five new
members, and the 11 incoming members of the
Agency’s Board of Governors.
Thailand notes with satisfaction the IAEA’s 2006
Annual Report, in particular the new initiatives and
implementation of nuclear application programmes in
various fields. In our view, nuclear technology
applications constitute an area where the constructive
role of the IAEA in promoting the peaceful uses of
nuclear power deserves more emphasis and active
support.
As the fifty-eighth member of the IAEA and one
of its founding members — since 1957 — and current
member of the Board of Governors for the term 20062008, Thailand fully complies with the Agency’s rules
and regulations and with all relevant codes of conduct
on the safety and security of radioactive sources. We
welcome the keynote address by Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, the IAEA’s Director General, at the Sixth
Congress on Science and Technology for Development
in Thailand on 16 July 2007, where the role of nuclear
power as an engine for development was underscored.

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

In particular, we fully support the view that the role of
nuclear energy in relation to sustainable development
needs to be re-evaluated in the context of emerging and
interrelated issues — namely, energy security and
climate change.
As a State party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT), Thailand recognizes and supports the
inalienable right of all States to develop, research,
produce and utilize nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination, under the NPT.
Acknowledging the symbiotic linkage between energy,
security and development, and the exigencies of
climate change resulting from the use of fossil fuels,
Thailand considers nuclear power to be one of the
sources of viable alternative energy options and
therefore welcomes the reassessment of its role in
sustainable development in accordance with both
Agenda 21 and the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
As there is a need to diversify energy sources and
to reduce dependency on fossil fuels, Thailand looks to
nuclear energy. In July of this year, Thailand
announced its plan to develop nuclear energy under the
National Power Development Plan for the next 14
years, in which nuclear-powered electricity generation
is envisaged by 2021. The Office of Atoms for Peace of
Thailand, as the national regulatory body, together with
Thailand’s Institute of Nuclear Technology and the
National Energy Policy Council, as the operational and
policymaking bodies, respectively, have already
commenced work with the IAEA on issues relating to
the necessary educational, industrial, legal, and
institutional instruments. Thailand’s Nuclear Power
Infrastructure Preparatory Committee has also already
been set up.
Thailand further welcomes the IAEA’s active role
in applying nuclear technology for other development
purposes, especially in the fields of medicine, food and
agriculture, environmental management and industry.
Thailand thus encourages countries to work with the
IAEA in reporting their progress in fulfilling
international obligations regarding the peaceful use of
nuclear
energy
and
in
strengthening
the
implementation of safeguards systems.
The report, which outlines programmes and
activities undertaken by the IAEA in conjunction with
its member States, provides encouraging signs that the
Agency is taking the right approach in supporting the

07-57052

rights of its members to utilize nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes and in strengthening its legal and
institutional role in safety and verification regimes.
With regard to strategies on non-proliferation
issues, Thailand welcomes the IAEA’s efforts to
explore multilateral mechanisms to ensure reliable
supply of and access to fuel cycle services for States
that choose not to acquire full fuel cycle capabilities.
Regarding the Technical Cooperation Fund
(TCF), Thailand applauds the important role the TCF
has been playing in strengthening technology transfer
and promoting scientific and technological cooperation
in areas such as basic human needs and sustainable
development. Nevertheless, additional emphasis must
be given to how the Fund could be used and managed
more effectively without sacrificing the benefits of
nuclear technology to Member States.
Finally, Thailand reiterates its support for the
indispensable role of the IAEA in nuclear technology,
safety and verification for the peace and prosperity of
its member States and the international community.
Thailand commends the IAEA for its integrity,
impartiality and professionalism in promoting and
ensuring the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for
development, and hence its competence and central
role as part of the disarmament and non-proliferation
agenda.
Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): Croatia has aligned
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit my remarks to a few issues of particular
interest to my country.
At the outset, let me stress that, following last
year’s election to the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Governor from Croatia was elected Vice-Chairman of
the Board this September. This result confirms our
readiness to play a constructive part in IAEA activities.
Moreover, it demonstrates Croatia’s appreciation of the
Agency’s unique contribution to peace, security and
development in the world at this difficult and critical
time for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Let me also express Croatia’s appreciation for the
Agency’s comprehensive annual report. I would like to
thank the Director General, Mr. ElBaradei, for
presenting the report this morning. Croatia fully

13

A/62/PV.37

supports its substance and is again pleased to be among
the sponsors of the draft resolution on the report.
Croatia commends the Agency for the successful
continuation of its wide-ranging activities in the fields
of technology, safety and verification. We particularly
support efforts to continuously upgrade and develop
the Agency’s concepts and means to effectively address
dangerous new trends in nuclear proliferation.
The Agency was established 50 years ago to
promote safe, secure and peaceful nuclear
technologies. In this regard, Croatia reiterates that
comprehensive safeguards agreements together with
the Additional Protocols constitute the current IAEA
verification standard. Achieving the universal
application of a strengthened safeguards system is an
urgent priority, and the fact that more than 100
countries have yet to bring into force their additional
protocols is a cause of great concern. At the same time,
there is a parallel need to increase the Agency’s
verification resources to enable it to deal effectively
with growing verification demands.
Croatia supports the Agency’s activities in the
area of strengthening national capacities in order to
prevent proliferation and increase nuclear security.
National measures should include improvement of
export and import controls, strengthening of border
controls, re-evaluation of legislative frameworks, more
frequent exchanges of relevant information at the
national and international levels, and the improvement
of public awareness on the issue of proliferation.
Croatia signed and ratified the Additional
Protocol, the amendment to article VI of the IAEA
statute and the amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. Croatia also
supports the Code of Conduct on the Safety and
Security of Radioactive Sources and the supplementary
guidance on the import and export of radioactive
sources.
One of the most beneficial aspects of successful
cooperation between Croatia and the Agency has been
within the framework of its technical cooperation
programme, where the Agency supports five ongoing
projects in Croatia, together with its contributions to
and co-organization of workshops and seminars hosted
by Croatia, addressing issues of non-proliferation,
radiation protection and the fight against trafficking
and potential threats by terrorists against the security
of nuclear and radioactive material.

14

In that context, we are also pleased to have
strengthened our role in the region, bearing in mind the
importance of coordinated and effective regional
measures aimed at maximizing the peaceful use of
nuclear energy and confronting the growing risks of
proliferation and nuclear terrorism.
As the role of the Agency continues to expand,
the challenges it faces remain important and difficult.
The annual report makes it perfectly clear that these
challenges can be addressed only by partnering
with its stakeholders: member States, international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations,
national counterparts and the public. Croatia pledges
its unequivocal commitment to that partnership as we
move along the path towards sustainable nonproliferation and genuine “atoms for peace”.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): This
year, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
is celebrating its fiftieth anniversary. In its 50 years of
existence, the Agency has acquired exclusive status as
the leading international body capable of dealing with
the question of the safe use of nuclear power for
peaceful purposes and for ensuring effective control
over the implementation of international obligations
relating to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
States members of the Agency and its secretariat
are doing truly colossal work. As part of its technical
cooperation programme, the IAEA is providing
interested member States with multifaceted assistance
in making use of cutting-edge nuclear technology. Very
careful work is being done to ensure a global system of
nuclear and radiological security. An action plan to
combat nuclear terrorism is being carried out.
Measures are being taken to enhance the physical
protection of nuclear and radioactive materials.
Consistent steps are being taken to ensure the
universalization of the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and to enhance the effectiveness of the IAEA
safeguards system. Work is also being done to protect
nuclear knowledge and train nuclear specialists.
Belarus has been actively promoting the
implementation of all of these activities in the work of
IAEA. Our country is fully behind the activities of the
agency in its work towards achieving the IAEA slogan,
“Atoms for peace”. We believe that all of the
machinery available in the Agency should be used to
the maximum extent possible in order to achieve those
aims. We consider the machinery for technical

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

cooperation within IAEA today as the most important
instrument for transmitting and implementing up-todate nuclear ideas, technology and experience.
The implementation of technical cooperation
projects by the Agency in Belarus have provided
considerable assistance to national efforts in a number
of areas relating to the possible use of nuclear knowhow and technology. Moreover, Belarus suffered the
full brunt of the Chernobyl tragedy, and the success of
mutual assistance as part of its cooperation with
IAEA has made it possible to implement a number of
socio-economic and medical measures that have
allowed for the rehabilitation of the damaged regions
and have ensured their sustainable development.
At this stage of its existence, IAEA is particularly
important in terms of cooperation with member States
that are interested in setting up their own nuclear
power programmes. We are pleased to note that IAEA
activities along those lines are becoming more
systematic in nature. That is particularly important
given the increasing number of Governments that have
announced their intentions to implement national
programmes to develop nuclear power, including
projects to construct nuclear power stations on their
territory. In that context, a very promising area of work
for the Agency is its evaluation of new approaches to
the nuclear fuel cycle to ensure guaranteed supplies of
nuclear fuel to interested consumers.
Belarus is a convinced and consistent supporter
of enhancing and ensuring the universalization of the
non-proliferation regime, and we have unfailingly
discharged our obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
safeguards agreements. We are aware of the complexity
and the multifaceted nature of the implementation of
the NPT, but we nonetheless do believe that
cooperation under that Treaty should lead to positive
experiences in implementing all of its provisions,
including the IAEA safeguards agreement.
In that connection, any country that discharges its
obligations under the NPT should have unimpeded
access to the development of its nuclear power.
The delegation of Belarus is pleased to note that
the IAEA resolution on strengthening the Agency’s
activities in the field of technical cooperation reflects
the value of the Agency’s contribution to international
efforts in overcoming the consequences of the
Chernobyl accident. The Government of Belarus

07-57052

intends to continue to create favourable conditions for
the Agency in its work to mitigate the consequences of
the catastrophe at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
We call on all member States of the Agency to support
IAEA activities in that very important area.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for presenting the
annual report of the Agency. Pakistan appreciates the
role played by IAEA in promoting the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy in the diverse areas of power
generation, health and medicine, agriculture,
hydrology, industry, environment and basic sciences.
We assure Mr. ElBaradei and his colleagues of our full
support and cooperation in achieving progress and
prosperity for all.
IAEA has completed five decades working as a
successful organization. Its role as the world’s focal
point in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy
assumes greater significance in view of the rapidly
growing global energy demand and shortage of fossil
fuel reserves, as well as the diverse challenges of the
environment and proliferation.
The Agency’s report for 2006 underscores the key
role of nuclear power in enhancing the security of
energy supply while also mitigating the discharge of
carbon into the atmosphere. The Agency can make a
significant contribution to meeting the needs and
challenges of the twenty-first century by ensuring
equitable access to nuclear materials, technology and
equipment for peaceful purposes.
Pakistan attaches the highest importance to the
technical cooperation programme of the IAEA. We
have benefited from and contributed to the technical
cooperation programme.
Pakistan was one of the earliest countries to
launch a programme of nuclear power generation and
have developed the entire range of nuclear fuel cycle
facilities. Parallel to the development of the nuclear
fuel cycle, I would briefly draw attention to our
achievements in other sectors.
In the area of nuclear research, the Pakistan
Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology has
emerged as a major research institution in the region
for basic and applied research in the fields of nuclear
physics, nuclear chemistry, nuclear materials, nuclear
engineering, radioisotope production and applications.

15

A/62/PV.37

The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission is
playing a vital role in the application of nuclear science
and technology in the human health sector. The
Commission has so far established 13 nuclear medicine
and oncology centres and institutions throughout the
country for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The
PAEC is also collaborating with international agencies
such as the IAEA, the Japan International Cooperation
Agency, the International Union Against Cancer, the
World Health Organization and others in technical
cooperation projects, providing training for technical
human resource development.
The PAEC has been playing a major role in
harnessing nuclear techniques in agriculture and other
biological research since its inception. Our National
Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering is
a centre dedicated to the application of biotechnology
in agriculture, industry, health and environment. The
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission has also
established research laboratories in the fields of isotope
hydrology and isotope ecology.
With a sizeable civilian nuclear programme and
decades of experience in nuclear operations in the
areas of power generation, health, medicine,
agriculture, biotechnology and industrial applications,
Pakistan is uniquely placed to offer cooperation in
peaceful uses of nuclear energy to developing countries
under IAEA safeguards. We look forward to further
strengthening our participation in the IAEA’s
promotional activities.
Since the foundation of the atomic energy
programme, Pakistan has always recognized that
nuclear safety and security in the national and
international context is a vital objective. We have
therefore established strong safety and security
infrastructure, including a strong and independent
Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority (PNRA).
Pakistan is a party to the Nuclear Safety Convention,
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and other relevant IAEA instruments. Nuclear
safety arrangements at civilian facilities in Pakistan are
subjected to peer reviews and regular inspections by
IAEA missions. On the security side, the PNRA
requires all operators to implement the security
arrangements as contained in IAEA document
INFCIRC/225/Rev.4, which constitutes the current
international standard in this regard.

16

The PNRA is implementing a National Nuclear
Security Action Plan which aims at, first, strengthening
the security of nuclear and radioactive materials and
facilities containing such materials; secondly,
prevention and detection of illicit trafficking in nuclear
and radioactive materials; and, thirdly, responding to
incidents of illicit trafficking and emergencies. The
PNRA is cooperating with the IAEA for capacitybuilding in this context.
Pakistan’s economy has expanded at an average
annual growth rate of 7 per cent from 2002 to 2007.
Electricity demand increased at 8 per cent per annum.
At the current rate of growth, the demand for
electricity would increase from 20,000 megawatts at
present to 163,000 megawatts by 2030.
Pakistan’s indigenous energy resources are
limited. The Government of Pakistan has therefore
launched a 25-year Energy Security Plan to cater for
the rising demand for energy. The strategy for the
development of the power sector is maximum
utilization of indigenous energy resources to reduce
dependence on imported fuels. Nuclear power
generation will be an indispensable element in our
national energy security strategy.
This Energy Security Plan envisages increase in
nuclear power generation capacity from the present
425 megawatts to 8,800 megawatts by the year 2030,
representing an increase in the proportion of energy
that nuclear electricity generation will supply from the
0.8 per cent to 4.2 per cent. This will entail setting up
several additional nuclear power reactors.
To support the planned expansion of nuclear
power in Pakistan, we have embarked upon the
establishment of a uranium conversion and enrichment
facility that will cater for the needs for fuel of our
nuclear power plants. At the last IAEA General
Conference, Pakistan made an announcement
concerning the possibility of placing this facility under
IAEA safeguards. This voluntary measure would be
facilitated through Pakistan’s non-discriminatory
integration into the international arrangements for
peaceful nuclear cooperation.
Pakistan has been closely following recent
proposals and initiatives on assurances of supply of
nuclear fuel. The basis of acceptance of any such
mechanism will be that of trust in the system. It should
encourage expansion of nuclear power through the
assured supply of nuclear fuel and other related

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

services in a non-discriminatory manner. Above all,
consistent with the existing realities, any such
mechanism should include all States with advanced
fuel cycle capabilities, without discrimination. In
particular, the report of the Expert Group established
by the Director General of the IAEA emphasizes the
need to make the three non-NPT States partners of the
multilateral nuclear fuel cycle approach. It also
envisages the establishment of nuclear parks in
countries under IAEA supervision.
Pakistan recognizes the important role played by
the IAEA verification regime. We have fully complied
with our obligations pursuant to our safeguards
agreements with the IAEA. We share the view that all
States should fully comply with their safeguards
obligations and international commitments. The most
important step towards maintaining the credibility of
the safeguards regime is the fulfilment of their legal
obligations by all States. A balance between the
Agency’s regulatory, promotional and safety functions
will ensure the continuing relevance of the Agency in
the twenty-first century in the context of promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as nonproliferation.
In conclusion, let me say that the international
community has well recognized and commended the
vital role that Director General ElBaradei and the
IAEA are playing in the promotion of peaceful nuclear
cooperation and non-proliferation. Mr. ElBaradei’s
remarks regarding several current issues deserve close
consideration by all the concerned parties.
There is a disconnect, however, between the call
of some for full-scope safeguards and the additional
protocol as the standard for peaceful nuclear
cooperation, and their simultaneous readiness to
consider selective exceptions from such standards.
Pakistan supports the Director General’s call for a new
framework for the use of nuclear energy that responds
to “the lessons we have learned and the current reality”
(A/62/PV.36). And this will have to be done on a nondiscriminatory basis. We also welcome the recognition
of the linkage between non-proliferation and
disarmament. For its part, for the past several years,
Pakistan has called for evolving a new consensus on
disarmament and non-proliferation which would
encompass the new framework for the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We hope that the Secretary-General
will consider convening an international conference or

07-57052

a special session of the General Assembly to help in
evolving such a new consensus.
Ms. Mohamed-Noor (Singapore): My delegation
would first like to thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, for his comprehensive report.
The IAEA continues to do excellent work, despite the
challenges it faces. That is testimony to the skill and
leadership of its Director General. We believe that the
IAEA should continue to be the global focal point for
nuclear cooperation, in line with its three pillars of
technology, safety and security and verification.
Last year, we were focused on nuclear
developments in Iran and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. This year, we welcome the closure
of the Yongbyon nuclear facility in the latter country,
as verified by the IAEA, and the return of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the SixParty Talks. Continuing cooperation between the IAEA
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
lead to enhanced security in the Korean peninsula. In
tandem, we hope that Iran will also continue to
cooperate with the IAEA in building confidence and
resolving the outstanding questions pertaining to its
nuclear programme.
The Asia-Pacific region’s demand for energy has
increased with its rapid economic development. This
demand can only become more pronounced in the
future. At present, fossil fuels meet most of Asia’s
energy needs. The question going forward is whether
this situation can continue. Fossil fuels are finite and
not always easy to extract; high oil prices are one
manifestation of this. There are also concerns about the
pollutive effects of fossil fuels and how fossil fuel
emissions contribute to climate change. With these
concerns in mind, it is no surprise that many countries
are exploring alternative sources of energy that may be
cleaner and more stable in terms of price and long-term
availability. In short, many countries are looking at
nuclear power.
Under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), States have the sovereign
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful means.
However, countries that explore the nuclear energy
option also have a grave responsibility to carefully
consider safety issues. Accidents involving nuclear
facilities have horrible effects that range over great
distances and manifest themselves over a very lengthy

17

A/62/PV.37

period of time. One need only hark back to the
Chernobyl tragedy of more than 20 years ago. Just this
year, there was a fire and a leak at the KashiwazakiKariwa nuclear plant when an earthquake struck
Niigata province in Japan.
States newly considering nuclear power should
also adopt measures to assuage concerns about safety
and security issues. The IAEA’s Department of Nuclear
Safety and Security has a pivotal role to play in helping
these countries achieve the necessary safety standards.
The IAEA can help States build capacity regarding
safety and security issues associated with the use of
nuclear energy. We fully support the Department’s
objective of a strong, sustainable and visible global
safety regime that provides for the protection of people
and the environment from the effects of ionizing
radiation, for the minimization of the likelihood of
accidents or malicious acts that could endanger life and
property and for the effective mitigation of the effects
of any such incidents. In this regard, we welcome the
IAEA’s activities to build, strengthen and maintain
national and regional capacities for using nuclear
technology in a safe, secure and sustainable manner,
and we encourage the IAEA to continue these
activities.
The IAEA should also continue its technical
cooperation with relevant countries and explore more
partnerships and cooperation with other players in the
nuclear energy market. States should draw on the
IAEA’s expertise in these areas.
Singapore supports the IAEA’s objective of
providing authoritative guidance and advice on nuclear
safety approaches, policies and principles. To this end,
IAEA’s safety standards are of paramount importance
and provide a widely accepted basis for nuclear safety.
States considering nuclear power should look towards
these international standards in setting their own
guidelines and should build on the IAEA’s framework
when developing nuclear safety regimes. Singapore
thus welcomes the IAEA’s efforts to extend its safety
and security standards and best practices throughout
the world.
We support the introduction of a new IAEA
safety review initiative, the Integrated Regulatory
Review Service, the adoption of the Fundamental
Safety Principles by the IAEA Board of Governors, and
the continuation of the IAEA’s peer review mechanism.
These initiatives will help countries and regional

18

organizations build up a body of standards, knowledge
and expertise on nuclear safety issues.
Importantly, the effectiveness of the IAEA
necessarily depends in large part on cooperation from
States. States should continue to work, in cooperation
with the IAEA, on creating a culture of safety among
nuclear regulators, operators and employees. Regional
safety and security regimes under the auspices of the
IAEA, such as the Asian Nuclear Safety Network, are
useful in building up State capacity based on the
IAEA’s safety protocols and standards.
Within the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), we also recognize the IAEA’s role
and expertise in the area of safety. The plan of action
that was adopted by ASEAN Foreign Ministers in July
to implement the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone, for instance, calls for ASEAN to work with the
IAEA and other partners in developing a legal
framework to meet international standards on nuclear
safety. ASEAN energy ministers, at their annual
meeting in Singapore on 23 August 2007, also
endorsed in principle the establishment of a nuclear
energy safety subsector network to discuss nuclear
safety issues.
These developments go hand in hand with efforts
to look for alternative, carbon-free and sustainable
energy sources. In this regard, ASEAN looks forward
to working closely with the IAEA in developing a
regional framework of collaboration and cooperation,
as well as adopting the best practices in this field. We
believe this is timely, as more South-East Asian
countries have either indicated an interest in or are
pursuing nuclear energy programmes, in line with
increasing energy needs. We believe that, for their part,
companies involved in the provision of nuclear energy
plants must also help ensure that nuclear power plants
meet the highest safety standards. This includes issues
such as location and design, the management and
disposal of spent nuclear fuel and human capacity to
run the plants properly.
The IAEA’s role in building confidence about the
safety and security aspects of nuclear energy is crucial.
Nuclear energy is obviously an option for States
considering alternative sources of energy. But those
same States must ensure that this energy can be
sourced safely. Cooperation with the IAEA in
developing their nuclear power is essential for those
States’ — and, indeed, the wider regions’ — safety and

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

security. It would be tragic if nuclear energy became
the source of future problems. Singapore believes that
the IAEA can continue to do good work in this regard.
Singapore will continue to support the IAEA’s
mission and activities in the future.
Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): Ukraine has
aligned itself with the statement made by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and associated countries. Therefore, I shall
limit my remarks to a few issues of particular
importance to my country.
At the outset, on behalf of the Government of
Ukraine, I would like to congratulate the new States
members of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) — the Republic of Cape Verde, the Republic of
the Congo, the Republic of Burundi, the Kingdom of
Bahrain and Nepal — and to wish them every success
in their activities within the Agency. The enlargement
of the IAEA’s membership is additional evidence of the
Agency’s growing authority.
As is known, Ukraine voluntarily renounced what
was then the world’s third largest nuclear weapons
arsenal. That is further evidence that we are a country
for which the peaceful use of nuclear energy is one of
the fundamental principles of sustainable development
for all nations seeking a more secure and predictable
environment.
We share the view that it is necessary to expand
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a safe and secure
manner, with reduced risk of proliferation. That is the
idea behind the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership,
which we joined on l6 September 2007 by signing its
Statement of Principles.
Regarding the Agency’s activity in evaluating the
worldwide long-term use of nuclear energy, my country
attaches special importance to the IAEA’s work in
studying the options for meeting energy demands. We
note and value the initiative of the Agency on the
creation of a non-discriminatory mechanism of nuclear
fuel supply. We believe that a guaranteed nuclear fuel
supply, in conformity with the principle of nuclear
non-proliferation and under the Agency’s auspices, will
be essential in improving the energy independence and
security of Member States, especially developing ones.
Since my country suffered the world’s worst
nuclear accident, at the Chernobyl nuclear plant, we
pay special attention to compliance with effective

07-57052

safety standards and to ensuring that these are in
accordance with internationally recognized norms.
Safety performance indicators at Ukrainian nuclear
power plants meet the requirements of national and
international norms in this sphere, which was
confirmed by Operational Safety Review Team
missions to Ukrainian nuclear power plants.
Nevertheless, my country continues to upgrade its
approaches to nuclear power plant safety improvement.
We do this at the national level and in the framework
of international cooperation. We also update legislation
in the field of nuclear energy use, and we strengthen
relevant institutional capabilities of the national
regulatory authority.
It is my pleasure to note that the enhancement of
nuclear security, the improvement of nuclear materials
and the security of radioactive sources worldwide
remain among the Agency’s priorities. My country
attaches special importance to activity aimed at
supporting the Illicit Trafficking Database because it
gives an opportunity to assess trends in this sphere for
further improvement, development and implementation
of measures aimed at securing the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. We have actively participated
in that programme since 1997, and we call upon all
Member States to engage more actively in exchanges
of information with the Database.
My country considers the Comprehensive
Safeguards System as an important tool to ensure the
absence of undeclared activities and of the diversion of
related nuclear materials. We are confident that the
safeguards agreements, together with additional
protocols, should constitute the IAEA verification
standard. Ukraine encourages all States that still have
not done so to sign, ratify and implement
comprehensive safeguards agreements without further
delay.
My country fulfils its international obligations in
accordance with the provisions of the Additional
Protocol on safeguards between Ukraine and the IAEA.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express our gratitude to the Agency for its assistance in
implementing the Additional Protocol in Ukraine.
We reaffirm our position that achievement of the
universality of the safeguards system must be
considered a priority task by the Agency. The IAEA
must devote special attention to safeguards

19

A/62/PV.37

implementation in countries striving to develop nuclear
activities.
It is well known that the issues of the mitigation
of consequences of the Chernobyl disaster and the
transformation of the shelter object at the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant into an environmentally sound
system remain among the priorities for Ukraine.
I am pleased to inform the General Assembly that
in September the contracts in the construction of a new
safe confinement over the shelter and of an interim
spent fuel storage facility for the Chernobyl site were
signed in Kyiv. We appreciate highly the efforts of all
the countries involved, contributors and donors to the
Chernobyl Shelter Fund and the Nuclear Safety
Account of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development for their valuable contributions that made
the conclusion of those contracts possible. We are
convinced that the implementation of the contracts will
be crucial for overcoming the consequences of
Chernobyl, and we call upon all parties concerned to
further foster this process.
Ukraine welcomes the long-standing partnership
with the IAEA in the implementation of radiological
support for the rehabilitation of the Chernobyl-affected
areas. We particularly welcome the efforts of the
Agency to enhance the radiation safety of the local
communities in the Chernobyl area, to improve the
long-term strategy of radiological monitoring and to
disseminate information.
During this General Assembly session, we will
submit a draft resolution on the strengthening of
international cooperation to mitigate and minimize the
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster. We shall look
forward to its adoption by consensus next month. In
the spirit of solidarity, we kindly invite other Member
States to join in sponsoring that document.
Ukraine shares the concerns regarding new
threats of nuclear terrorism. Therefore, we welcome
the development of effective measures aimed at
preventing the acquisition by terrorists of nuclear and
radiological weapons and the means of their delivery in
the framework of initiatives on the suppression of
nuclear terrorism, as well as other international and
regional programmes in this field. At this point, we
note with satisfaction the entry into force in July 2007
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

20

In conclusion, I would like to echo the words of
support expressed earlier regarding the report of the
IAEA, and to note again our appreciation for the
activities of the IAEA Director General, Mr. ElBaradei,
as well as for those of the Agency’s secretariat, in
strengthening international cooperation in the sphere of
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Ukraine will
continue to participate actively in the Agency’s
activities in order to help to fulfil this important
mission.
Ukraine fully supports the draft resolution
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency” (A/62/L.5).
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to join other delegations in
thanking Director General Mohamed ElBaradei for his
presentation of the annual report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
As a member of the IAEA, Kazakhstan takes
effective measures to meet its obligations in
strengthening the non-proliferation regime, as well as
in implementing the Additional Protocol to its
Safeguards Agreement. By renouncing our possession
of the world’s fourth-largest nuclear arsenal, we again
confirmed our country’s devotion to implementing its
international obligations. We have established and are
consistently improving a system to combat the illicit
transfer of nuclear material and technology. At the
same time, we call for careful reflection on the
introduction of new limits to the transfer of nuclear
technologies so as not to create unjustified barriers to
the peaceful use of nuclear power.
We in Kazakhstan are working, with IAEA
assistance, to implement the provisions of the new
version of the Code of Conduct on the Safety and
Security of Radioactive Sources.
In the town of Kurchatov, we have started work
on a nuclear technology park, which will be a basis for
the development of peaceful applications of nuclear
power, including the development of nuclear power in
our country. We have begun operating a heavy ion
accelerator and are continuing the construction of a
Kazakh research tokomak. We are also designing a
major nuclear medicine centre.
Kazakhstan has the second largest uranium
deposits in the world, and we clearly understand the
importance and responsibility of not using uranium for

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

any purposes other than peaceful ones. This year,
Kazakhstan signed an intergovernmental agreement
with Russia on the creation of an international uranium
enrichment centre in Angarsk. My colleague, the
representative of the Russian Federation, alluded to
this earlier today (see A/62/PV.36). We believe that the
creation of a multinational centre for uranium
enrichment would make it possible to ensure reliable
uranium fuel, while at the same time deferring the
proliferation of sensitive technology from the civilian
nuclear fuel cycle. We are an active participant in the
process of strengthening the non-proliferation regime,
both worldwide and in the Central Asian region.
Kazakhstan recognizes the right of each country
to develop peaceful nuclear technology. We must find
ways to resolve the conflict situations that have arisen
recently. These ways should not infringe on the right of
countries to technological development or their access
to knowledge and should restore the confidence of the
international community with regard to peaceful
nuclear activity. This is certainly a very complex task,
but the experience of the IAEA and of its Director
General with his firm and principled position makes it
possible for us to hope for a successful resolution to
this problem.
We need to improve the monitoring system
regarding a whole range of problems relating to nuclear
weapons and technology while at the same time
ensuring that the nuclear atom is used for exclusively
peaceful purposes, not for military purposes. We feel
that it is logical to create, under the auspices of the
IAEA, mechanisms, including international centres, to
ensure a reliable fuel supply for nuclear power stations
and to manage the secure storage and reprocessing of
waste at particularly sensitive stages of the fuel cycle.
It is clear that we will need to resolve political,
commercial and financial questions to do this and it is
possible that such proposals may seem somewhat
unrealistic today, but I think we have to start moving
along these lines. We do support the IAEA report and
note the statement made today by the Director General
and his initiative for new approaches to the peaceful
use of nuclear power. We believe that, once they have
been thoroughly discussed, we could agree on general
guidelines for developing innovative nuclear
technology.
In conclusion, we would like to express again our
firm support for the activities of the IAEA, and we

07-57052

assure you that Kazakhstan will continue to
consistently live up to its reputation as a responsible
international partner in this area. As is our custom,
Kazakhstan is one of the sponsors of the resolution to
be adopted today by the General Assembly on the
IAEA.
Mr. Abdallah (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate Mr. Kerim on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly and wish him
every success in his lofty post. We would also like to
express our appreciation and thanks to Mr. ElBaradei,
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his comprehensive report
to the General Assembly. This report reviews the action
and plans of the IAEA with regard to the transfer of
technology for peaceful purposes, the preservation of
the international nuclear security regime and the
strengthening of the security of nuclear installations.
This stresses the growing role of the IAEA, particularly
in the area of cooperation for the peaceful use of
nuclear energy and for development.
My delegation welcomes the draft resolution
presented by Chile on the report of the IAEA for 2006.
We support this draft resolution, in conformity with the
African Group’s position as expressed to the General
Assembly by the representative of Benin. On behalf of
the delegation of Sudan, it is a great pleasure to
welcome the representative of Chile and to
congratulate him on his election as Head of the Board
of Governors. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
IAEA in the area of cooperation with various scientific
bodies to improve agricultural crops and their
characteristics, as well as to develop vaccines, a
nuclear medicine programme, particularly in medicines
used in the fight against cancer, one of the deadliest
diseases of our time.
My delegation reaffirms the right of States,
without any discrimination, to undertake research and
produce nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with international conventions. We call on
States to preserve the credibility of the IAEA and its
vital role by refraining from exerting pressure on the
Agency or from interfering with its activities. In this
context, we ask that justice and equity be respected in
dealing with certain States, through dialogue and
negotiations, so as to come to suitable solutions in
accordance with international agreements.

21

A/62/PV.37

The delegation of the Sudan reaffirms its
established position to support the aspirations of all
geographical regions to make their regions free from
nuclear weapons, on the basis of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is
one of the main pillars of international peace and
security. The Middle East region is still a long way
away from achieving this goal. For decades now,
Israel, the only State in the region to possess nuclear
weapons, is opposed to such initiatives and refuses to
sign the NPT and its Additional Protocol, despite the
appeals and repeated calls of the international
community to that effect. Israel’s accession to the
Treaty and its Protocol is the only way to put an end to
tensions in the region and to open the path to peace for
everyone. Declaring the Middle East a nuclearweapon-free zone remains the best way to reinforce
regional security and to maintain international peace.
Helping developing countries to develop their
national legislation will complete the work of the
IAEA in implementing the programmes and plans for
technical cooperation. We hope that cooperation will
be promoted within the framework of the Agency’s
health programmes in order to activate and support
regional and continental projects in the fight against
mosquitoes that transmit malaria, the disease that kills
most people in Africa, so that our continent can
implement its economic and social development
programmes. We highly appreciate the work of the
IAEA on the African continent and we hope that the
Agency’s budget will be increased so that it can fight
poverty and diseases and support nuclear treatment
institutions, on the African continent.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/62/L.5, but before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote before the
vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to ten minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hong (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is, in
essence, an issue directly linked to the end of the
hostile policy of the United States and its nuclear threat
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A
peaceful resolution of the nuclear issue through
dialogue and negotiations is our consistent policy. This
is well proved by our efforts dedicated to the hard
process of resolving the issue since the early 1990s.

22

Our ultimate goal, with regard to the nuclear issue, is
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The 19 September 2005 Joint Statement and the
practical actions taken for its implementation thus far
are a clear indication of the unwavering political will
of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to realize the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will continue to implement faithfully its
obligations pursuant to the 19 September Joint
Statement on the basis of the principle of actions for
actions. That requires the United States to take political
measures such as removing the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from the list of States sponsors of
terrorism and terminating the obligations of the
Trading with the Enemy Act, as they have pledged to
do.
In particular, Japan should do positive things to
achieve progress in the ongoing Six-Party Talks, not
merely in words but in actions. Japan’s call for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1718
(2006) is nothing but a manifestation of their ulterior
intentions to block current progress. No issues will be
resolved by sanctions or pressure, as has been proven
by history.
As for the draft resolution before us, with strong
reservations on some paragraphs contained in IAEA
General Conference resolution GC(51)/RES/16, my
delegation wishes to inform the Assembly that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would like to
join in the consensus adoption of draft resolution
A/62/L.5, entitled “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency”, with the expectation of continued
progress in the six-party talks and a fair approach by
the Agency to the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before the Assembly
takes a decision on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/62/L.5. I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors of the text:
Belize, Botswana, Ethiopia, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Moldova, Morocco and Tunisia.

07-57052

A/62/PV.32

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.5?
It was so decided.
Draft
resolution
(resolution 62/2).

A/62/L.5

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Darwish (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Our delegation joined the consensus on the
draft resolution entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency” (A/62/L.5), guided by its
belief in the importance of the role of the Agency in
monitoring nuclear non-proliferation and guaranteeing
the right of all Member States, big and small alike, to
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
However, our delegation wishes to place on
record our disappointment and regret over the double
standards exhibited by several States in the various
successive conferences of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the issue of Israeli nuclear
capabilities and the Israeli nuclear threat. That has
resulted in the annual postponement of the discussion
of this question, while major international pressure is
being brought to bear on other States as they exercise
their sovereign right to possess nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
In that regard, we recall that this item has
remained on the agenda of the IAEA General
Conference for over a decade, during which time many
resolutions emerged in favour of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone and calling upon Israel to
abandon the nuclear option, to subject its nuclear
facilities to international inspection and to the
safeguards agreement, along with the other States in
the region, and to strive to establish a nuclear-weaponfree zone that has no place for the policies of nuclear
terrorism.
We should also mention that we were also
disappointed with the failure of the international
community to send a clear message to Israel, in which
it affirms the importance of good intentions and serious
work to implement the principle of nuclear non-

07-57052

proliferation in an equitable and transparent manner,
instead of the policy of nuclear hypocrisy practiced by
some States which will only lead to greater threats to
international peace and security.
Our delegation would like to emphasize that
continuous manoeuvring to silence the voice of the
truth vis-à-vis the Israeli nuclear threat and danger to
the Middle East will lead to frustration on the part of
the States and peoples of the region and will cause a
nuclear arms race, the results of which will be the
responsibility of the States that are covering up the
danger posed by Israeli nuclear weapons.
The annual vote which is usually held in the First
Committee on the draft resolution entitled “Threat of
nuclear proliferation in the Middle East” is clear
evidence of the unsound position of those States that
have mounted obstacles to the discussion of this item at
previous IAEA General Conferences. That is especially
true since the seventh preambular paragraph of this
year’s First Committee draft resolution (A/C.1/62/L.2)
refers to concerns about the continued presence of
nuclear facilities in the Middle East that are not subject
to the safeguards regime. The eighth preambular
paragraph of the same draft also notes that Israel
remains the only State in the Middle East that is not yet
a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Also, operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of the First
Committee’s draft resolution emphasize the importance
of Israel joining, without any delay, the NPT, and
having all its nuclear facilities subjected to
comprehensive IAEA safeguards. Israel is urged not to
develop, produce, test or possess nuclear weapons, but
to abandon the possession of such weapons as an
important confidence-building measure among all
States in the region and a step towards promoting
peace and security.
All those demands represent the international and
regional will to protect international and regional peace
and security from the threat of Israeli nuclear arms.
The Acting President: We have now heard the
only speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
87?
It was so decided.

23

A/62/PV.37

Organization of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw to
the attention of members that a revised programme of
work of the General Assembly has been re-issued as
document A/INF/62/4/Rev.1, for technical reasons.
Further to the announcement made at the 33rd
plenary meeting, on 24 October 2007, concerning the
programme of work, the following changes are
reflected in the revised version: the postponement to a
later date of the consideration of agenda item 11,
“Elimination of unilateral extraterritorial coercive
economic measures as a means of political and
economic compulsion”; agenda item 14, “Prevention of
armed conflict”; and agenda item 44, “Implementation
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.” The specific
meeting focused on developments under agenda item

24

116, “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, is now scheduled for Thursday afternoon,
6 December 2007.
Additionally, I wish to inform members that on
Wednesday afternoon, 31 October 2007, as the second
item, the General Assembly will take up sub-item (b)
of agenda item 66, “Follow-up to the outcome of the
special session on children”, for the purpose of taking
action on a draft decision submitted by the President of
the General Assembly. The draft decision is entitled
“Participation of children and non-governmental
organizations in the round tables of the
Commemorative High-level Plenary Meeting Devoted
to the Follow-up to the Outcome of the Special Session
on Children”. This will be issued under the symbol
A/62/L.8.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

07-57052
