S/PV.7858

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7858th meeting

Wednesday, 11 January 2017, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2016/1130)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00710 (E)
*1700710*

S/PV.7858

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.

expiration of the second and final mandate of President
Joseph Kabila, on 19 December.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2016/1130)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of the National
Episcopal Conference of the Congo.
Monseigneur Utembi is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

11/01/2017

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/1130, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The signing of this agreement represented a major
contribution to improving the situation, which, let us be
clear, could have erupted, because the political players
who had rejected the political agreement of 18 October
had maintained their position that the national and
provincial institutions would, on the evening of
19 December, become illegitimate.
It should also be pointed out that certain political
players have not yet signed on to the agreement, such
as the Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC),
although it recently indicated its readiness to do so in
the near future. It has stated that it has been reluctant
to sign on to the agreement because it believed that the
Rassemblement would benefit disproportionately from
the political transition arrangements, which currently
propose to give the post of Prime Minister and head
of the follow-up committee to representatives of
the Rassemblement.
In addition, members of the opposition, headed by
the current Prime Minister, Mr. Samy Badibanga, are
also showing some reluctance, maintaining that some of
the provisions of the 31 December agreement, namely,
those concerning the electoral process, are not realistic.
Prime Minister Badibanga and his Government are
clearly concerned about the political consequences for
them if a new Government of national unity were to be
put in place under the leadership of the Rassemblement.

Mr. Ladsous: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to update the Council on the
political and security developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the issuance of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/1130).

For its part, the presidential majority has itself sent
mixed signals regarding its support for the agreement. It
signed the agreement with reservations that have yet to
be clarified, and then criticized the agreement, stating
that the text was not inclusive enough — specifically
because the MLC and the members of the opposition
who are close to Prime Minister Badibanga had not yet
signed it.

As the Council is aware, on 31 December, under
the auspices of the National Episcopal Conference of
the Congo (CENCO), a political agreement was signed
between the signatories and non-signatories of the
political agreement of 18 October. That signing took
place at a critical juncture in the political life of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, when political
tensions were growing and violent incidents had taken
place in certain areas in the country following the

I would also note that prospects for a December
2017 election have finally improved. Major political,
financial, technical and logistical support will be
needed. Delays in bringing the voter register up to
date, in setting up a transition Government and in
implementing the provisions of the 31 December
agreement could negatively affect the current timetable.
We must therefore do our best to prevent delays in the
electoral process.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.

2/7

17-00710

11/01/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Nevertheless, the signing of the agreement opens
up new possibilities for a peaceful resolution to the
political deadlock. We must therefore spare no effort
in ensuring that all stakeholders commit to it and that
it is implemented in good faith. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Secretariat
will remain active but discreet in their support for the
Congolese political actors and will encourage them to
continue to demonstrate their flexibility and ability
to compromise.
CENCO, which has made commendable efforts
in that regard, will continue to enjoy our support in
ensuring that all Congolese stakeholders adhere to the
agreement, for barring that, its implementation would
be difficult, and that could only have negative political
and security consequences.
(spoke in English)
Before I turn to the security situation, I wish to
express my deep concern about reports of human
rights violations and acts of violence in Kinshasa and
other cities across the country on 19 and 20 December.
As indicated in separate reports, the repression of
demonstrations by national security forces and clashes
between those forces and demonstrators resulted,
allegedly, in the extrajudicial killing of at least 40
civilians and the death of two police officers — one
killed by demonstrators and the other by a stray bullet.
We know that some demonstrations turned violent, with
demonstrators looting and destroying public property,
resulting in at least 140 people injured and 683 people
arrested by national security forces — 291 of whom
have since been prosecuted or released.
It is important to encourage the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to initiate a full
investigation into the events that led to the excessive
use of force and loss of life, and to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable.
I will now turn to the security situation in the
eastern part of the country, which remains very fragile.
In addition to the threat posed by foreign armed groups,
namely the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the
Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), the activities of militia groups are on the
rise in many parts of the country. That phenomenon is
driven, in part, by the escalation of deep-rooted, longstanding conflicts among ethnic communities. It is also
driven by the mobilization, particularly in December,

S/PV.7858

of militia groups, some of which have links to political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the diaspora.
The spillover effects of the instability in
neighbouring countries, notably South Sudan and
Burundi, are already being felt in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with a risk that they will
continue to grow. There are now around 70,000
South Sudanese refugees who entered Haut-Uélé and
Ituri provinces over the past six months, resulting in
significant humanitarian challenges. Continued reports
of infiltration by elements of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition into refugee
camps and elsewhere in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo represent a major cause for concern. Efforts are
under way to relocate refugee sites further away from
the border.
MONUSCO, acting in support of the Congolese
national security forces, continues its efforts to counter
the destabilizing activities of armed groups such as the
ADF and the FDLR. Limited progress has been made
in that regard, although much remains to be done to
sustainably degrade the capacity of those groups. That
will ultimately require long-term military engagement,
combined with efforts by the national authorities to
address issues linked to the longer-term stabilization of
the country and the extension of State authority.
In conclusion, I would encourage Council
members to continue calling on Congolese political
actors to swiftly endorse and agree on implementation
arrangements for the 31 December agreement, and to
put in place a transitional Government of national unity.
Failure to do so risks delaying the holding of elections
and greatly increasing the risk of renewed political crisis
and increased violence across the country. Needless to
say, regional and international actors should maintain
strong support for the implementation of the agreement
and the holding of elections, as soon as feasible.
MONUSCO, for its part, will continue to work
closely with the authorities to address the increasing
threat posed by armed groups to the civilian population,
through a combination of political and security
initiatives, since many of the security issues in the east
of the country can only be resolved through meaningful
political engagement by authorities at all levels.
MONUSCO will continue to support those efforts.
We will engage with Council members, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government and

17-007103/7

S/PV.7858

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

other key partners in the coming weeks to determine
how the Mission should adjust to the prevailing political
and security situation and how it can support the timely
implementation of the 31 December agreement. We will
return, in due course, with our recommendations for the
Security Council’s consideration, while also working
with MONUSCO to adjust its priorities and posture,
within the existing mandate, so that it can provide the
best support.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.
Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): On
behalf of the National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo (CENCO), over which I preside, I convey my
best wishes to the members of the Security Council for
2017. Our Conference extends its heartfelt thanks to the
Security Council for its multifaceted support during
its good offices mission to help the Congolese political
class and civil society in their search for a peaceful and
consensual solution to the country’s crisis.
We especially welcome the 4 January presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2017/1) on
the comprehensive and inclusive political agreement
negotiated under the auspices of the Kinshasa
Archdiocese and signed on 31 December. We call
on the Security Council to remain vigilant, and we
call on stakeholders to support the comprehensive
implementation of the agreement, particularly as it
relates to the holding of elections in 2017.
Maintaining and building civilian peace is urgent
during this period in order to ensure responsible
and consensual management of institutions prior to
and during the elections, to mobilize the necessary
resources to meet vital social needs and to organize
the vote. In that regard, the parties to the agreement
negotiated under the auspices of the Kinshasa
Archdiocese call upon the international community to
assist the Independent National Electoral Commission
by providing logistical, financial and technical support
in order to ensure a smooth electoral process.
The political commitments negotiated under the
auspices of the Kinshasa Archdiocese provide, inter
alia, for the establishment of a national council for
overseeing the agreement and process, as well as for
a Government of national unity. It is critical that such
bodies be set up as soon as the agreed timetable has
been implemented in the near future. The effectiveness
4/7

11/01/2017

of such institutions depends not only on management
skills but also, in particular, on good faith and political
will, as well as the legal tools and financial resources
made available to them.
The National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo calls on the Congolese State, the international
community and the parties to the agreement to
advocate for the appropriate measures needed to
ensure the security of the electoral process. It asks the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the
Government in strengthening its intervention capacity
and in maintaining peace in the country, in particular
in east Katanga and central Kasaï. The parties to the
agreement have closely examined the cases of political
and opinion prisoners, political refugees and those in
exile, any legal action being taken against politicians,
the closing of media firms, violations of fundamental
freedoms, and the sanctions imposed upon Congolese
people by certain Western Governments. Our
Conference asks the Congolese Government and
the international community to take the appropriate
measures to ease the social and political tension. Such
measures should respect human rights.
The Congolese people warmly and happily
welcomed the signing of the comprehensive and
inclusive agreement negotiated under the auspices
of the Kinshasa Archdiocese as a key way to end the
political crisis and usher in social peace. It asks one
thing of the international community and that is to
vigorously assist the Congolese people in its efforts to
ensure that the agreement is successfully implemented,
until presidential and legislative elections are scheduled
and held.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I thank
Monseigneur Utembi for his comprehensive briefing
and for the tireless mediation efforts made by the
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo under
his leadership.
I believe that this is an excellent example of conflict
prevention in practice, for which Member States
expressed overwhelming support during our discussion
here during yesterday’s open debate (see S/PV.7857).
In that vein, the Security Council, in its presidential
statement last week (S/PRST/2017/1), welcomed the
signing of the agreement and expressed the desire for
its speedy implementation, which we all hope will allow
17-00710

11/01/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue on
the path to long-term peace and stability.
We heard the appeal of Monseigneur Utembi to the
Security Council and to the international community
to support the implementation of the agreement in any
way possible.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank the President of the National
Episcopal Conference of the Congo, Monseigneur
Marcel Utembi, for participating in today’s meeting,
and Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his
briefing, which very clearly summarized the report
(S/2016/1130) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the country. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, his entire team
and the personnel of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) should be recognized for their
tireless and invaluable efforts.
I wish to reiterate Uruguay’s commitment to
stability and peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, not only as an elected member of the
Security Council but also as a consistent MONUSCO
troop-contributing country for the past 16 years.
Uruguay welcomes the signing of the comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement that was adopted
in Kinshasa on 31 December 2016 and acknowledges
the important mediation role played by the National
Episcopal Conference of the Congo in facilitating the
agreement. In the same vein, we encourage the political
parties that have not yet done so to sign the agreement.
The agreement is a significant step forward in the quest
for a political solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but, more important, it require
much effort is its implementation. In that regard,
Uruguay hopes that political leaders will continue
displaying a spirit of flexibility and understanding
during the implementation process, which should be
done in good faith and in all aspects.
The main aims of the agreement are, on the one
hand, to ensure the inclusive management of the
executive prior to and during the elections and, on
the other, to ensure the organization of national and
provincial presidential and legislative elections that are
peaceful, credible, inclusive and held without delay, no
later than December 2017. Such elections should give

S/PV.7858

rise to a peaceful hand-over of power. Stability, peace,
development and the consolidation of constitutional
democracy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are at stake. The messages conveyed to the Security
Council mission in November 2016 were clear in
that regard.
Although the recent political developments in
the country lead us to be optimistic about the future,
Uruguay must express its concern about human rights
violations, which, according to the statistics contained
in the report (S/2016/1130) of the Secretary-General,
show a considerable increase in comparison with those
mentioned in the previous report (S/2016/833). The
report indicates that, between January and 30 November
2016, MONUSCO documented 4,599 human rights
violations, of which 2,915 were committed by State
actors and 1,684 by armed groups. As we stated, those
figures show a significant increase in comparison with
the 3,877 violations documented in 2015.
In addition, MONUSCO has also reported a steady
reduction in the political space, with an increasing
number of restrictions on civil and political rights,
including violations of the freedoms of expression
and association. In that regard, Uruguay implores
the Government, as the Security Council has done
on repeated occasions, to respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to exercise the highest level
of moderation in response to protests. It also implores
opposition forces to show greater responsibility by
ensuring that their demonstrations are peaceful.
Finally, Uruguay expresses its determination
to support the implementation of the 31 December
agreement and to monitor developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession of
your country, Sweden, to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2017, and to tell you
how much my delegation and I are honoured to see you
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today. I
would next like to thank you, Sir, as well, for giving me
an opportunity to address the Council at this meeting
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Finally, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Román Oyarzun

17-007105/7

S/PV.7858

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain, who
managed with devotion and competence the discussions
in the Council last month.
My delegation takes note of the report (S/2016/833)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is before the Council for its
consideration, and wishes to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
who introduced it. While we fully appreciate the
content of the report, we feel it is important to revisit a
number of aspects that he raised in order to make a few
brief comments. I will begin by discussing the issue of
dialogue and the political agreement, developments in
the electoral process, the security situation in relation
to the presence of armed groups, and the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process.
Let me remind you, Mr. President, of the Council’s
visit to Kinshasa in November, during which its
members conferred with various Congolese political
actors. During the meeting that the Council held with
the highest authority in my country, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic,
the President told members about the 18 October 2016
political agreement signed by the parties to the national
dialogue, which took place at Cité de l’Union Africaine,
noting that the agreement was open for accession to all
Congolese political entities. With the aim of perfecting
the agreement by seeking greater inclusiveness, the
President granted a mission of good offices to the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO).
The signing of the political agreement, on
31 December 2016, among the Majorité présidentielle,
the opposition having participated in the dialogue at the
Cité de l’Union Africaine and the opposition regrouped
under the banner of the so-called Rassemblement et
alliés, marks an important step for my country towards
consensus on the organization of the elections and
the management of the transition of the country in a
calm climate. In order to facilitate its implementation,
as Council members know, the President renewed
his confidence in CENCO and asked it to continue
consultations with the political class as a whole to
define the practical modalities for the implementation
of the agreement.
With regard to the elections, in his address to the
nation on 31 December 2016, the President expressed,
on the basis of the CENCO political agreement, his
6/7

11/01/2017

determination to continue without delay the process
already under way for the organization of timely
elections, in accordance with the timetable to be set
by the National Independent Electoral Commission
(CENI). In that context, the process of revising the
electoral rolls, begun in July 2016, is continuing
throughout the various provinces of the country. As
previously reported to the Council (see S/PV.7826), 12
of the country’s 26 provinces are already covered by
enrolment operations. My Government wishes to thank
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the continued substantial logistical support it has
provided the CENI as part of those efforts.
On the security front, the report under review
highlights the continuing presence in the east of our
country of foreign residual negative forces, such
as terrorists from the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), the Lord’s Resistance Army and some national
armed groups. The Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), with the assistance
of MONUSCO, has made considerable efforts against
those negative forces and armed groups. As the report
points out, our army has made many sacrifices in
this struggle. Nevertheless, it remains determined to
continue the fight until complete eradication to allow
our citizens residing in that part of the country to live
in peace in a sustainable way.
To achieve that objective, we believe that together
we must review our working methods. In order to
eradicate all of the armed groups, the Council has often
insisted on collaboration between the FARDC and
MONUSCO. It seems to us that, despite the resumption
of collaboration, the results are falling short of what
we expected. We believe that the transformation of the
force engaged in MONUSCO, notably the replacement
of the Intervention Brigade with the rapidly deployable
battalions, has not been effective in this struggle.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
country, wishes to live in peace and to safeguard its
good relations with all neighbouring States. In this
perspective, you will agree with us, Mr. President,
that, while my country is working hard to eradicate
the foreign negative forces mentioned previously, it is
not normal that, because of the forces that have come
to assist it to bring home peace, its territory has once
again become a sanctuary for armed combatants from
a neighbouring country. Indeed, as Council members
17-00710

11/01/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

know, South Sudanese fighters are now on Congolese
territory. By a letter of 9 January 2017, we informed the
Council of the conditions under which those combatants
arrived. Without going into detail on the matter, my
Government would be grateful to the Council, taking
into account the responsibility of the United Nations in
this situation to take all the measures deemed necessary,
as has already been communicated to MONUSCO in the
note verbale sent to it on 1 October 2016, to evacuate
those fighters from our territory.
The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement process is at the heart of peacekeeping
activities, not only to achieve stability in the sectors
affected by the conflict, but also to eliminate the threat
posed by armed groups. To that end, as I just said, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot continue to
be an oasis for foreign armed groups. Neighbouring
countries must adopt policies that encourage the return
of their nationals living in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which will reduce tension and remove
suspicion and thereby restore confidence in the region
and peace in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The policy of the voluntary surrender of foreign
armed groups applied to date has shown its limits.
We need to examine and see how fast the repatriation
process can be accelerated. In that context, the process

S/PV.7858

of repatriating the FDLR and their families in the
transit camps in Kanyabayonga, North Kivu, Walungu,
South Kivu, and in Kisangani in Tshopo, must also be
accelerated. My Government cannot understand the
fact that the appeals launched some years ago to the
international community for the repatriation of those
combatants have not yet received a favourable reply. In
the same vein, my Government wishes to put an end to
the case of the Mouvement du 23 mars in Uganda and
Rwanda, and calls on these two neighbouring States,
which continue to accommodate them, to facilitate
their repatriation.
I cannot end my remarks without once again
expressing to the Council the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the efforts made by the United Nations
to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our country and to guarantee its peace and stability.
Finally, on the threshold of this new year, my delegation
wishes to express to all the members of the Council its
best wishes for 2017.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.

17-007107/7
