S/PV.7224

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7224th meeting

Wednesday, 23 July 2014, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2014/480)
Third report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 2110 (2013) (S/2014/485)

14-48015 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1448015*

S/PV.7224

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.

pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013), related to relations
between Iraq and Kuwait.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Third report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2014/480)
Third report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 2110 (2013)
(S/2014/485)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Iraq to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Mladenov,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Baghdad.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/480, which contains the third
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013). I also
wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/485, which contains the third report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2110 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Please allow me to begin by first
wishing a blessed holy month of Ramadan to all our
Muslim friends and colleagues, and by saying to them
Ramadan kareem.
I am honoured to present to the Council today two
reports on behalf of the Secretary-General. The first is
pursuant to resolution 2110 (2013), on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the most recent developments in Iraq. The second is

2/8

23/07/2014

In my first and second briefings to the Security
Council in November of last year (see S/PV.7068) and in
March this year (see S/PV.7149), I spoke of how eastern
Syria and western Iraq were becoming one battlefield.
On 29 June, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) — also known as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham or simply the Islamic State — took down a
military outpost on the Iraq/Syria border and declared
control over parts of both countries. This group, which
is listed under the United Nations sanctions regime
as an Al-Qaida affiliate, has taken over Iraq’s second
largest city and is now in control of about one-third
of the country. In so doing, it took some $450 million
from the coffers of the Iraqi Central Bank in Mosul.
It controls critical infrastructure, including oil fields
and pipelines. It has substantially increased its military
capabilities.
From a splinter group of Al-Qaida, ISIL today has
grown to be a complex threat to peace and security in
Iraq, the entire region and beyond. Its terrorist acts
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivations. Recruiting and using foreign fighters,
and engaging in murder, hostage-taking, kidnappings,
gross human rights violations are all reasons why the
international community and the Security Council
should demand in no uncertain terms that ISIL cease all
hostilities and atrocities, and call upon Member States
to cooperate in efforts to enforce existing sanctions
and hold accountable the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of these horrific terrorist acts, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
ISIL’s strategy has been clear from the very
beginning. It has aimed to establish a permanent
foothold beyond the control of the authorities through
terror and violence. It has sought to radicalize people
by exploiting legitimate grievances.It has manipulated
divisions within Iraqi society with the intention of
exacerbating sectarian divides, fomenting social
unrest and undermining the Government and elected
representatives.
Just over the course of the past few weeks, minorities
in the Ninewa province have come under direct attack
by ISIL. Christians have been given an ultimatum to
convert, pay a tax, leave, or face imminent execution.
Shia, Turkmen, Yazidis and Shabaks are facing
systematic abductions, killings or the destruction of
their property. The houses of minority residents in the
14-48015

23/07/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

city have been marked. Tens of thousands of people
have been displaced or forced to flee and seek refuge,
while many others have been executed or kidnapped.
These repugnant acts, which form one part of a
growing tragedy of displacement, have been strongly
condemned by the Iraqi Parliament, Government and
religious authorities, as well as the Secretary-General
and the Security Council.
Since the beginning of the year, an estimated
1.2 million Iraqis have lost their homes. More than
three-quarters of them are displaced in areas that
are not under the Government’s control or in highly
insecure zones. Millions more remain trapped in areas
of fighting. The United Nations has identified over
1,600 sites of displacement across the country. The
picture emerging is highly concerning.
The governorates of the Kurdistan region of Iraq
now host over 300,000 newly displaced, and their
capacity to respond has been overwhelmed. This new
influx joins the more than 225,000 Syrian refugees
who had already sought protection in the three Kurdish
provinces of Iraq. I would like to commend the efforts
of the thousands of host families across Iraq and all
local and national officials who are involved in the
humanitarian response.
Let me assure the Council that the United Nations
will continue to work closely and in coordination with
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government to address the urgent humanitarian needs
of those displaced by the current conflict. Let me also
be unequivocally clear. We will spare no effort to reach
all who have been affected by the fighting, no matter
where they are.

S/PV.7224

monitors and reports on the impact of the conflict
on civilians and civilian infrastructure. The Mission
also conducts direct advocacy with political, civic
and religious leaders with the aim of mitigating the
effects of the violence and by raising the awareness of
all parties to the conflict concerning their obligations
to protect civilians. UNAMI and the United Nations
country team are devoting all available resources to
ensuring the coordination of the delivery of life-saving
humanitarian assistance to civilians impacted by the
violence.
Despite our efforts, however, between January
and June this year, 5,500 were killed and some 12,000
wounded. Almost 900 people have died in July alone.
I extend my deepest condolences to the families of all
civilian casualties, to the victims of terrorism, and to
the members of the Iraqi security forces who have lost
their lives in the line of duty.
UNAMI has serious concerns regarding the safety
and protection of civilians in areas affected by violence,
particularly the members of vulnerable groups, such
as women, female-headed households, children, the
elderly, persons with disabilities, and diverse ethnic,
religious and cultural communities. We have received
reports of women being targeted and having severe
restrictions placed on their freedoms in areas under
ISIL control. I am also alarmed by the killing and
maiming of children due to indiscriminate attacks,
including shelling on populated areas, and the ongoing
recruitment and use of children as young as 12 by all
parties.

I would like to strongly welcome the Government
of Iraq’s decision to allocate $400 million to address
the needs of the displaced. The United Nations is ready
to assist with the disbursement of the funds and to help
augment the Iraqi Government’s efforts to that end. The
United Nations stands ready to work with the authorities
to take expeditious steps to establish a comprehensive
registration system that covers all of Iraq, and will help
assist with tracking displacement. I would also like
to thank Member States for their generosity, and in
particular the recent pledge by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia of $500 million, which will allow the United
Nations to continue to provide life-saving support,
including shelter suited to both winter and summer.

I would like to call upon all actors to the conflict
to ensure that human rights standards and international
humanitarian law are respected and upheld throughout
all phases of the armed conflict, and to ensure the
protection of innocent civilians, social infrastructure,
and cultural and historic heritage. The Government of
Iraq must do all it can to hold accountable any individual
who commits violations of international humanitarian
law or violations or abuses of human rights law.
Civilians must be guaranteed that they can leave areas
affected by the violence in dignity and safety, and
must have their right to access humanitarian assistance
respected. All parties must establish humanitarian
corridors, especially for besieged communities, and
respect the right of impartial organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance for those in need.

The spreading violence is having a grave impact
on the human rights situation in Iraq. UNAMI closely

As the cycle of violence and instability in Iraq
continues, many ask what can be done to turn the tide. It

14-480153/8

S/PV.7224

The situation concerning Iraq

is clear that Iraq will never be as it was before the fall of
Mosul. While ISIL remains the most significant threat
to the sovereignty of the country, it has been joined in a
temporary alliance of convenience by a number of other
groups with different goals. Former Baathist militants
and Sunni tribes have used the cover of ISIL’s advances
to join hands. Their aims are wide ranging; some are
broadly sectarian, others are anti-Government or seek
the overhaul of the constitutional order.
ISIL and associated armed groups have waged
fierce battles against the Iraqi security forces, and have
captured large portions of the governorates of Ninewa,
Anbar, Salah al-Din and Kirkuk, and parts of Diyalah.
They pose a direct threat to vital infrastructure,
including the Bayji refinery and a number of airbases,
access to which would substantially increase their
financial and security resources. In response to the
crisis, forces from the Kurdistan region of Iraq, also
known as the Peshmerga, have moved into areas vacated
by Iraqi security forces, including in the disputed
internal boundary areas, and are currently engaged in
battles with ISIL as well.
The solution to the crisis cannot be found in the
toolbox of military operations alone. If any security
plan is to succeed, it will need to be broadly accepted
across the political, sectarian and ethnic divide; it will
need to be implemented in full cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government; and it must be implemented in line with
international humanitarian law and human rights
standards. And there is also one condition sine qua non
that should be met for any security plan to succeed,
and that is a very simple condition — everyone should
stand together against terrorism. No one can disengage,
as the threat affects all communities. Everyone should
support the legitimate national institutions of Iraq.
However, we must be absolutely clear — a military
solution is not enough, and alone it will certainly not be
effective. In fact, it will be impossible without addressing
the root causes of violence and implementing a political
and social package that addresses the concerns of
all communities without exception. A political road
map and a comprehensive vision for re-engaging all
communities in the country’s decision-making process
in a serious manner are vital. Demands from Sunnis and
all other components of Iraqi society that are legitimate
and constitutionally sound should be addressed without
delay. The impasse between Baghdad and Erbil must
be solved immediately. Existing disparities in poverty

4/8

23/07/2014

and development also breed legitimate resentment,
including among some Shia communities in the south
of the country.
Addressing those and other such concerns can only
be done through adherence to the democratic political
process and the Constitution. A new Parliament was
elected in late April in an election that saw a turnout
of over 62 per cent. Last week, the political blocs
demonstrated that they can reach agreement, when they
elected the Speaker of the Council of Representatives and
his deputies. The momentum generated by the election
of the legislature’s leadership must now translate into
the election of the leadership of the executive branch,
including a new president and a new Government.
Iraq cannot afford a protracted Government formation
process, as the current threats continue to challenge the
existence of the Iraqi State.
At the polls, the Iraqi people did not give any
single political bloc a full majority in the Parliament.
The message of those who voted has been clear — all
groups must compromise and cooperate in bringing
the country together. At a time like this, for any
Administration to succeed, it must have substantial
support from the communities and work on the basis of a
clear programme that saves the country from terrorism,
sectarianism and division. Iraq needs and must receive
regional, interregional and international support.
Iraq alone cannot face the current challenges without
support from its allies, the region and the international
community. The threat of ISIL is not and will not be
limited to Iraq alone. Therefore, serious engagement
among various stakeholders is urgently needed.
Allow me to briefly turn to developments in the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq and address the deterioration
of relations between Baghdad and Erbil.
On 3 July, the President of the Kurdistan Region
declared his intention to address the current political
impasse through a referendum for independence because
of an enduring deadlock over a number of critical issues,
including the hydrocarbon and revenue-sharing laws,
the status of the Peshmerga, the adoption of the 2014
federal budget and the implementation of Article 140
of the Iraqi Constitution. The Federal Government in
Baghdad has rejected all moves towards independence
as unconstitutional.
I would like to once again highlight that the 2014
federal budget draft law remains outstanding, seven
months into the fiscal year. As part of the ongoing

14-48015

23/07/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

dispute, the Kurdistan Regional Government has not
received its anticipated budget allocations since March.
That has led to the inability of the Regional Government
to pay public sector salaries. In an apparent reaction,
Erbil has also begun to export oil independently, which
has been challenged by the federal Government. Despite
UNAMI’s efforts to find acceptable compromises,
strong disagreements remain.
Relations between Baghdad and Erbil have further
deteriorated due to the exchange of harsh statements
between their respective political leaders, which has
led to Kurdish ministers suspending their participation
in the Council of Ministers of Iraq. I call upon all
political leaders to refrain from radical statements
and accusations that may further complicate the
situation. Indeed, today I am encouraged because
Kurdish Members of Parliament in the Iraqi Council
of Representatives continue to engage actively in the
political process. UNAMI stands ready to continue
providing its good offices and legal and technical
support to the process.
I also wish to present today the third report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/480) on the issues of
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013). Iraq’s
relations with Kuwait continue to show strong signs of
improvement. Kuwait’s donation of $10 million towards
humanitarian relief for internally displaced persons in
Iraq demonstrated its goodwill towards its neighbour.
The normalization of relations is on a strong footing,
and I am hopeful that the two countries will only draw
more closely together, thus mutually benefitting from
the increased closeness. The major element standing
in the way of the relations reaching their full potential
is the current instability in Iraq. As long turmoil
continues, decisions on matters such as the missing
Kuwaiti persons and property are likely to take more
time and effort.
The Kuwaiti Government is understandably
anxious that the security situation and the political
stalemate in Iraq and its attendant demands will leave
UNAMI with little time or space for its mandated role
on the missing Kuwaiti persons and property. I wish to
assure it and the Security Council that our commitment
to that humanitarian endeavour remains clear and that
Iraq remains devoted to implementing its obligations.
The present report speaks of our efforts not only to
keep the issue at the forefront, but also to come up with

S/PV.7224

new ideas to see how we could move forward together
on a subject that has eluded closure for a decade now
in relation to the missing persons and since 1990 in
relation to the national archives.
In consultation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross, we have identified the International
Commission on Missing Persons as a partner to Iraq. We
believe that cost-effective scientific and technological
means could help overcome many of the challenges in
the search for missing persons. It is my hope that the
situation in Iraq will stabilize to enable Governmental
consideration of such proposals so that new means and
techniques can be employed in the search operations.
I am also pleased that an Iraqi witness approached
UNAMI to identify a grave site in Kuwait. UNAMI
will work closely with the relevant Iraqi authorities to
take that witness to the site. It is our hope that those
efforts might also lead to tangible results.
The Secretary-General has called for more regular
contact between the joint Iraq-Kuwait interministerial
committee on missing Kuwaiti property in order to build
a better understanding through the practical means of
finding the national archives. I am pleased that Iraq and
Kuwait have agreed that the property committee will
now meet twice a year. The Iraqi Prime Minister made
it clear to me that he will act on any information on
the archives to help resolve the issues. UNAMI stands
ready to assist Iraqi efforts in that direction. I also wish
to inform the Council that we stand ready to facilitate
more contacts between the two countries at all levels.
Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations are excellent at a Governmental
level. It is time that those relations trickle down to a
people-to-people level.
The Kuwaiti leadership has reiterated its desire to
broaden and deepen its relationship with Iraq. Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Buzstin’s proposal for a joint meeting of young Iraqi
and Kuwaiti artists in Kuwait to exhibit their talents
together as part of a United Nations event has been
enthusiastically welcomed by the Kuwaiti leaders. The
security situation in Iraq permitting, UNAMI, with the
cooperation of United Nations Development Programme
and the two Governments, will pursue the idea further.
Iraq-Kuwait relations can also result in dividends for
the region with Iraq’s relations being strengthened with
all other countries in the Gulf neighbourhood. For my
part, I intend to visit Kuwait at the earliest opportunity
after the Eid to pursue the dossier and further IraqKuwait cooperation.

14-480155/8

S/PV.7224

The situation concerning Iraq

In closing, I would like to express my gratitude for
the trust that has been placed in me by the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council to lead the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq. I want to the note
before the Council my personal gratitude to my team
in Baghdad, in Erbil and in Basra, and to everyone
in UNAMI and the United Nations country team for
their commitment to undertaking their political,
humanitarian, developmental and support tasks in a
high-risk environment. Particular gratitude is due to our
security colleagues and the Fijian and Nepalese United
Nations guard units. I look forward to continuing to
fulfil the mandate entrusted to UNAMI by the Security
Council and I express my deep and sincere appreciation
to the Government and the people of Iraq for their warm
and cordial welcome.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Rwanda on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for its great efforts to preside over the Council’s
business. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for
agreeing to convene twice at the request of my country
to discuss the recent developments in Iraq. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well
as his team, in Baghdad and New York, especially in
the difficult circumstances our country is experiencing.
Moreover, I wish to welcome tomorrow’s upcoming
visit by the Secretary-General and his team to Iraq at
this delicate stage for my country, as a gesture of his
ongoing support and the support of United Nations
bodies for the political operation and to foster the
establishment of democratic institutions and the
formation of a new Government of national unity.
Notwithstanding the recent terrorist threats in Iraq,
in accordance with the Constitution, the political effort
is fully under way. The third parliamentary elections
in Iraq took place on time and, by every international
standard, they were a success. More than 13 million
Iraqis came out to defy terrorist groups and security
difficulties to vote. The Supreme Court confirmed
those results on 16 June. The first meeting of the
Iraqi Parliament took place on 1 July. The Speaker of
Parliament and his two deputies were chosen on 15 July.

6/8

23/07/2014

This week, the Parliament will elect the President of
the Republic, who will have the task of nominating
the Prime Minister and forming a new Government
within 30 days. Thereafter, that will be voted on and
achieve support from the entire Iraqi peple, including
all factions.
In our statements before the Council, we
have repeatedly emphasized the importance of
cooperation between States and combating terrorism
as an internationl scourge. Any reluctance to combat
terrorism, whatever the pretext, is a grave error that
will inevitably lead to strengthening international
terrorist organizations, with spillover effects in the
countries of the region. We have therefore continued
to work on the consequences of the continuation of the
conflict in Syria, especially with the establishment of
terrorist organizations such as Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). What we have
warned about is precisely what has happened.
A stream of armed terrorist groups have crossed
the border from Syria into Iraq. Early last month, with
the growth in the strength of ISIS, which enjoys full
logistical, financial and military support from external
sources, ISIS launched a broad attack in areas in the
north and west of our countries, involving a number
of major cities. As a result, Iraqi security forces had
to withdraw. In areas controlled by the terrorist ISIS
organization there have been abductions of diplomats
and the perpetration of massacres against civilians,
as well as mass executions — all of which constitute
war crimes, as United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Navi Pillay has stated.
Terrorist attacks in Iraqi governorates have led to
a mass exodous that has affected more than 1 million
people, who have fled to the Kurdistan region and to
other parts in central and southern Iraq in order to
escape ISIS oppression. Refugees are enduring harsh
conditions during the hot summer, which coincides
with the fast during the holy month of Ramada. The
Government of Iraq, in cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the relevant
United Nations agencies operating in Iraq, is attempting
to mitigate the suffering as much as possible so that the
security forces can regain control over Iraqi territory.
ISIS has established a caliphate State in the
territories it controls, changing its name to the Islamic
State. In recent weeks, as part of an organized and
systematic effort, it has targeted religious facilities and
destroyed holy sites of both Christians and Muslims. It is
14-48015

23/07/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

also undertaking so-called sex jihad. The terrorist ISIS
organization has issued a decree to compel Christians
to pay heavy penalties or convert to Islam, be murdered
or leave the city of Mosul. As a result, that city is
now devoid of Christians. In that regard, we would
like to express our gratitude to the Security Council
for issuing a statement on Monday 21 July in which it
strongly condemned the persecution of minorities in
Iraq by the terrorist ISIS organization. The most recent
report issued by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human rights, of 18 July, confirms
what the Iraqi Government had asserted, namely, that
the flagrant violations perpetrated by ISIS last month
were crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Iraqi security forces are currently working with
volunteers and tribes in order to confront terrorism
and gradually to restore control. They are doing so
while respecting international humanitarian law and
attempting to avoid civialian casualties as much as
possible, in line with the Iraqi Constitution, which
provides that no one can be arrested or detained without
a warrant and that prisoners have a right to defend
themselves at every stage of an investigation.
Iraq is implementing a balanced international policy
aimed at establishing cooperation with neighbouring
countries and the rest of the world. We have enhanced
our relations with the fraternal State of Kuwait through
a number of agreements. Diplomatic relations are being
restored through the opening of new Consulates in
various Iraqi cities. Iraq is also making every effort to
find the remains of missing Kuwaitis and that country’s
national archive. In cooperation with other Government
authorities, the Ministry for Human Rights is carrying
out excavations and investigations in the governorates
of Karbala and Al-Muthanna. Although no remains
have yet been found, Iraq is determined to achieve
tangible results in that regard. Moreover, cooperation
with the Arab Republic of Egypt has been enhanced, as
have relations with Iran, through the signing of bilateral
economic and legal cooperation agreements.
Iraq continues to protect the residents of Camp
Hurriya in Baghdad and to provide them with all of the
necessary humanitarian assistance, even though they
belong to the Mujaheddin e Khalq terrorist group. In
that respect, we commend the efforts of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
in her efforts to relocate the residents of that camp to
other countries and thereby end their illegal status in
Iraq, a situation which has been ongoing for more than
two decades.

S/PV.7224

We call on the international community to fulfil its
obligations to the residents of that camp and to move
them to third countries, especially given that my country
has fulfilled all of its international commitments in that
respect.
The Iraqi political leadership is aware that the
national unity Government must take decisive steps to
protect the stability of Iraq as a homogeneous State.
Iraq can overcome the status quo by resolving problems
related to national unity, participation and citizenship.
Moreover, the stability of Iraq is pivotal to the
stability of the region as a whole, but no Government
could possibly ensure political stability in the absence
of security. The terrorist acts that are taking place in
Iraq must be countered strictly through international
and regional cooperation, so that Iraq can restore peace
and security. Hence last month, the Iraqi Government,
in two letters addressed to the Security Council,
stressed the importance of the cooperation of Member
States with Iraq in the joint fight against terrorism. It
specified its logistical requirements and what it needs
Council members and other States Members of the
United Nations to do.
The support of the Security Council for the efforts
of the Iraqi Government to fight terrorism, as reflected
in its resolutions, will remain ineffective as long as
Member States do not implement such resolutions,
especially as concerns cooperation between the
countries of the region, with a view to dismantling
terrorist networks and working together to address
the sources of terrorism, imposing sanctions and
prohibiting activities that encourage Wahhabi thinking.
Failing that, we would warn once again that
allowing an extension of the influence of the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq would undermine the security and
stability of the region as a whole and hence international
peace and security. We therefore seek the Council’s
constructive assistance in putting an end to its spread.
Yes, the Council is capable of doing this. The Council is
the principal international organ capable of putting into
effect binding resolutions in order to force countries to
fight terrorism in all its forms.
I would like to stress our Government’s desire
to see the mission of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) extended for another year,
as stated in the letter from His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs addressed to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon dated 20 July 2014, in accordance with the
applicable standards stated in resolution 1770 (2007).

14-480157/8

S/PV.7224

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Mission in providing assistance to the Iraqi Government,
especially humanitarian assistance to refugees and
persons displaced as a result of terrorist attacks, such
as the distribution of tents in order to allow children
to continue to study and cooperation with respect to
starting the polio vaccination campaign.
My delegation praises the visit of Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for

8/8

23/07/2014

Refugees, to Baghdad and Kurdistan from 15 to 18 July.
In that respect, we reiterate our appreciation and thanks
to Mr. Mladenov and his team for their dedication and
hope that they will continue their efforts to assist Iraq.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
speakers on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

14-48015
