S/PV.9090

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9090th meeting

Tuesday, 12 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. França/Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Botchwey
Mr. Kumar
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The key role of strategic communications for efficient peacekeeping
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-42027 (E)
*2242027*

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The key role of strategic communications for
efficient peacekeeping
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/539)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Germany,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Lithuania, Malta,
Morocco, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand
and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Lieutenant
General Marcos De Sá Affonso Da Costa, Force
Commander, United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Ms. Jenna Russo, Director of Research, International
Peace Institute.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/539, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of Brazil to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I would like to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, Ministers and other high-level representatives
present today. Their presence underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
2/33

12/07/2022

The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Brazil for organizing this discussion and I
commend your vision and foresight, Mr. President,
in choosing this topic. For the first time the Council
is devoting a high-level debate to the critical role of
strategic communications in peacekeeping operations,
which is helping to highlight a fundamental point.
Communications are not a side issue or an afterthought.
More than ever, strategic communications are central
to the success of all our work. As I said when I was
sworn in as Secretary-General in 2016, we must be able
to communicate better about what we do in ways that
everybody understands. We need a substantial reform
of our communications strategy, upgrading our tools
and platforms to reach people around the world.
In the years since, we have embarked on an ambitious
global communications strategy to do just that, and we
are determined to do more. Our communications work,
after all, is designed not just to inform but to engage
audiences in support of the vital mission of the United
Nations. Strategic communications in peacekeeping
illustrate precisely why that is so crucial. The landscape
in which our peacekeepers operate is more hazardous
today than at any time in recent memory. Geopolitical
tensions at the global level reverberate locally. Conflicts
are more complex and multilayered. International
discord often translates into heightened tensions on
the ground, with warring parties disincentivized from
making the necessary concessions for peace.
Peacekeepers are facing terrorists, criminals and
armed groups and their allies, many of whom have
access to powerful modern weapons and a vested
interest in perpetuating the chaos in which they
thrive. The weapons they wield are not just guns and
explosives. Misinformation, disinformation and hate
speech are increasingly being used as weapons of war.
The aim is clear. It is to dehumanize the so-called
other, threaten vulnerable communities — as well as
peacekeepers themselves — and even give open licence
to commit atrocities.
For all those reasons, strategic communications
are critical across the spectrum of our peacekeeping
mandate and crucial to achieving our mission to protect
civilians and prevent violence; secure ceasefires and
safeguard political settlements; investigate and report
on human rights abuses and violations; advance the
women and peace and security agenda and promote the
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

role of women as peacekeepers, peacemakers and peace
leaders; and all the while ensure the safety and security
of our peacekeepers and the communities they serve.
That is why strategic communications are a top priority
within the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
We know that disinformation is not just misleading.
It is dangerous and potentially deadly. It fuels open
violence against our personnel and partners. It
transforms our blue flag from a symbol of security into
a target for attack. A recent survey found that nearly
half of all peacekeepers consider that misinformation
and disinformation can severely affect mandate
implementation and threaten their safety and security.
We see more and more instances where fake news
spreads like wildfire, hindering our missions in carrying
out their life-saving and life-changing work. To give
just one example, in Mali, a fake letter alleging that our
peacekeepers were collaborating with armed groups
was posted on Facebook. It went viral on WhatsApp
and was picked up by the national media. That fake
letter stirred up hostility and resentment towards our
peacekeepers, making their vital task of protecting
civilians that much harder. Strategic communications
that are credible, accurate and human-centred are one
of our best and most cost-effective instruments to
counter that threat.
More than just defusing harmful lies, engaging
in tailored two-way communication itself builds trust
as well as political and public support. It strengthens
understanding among the local populations of our
missions and mandates, and in return strengthens our
peacekeepers’ understanding of the local populations’
concerns, grievances, expectations and hopes. It can
create a safe space for reconciliation and peacebuilding
to work and provide women, young people and civil
society with greater access to peace processes. But to
be effective it must be grounded in evidence, based on
verified data, open to dialogue, rooted in storytelling
and delivered by credible messengers. I would now like
to briefly outline six concrete actions that we are taking
improve strategic communications in peacekeeping.
First, we are adopting a whole-of-mission approach
across uniformed and civilian components to foster a
networked communication in the field. To that end, we
are looking for military and police officers skilled in
strategic communications. I encourage all contributing
countries to provide personnel with these kinds of skill
sets, because any effective strategic communications

S/PV.9090

strategy requires communications teams properly
staffed and equipped to implement it.
Secondly, we are holding mission leaders
accountable to own and lead strategic communications
and ensure their full integration into all aspects of
mission planning and decision-making.
Thirdly, we are providing guidance and training
to missions, including collecting and sharing
best practices.
Fourthly, we are working with partners, including
technology and media companies and Member States,
to identify and deploy the best tools to better detect
and counter misinformation, disinformation and
hate speech.
Fifthly, we are continually monitoring and
evaluating the efficacy of our information campaigns
to ensure that we adjust as necessary, adapting our
strategy to the tactical necessities of the specific
contexts we operate in. While we live in an increasingly
digital world, direct person-to-person communication
often remains the most powerful way to build trust
and counter false narratives. That is why our missions
continue to conduct town hall-style gatherings in
local communities with village elders, young people,
women’s groups and others to listen and learn.
Sixthly, we are deploying strategic communications
to strengthen accountability and support efforts to
end misconduct by personnel and partners, including
combating sexual exploitation and abuse.
(spoke in French)
United Nations peacekeeping represents a
remarkable enterprise of multilateralism and
international solidarity. But for it to succeed amid new
threats and mounting challenges, we must all play our
part. All aspects of our operations must be adapted to
respond to new realities. The field of communications
is becoming more important every day. The United
Nations must take a deliberate stand as an information
actor in conflict environments. We must be seen as a
trusted source of information by providing engaging,
factual content, facilitating inclusive dialogue,
demanding the removal of harmful speech, calling
leaders to account and promoting peace and unity.
Member States, especially those present on the ground
alongside our peacekeepers, are crucial partners in that
vital effort. Access to information is a human right,
and in the places where our peacekeepers operate,

22-420273/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

it can be a matter of life and death or the difference
between peace and war. I look forward to working with
the Security Council to strengthen our peacekeeping
operations through improved strategic communications
and to pursue our shared goal of peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Affonso
Da Costa.
Lieutenant General Affonso Da Costa: I am
honoured to brief the Council at this high-level debate
on strategic communications from the perspective of a
Force Commander of a Chapter VII Mission working in
a complex and rapidly changing environment such as
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
As we have been deepening our response to the security
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we have identified several key areas that should be
enhanced, one of which is communications. Now
more than ever, an effective force depends on a strong
communications strategy.
We operate in a country where successive surveys
showed an overall poor perception among the population
about the relevance of MONUSCO in improving its
security. An anti-Mission sentiment prevails in certain
parts of the country, which even prevents some of our
deployments. Unfair speeches by several actors against
the Mission put the safety of our peacekeepers at risk.
The extensive use of social media by armed groups
and other spoilers undermines the confidence in the
United Nations. In respect to those militias, although
asymmetric in nature, they use regular information
warfare techniques. Fake news, diffused through
messaging and social media, are difficult to distinguish
from reality and will soon be virtually undetectable.
Such emerging technologies are driving a fundamental
change in the character of the war, and peace operations
are already being affected.
The United Nations force should therefore evolve
and adapt. One important part of our strategy is to
communicate in person with stakeholders, from the
village chief to the media and up to the national and
regional armed forces leadership. Those voices play a
crucial role in countering the criticism, explaining the
aim and the limits of our mandate and acknowledging
the validity of the United Nations Due Diligence
Policy on Human Rights. We have some other good
4/33

12/07/2022

practices to share — the use of language assistants
during our patrols, the provision of French classes at
the battalion level, the intensification of the use of
official social media, radio broadcasting and regular
meetings between the civilian and military branches to
coordinate communication activities.
The other important step was the new force
memorandum on the adoption of the StratCom concept.
It led to the full inclusion of the information warfare
perspective in all our military operations. To sum up,
we will gain the narrative in support of our operations.
Although proud of our work, we know that more
must be done. I mention the insufficient strength of
female translators to our female engagement teams, the
need for better predeployment training of our units on
communication skills and the need for more and best
qualified public-information and information-operation
staff officers. Substantively, to counter the menace of
fake news, the United Nations force should be a step
ahead in that domain. It will seek new capabilities,
such as those provided by a specialized military
psychological operation unit.
But means and resources are not the sole response.
Internally, it is to consider that the military campaign plan
must adhere to the Mission’s strategic communication
plan. So, synergy is the word. The alignment inside the
Mission and up to United Nations Headquarters is vital.
Only by defining the selected messages and indicators
to be conveyed are we going to be able to influence and,
ultimately, change the behaviour of the audiences. For
that reason, strategic communication is not an ordinary
staff responsibility, but a command duty and a mission’s
leadership endeavour.
On behalf of the more than 13,000 peacekeepers
in the service of peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I thank you again, Mr. President, for
this opportunity.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Affonso
Da Costa for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Russo.
Ms. Russo: On behalf of the International Peace
Institute, I am honoured to be here today to brief the
Security Council on the role of strategic communications
in United Nations peacekeeping. Over the past several
years, the United Nations has made some important
strides in its focus on strategic communications, and I
want to echo the words of the Secretary-General as to
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the centrality of strategic communications across the
whole-of-mission work.
Despite
some
improvements,
strategic
communications are still too often understood as a
unidirectional flow of information, most often centred
around managing expectations or communicating the
parameters of the mandate. While such efforts are no
doubt important, I want to challenge us to imagine
a more dynamic two-way flow of information that
includes more listening and the use of storytelling and
narratives that transform both the work of the mission
and the context in which it operates. While the United
Nations can, and should, relay messages that seek to
build trust and protect the reputation of the mission,
that is only one part of communicating, which also
requires listening to, and learning from, the people
whom the mission is there to serve.
I would like to use my time here today to touch
briefly upon three points: the role of strategic
communications in enhancing the protection of
civilians; how to ensure that communication is not
only gender sensitive, but also gender transformative;
and the importance of active listening to centre the
experiences of communities in peacekeeping.
Communicating with community members,
belligerents and national and local leaders is central
to planning and implementing protection-of-civilians
mandates. That includes not only managing expectations
by communicating the limitations of the mission’s
protection work, but also messaging on how populations
can better access the protection interventions that are
available, for example, mechanisms for reporting risks
of violence or the presence of peacekeeper patrols
protecting routes to gather water, firewood and other
supplies, as well as community-based support from
local partners, who play a critical role in providing
sustainable protection.
Strategic communication can also be used to counter
hate speech and misinformation or disinformation
that is used to incite violence, inflame identity-based
cleavages or mobilize individuals into armed groups.
Mission radio programmes and local-level workshops
can be an important tool in combating the effects of hate
speech. Missions can also train journalists in conflictsensitive journalism, as has been done in South Sudan,
for example, where hate speech has been described as
nearly as dangerous as the proliferation of weapons.

S/PV.9090

In addition to relaying information, the effective
protection of civilians also requires active listening.
Community members are the ones who are best
positioned to understand the risks that they face and how
to respond to those risks. Failing to listen to communities
when planning the protection of civilians prevents the
mission from building upon self-protection efforts that
are already taking place, and even risks putting mission
efforts at cross purposes with other protection actors,
including community members themselves.
The second point that I want to touch on is engaging
in strategic communications that are both gender
sensitive and gender transformative. Gender-sensitive
communications require tailoring messages to the needs
and concerns of women, as well as men, and considering
potential barriers to women’s access to information,
including access to radios or cell phones, literacy levels
or whether the venues chosen for in-person convenings
are considered safe or accessible. Improving women’s
access to information and addressing their specific
concerns related to the mission mandate and the
broader peace process are central to achieving the full
and equal participation of women and the fulfilment of
the women and peace and security agenda.
While such efforts should be considered a
minimum standard in a mission’s approach to strategic
communications, missions can go beyond being gender
sensitive to also being gender transformative. Gendertransformative communications use narratives and
storytelling to promote gender equality and combat
harmful stereotypes and behaviours, for example, by
highlighting stories and images that expand traditional
understandings of gender roles, address harmful gender
practices and use information to increase women’s
access to power and resources.
Finally, strategic communications in peacekeeping
should move beyond a unidirectional flow of relaying
information to a dynamic dialogue between missions
and communities. Communication is not only about
informing; it is about being informed. Every element
of a mission’s mandate requires an awareness of
the context in which the mission is operating. Those
contexts are complex, and each individual region and
village has a unique story to tell.
Community engagement is now a regular part
of peacekeeping mandates. Yet, in my own research
with civil society organizations, I often hear that
peacekeepers are perceived as maintaining a “power

22-420275/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

over” relationship with community members, rather
than a “power with” relationship. There is a sense
among some people that peacekeepers feel that they
have only knowledge to give, rather than knowledge to
gain, with an attitude of certainty rather than curiosity.
I would like to suggest that, as the United Nations
continues to grow and develop its work in this area, that it
focus as much on the listening aspect of communicating
as on the speaking aspect, centring the stories of
individuals and acts of everyday peace. Storytelling is
the oldest art form of communication. Stories make us
think, make us feel. They take us to a place where facts
and figures are denied access. Data and analytics may
persuade people, but they rarely inspire them to act for
the sake of peace against all odds. Let us therefore not
lose the power of the individual story and the role that
it can play in informing and inspiring our work around
the world.
The President: I thank Ms. Russo for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for External Relations of the Federative
Republic of Brazil.
I am greatly thankful to Secretary-General António
Guterres, Lieutenant General Marcos De Sá Affonso
Da Costa, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and Ms. Jenna
Russo, from the International Peace Institute, for their
invaluable and insightful briefings.
Peacekeeping has proven time and again to be one of
the most effective tools available to the United Nations
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. Practitioners and academics alike
agree that peacekeeping operations are instrumental to
containing conflict, protecting civilians and rebuilding
State institutions. The Council must continue to
enhance peacekeeping while guaranteeing the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
Brazil is a traditional contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Since 1956, when it first sent
troops to a peacekeeping mission, the First United
Nations Emergency Force, Brazil has participated in
41 peacekeeping operations, deploying approximately
55,000 military and police personnel to serve under the
United Nations flag around the globe.
Over those years, our practical experience
confirmed that efficient peacekeeping is about not
6/33

12/07/2022

only resources and mandates, but also communication.
Effectively communicating a peacekeeping mission’s
objectives and means has a strong impact on its success.
In simple terms, more dialogue is needed between
peacekeepers and leadership, Government authorities,
relevant stakeholders and local communities.
Brazil has a long and recognized history of
applying strategic communications in peacekeeping
missions, particularly in the case of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. Our military and police
personnel — dedicated men and women — have
consistently cultivated and built dialogue and trust.
Those are two essential — but rather rare, these
days — elements to achieving international peace
and security.
We therefore decided to organize this high-level
open debate on peacekeeping operations, with a focus
on strategic communications. This issue has never
before been specifically discussed by the Council. It is
high time we prioritize strategic communications in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeepers nowadays operate in ever more
volatile security environments and are tasked with
extraordinarily complex mandates. Be it in Mali,
Lebanon or the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
strategic communications have an enabler and multiplier
effect across all areas of peacekeeping operations.
They are critical to securing the political and public
support that peacekeeping missions need to effectively
implement their mandates. They are essential to the
protection of civilians and to the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda. They are a
great tool to draw attention and collect feedback from
local communities. They also help to promote respect
for human rights and international humanitarian
law; combat misinformation, xenophobia, racism
and discrimination; and prevent and fight sexual and
gender-based violence. Ultimately, they help create a
safe environment for peacekeepers. For those reasons,
we firmly believe that strategic communications must
be a pivotal element for United Nations peacekeeping.
Our briefers gave us a comprehensive assessment of
what has been done so far. I note with great appreciation
the efforts undertaken by Secretary-General Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix to mobilize
stakeholders in support of more effective United
Nations peacekeeping. The Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its implementation strategy made strategic
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

communications a top priority, which we welcome.
The field initiatives in that regard, as described by
the Force Commander of MONUSCO, are also highly
encouraging. However, we need further improvement.
In that regard, I would like to highlight four
pressing needs.
First, there must be a clear strategy on
communications in peacekeeping operations. In that
connection, the Council should encourage the United
Nations Secretariat to continue to develop a strategy, as
well as related policies and guidelines. They should be
implemented at all levels and across all components of
peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, we must improve our capabilities. The
Security Council, the General Assembly and troop and
police contributors should seek further improvements
in the communication capabilities of both United
Nations Headquarters and the missions. Strategic
communications and public information teams in
missions can be strengthened through better recruitment
and the allocation of adequate resources. Relevant new
technologies should be used to their full potential.
Thirdly, we must ensure adequate training. Effective
strategic communications rely heavily on the training
of all peacekeepers across components. Predeployment
training on strategic communications for all civilian,
military and police officers would have a significant
impact on engagement with local stakeholders.
Last, but not least, there must be a cultural
shift promoted by leaders. Mission leadership
must spearhead a move to institutionalize a culture
of strategic communications across components
in peacekeeping operations. It is up to mission
leaders to integrate strategic communications into
planning, decision-making and the implementation of
daily activities.
Let me say it again — strategic communications
are essential for a successful peacekeeping operation.
It is an operational necessity and a core capability for
peacekeeping operations. We hope that the strategic
review of strategic communications to be requested
by the Council will provide an accurate assessment of
existing capabilities and gaps and put forward concrete
proposals to address persistent challenges. The Security
Council must act upon the conclusions of the review and
prioritize strategic communications when negotiating
peacekeeping mandates.

S/PV.9090

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Integration of Ghana.
Ms. Botchwey (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this highlevel open debate on strategic communications in
peacekeeping operations. The choice of topic reflects
Brazil’s commitment and continuing contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
as well as the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the perspectives they have
brought to the debate through their briefings. Last,
but by no means least, I thank Jenna Russo, Director
of Research at the International Peace Institute for
her additional perspective, which also brings in a
gender dimension.
Today, more than at any other time, peacekeeping
is being called upon to deliver outcomes in conflict
situations that are ever more complex. Those situations
include settings where the parties to the conflict either
are unwilling to reach a political settlement or have
no clarity on their political objectives. In addition,
peacekeeping has to contend with a growing host of
asymmetric and irregular forces whose methods are
hate, division, terror and violence.
In such a challenging context, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been caught in the
crosshairs of the disinformation propaganda of
conflicting parties, in the misinformation efforts of
local stakeholders and in the instrumentalization of
hate speech to create distrust among local populations
and undermine or complicate the efforts to protect
civilian populations. The use of digital technologies
has amplified the scope of such negative actions, which
impede peace operations and peace support operations.
In too many instances, civilian populations have
been attacked because hate speech has been enabled,
cooperation required from local communities to protect
them has been withheld as a result of disinformation
and misinformation campaigns that have removed
the pillars of trust between peacekeeping missions
and such communities, and the safety and security

22-420277/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/07/2022

of peacekeeping personnel have been compromised
through disinformation, as segments of the population
are radicalized against the very troops deployed to
ensure the safety of their communities.

therefore urge continued support for the efforts of
the Department of Global Communications to embed
capacity in peacekeeping missions, for the effective
support of their strategic-communication function.

Ghana is therefore deeply concerned about the
significant increase in misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech (MDH) activity in peacekeeping
settings, especially on the African continent, where 6
of the 12 peacekeeping missions are hosted. The scale
of systematic, synchronized and orchestrated acts
has reached levels that negatively affect the efforts of
the United Nations, shape the conflict environment
and influence public opinion against United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, effective strategic communications entail
two-way traffic. In addition to the combined use of a
wide variety of communication methods, including
traditional media, digital platforms and social media,
we support the institutionalization of outreach
engagements with local communities in mandated
missions to sensitize them on the relevant mission’s
mandate. Such outreach overcomes any digital
divide and facilitates engagement with community
leaders, civil society actors and local authorities.
It also enables key stakeholders and constituents to
appreciate mandates.

It is in this context, and mindful of the indispensable
stabilizing role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, that Ghana, a pioneering and major
police- and troop-contributing country, supports all
efforts to turbocharge strategic communications as an
important enabler and multiplier for the reduction of
violence and the sustenance of peace. In view of the
emerging challenges and the pressing need to build
upon the progress since the Brahimi report of the
early 2000s (S/2000/809) and the 2015 outcomes of the
Independent High-Level Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) as well as the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative, Ghana would like to make four points in
support of further deepening and embedding strategic
communications in peacekeeping missions.
First, strategic communication is a strategic
necessity and should continue to remain an integral
and core part of peacekeeping. It needs to be reinforced
through strong mission leadership as a whole-ofmission approach that cuts across the planning,
implementation and evaluation phases of mandate
delivery in all missions. Ghana would therefore
support new and additional efforts that will help the
United Nations system to review existing policies and
adapt innovative approaches in order to reinforce and
mainstream strategic-communications activities into
mandated missions.
Secondly, in the light of the digital scope and reach of
MDH and its growing adverse impact on peacekeeping
operations, it is necessary to support and encourage
the further deployment of capacity and digital assets
for strategic communications that have a direct impact
on the protection of civilians and the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
8/33

Fourthly, Ghana believes that, considering the
desperate situation in many peacekeeping contexts,
quick-impact projects offer some of the best
opportunities for United Nations peacekeeping missions
to convey their commitment to the safety and welfare of
the civilian populations they serve. Additional efforts
and resources to support such projects should therefore
be made in support of the strategic-communication
functions that are required in peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the proactive
efforts of the Security Council to find ways to ensure
effective communication strategies and appropriate
technologies in support of peacekeeping operations. I
reiterate Ghana’s unflinching support for any initiative
that will enable United Nations peacekeeping missions
and police- and troop-contributing countries to
establish appropriate frameworks and policy guidelines
for strategic communication in peacekeeping. How
successful we are in addressing the issue of anti-United
Nations propaganda that encourages attacks against
peacekeepers and United Nations personnel in the field
would influence, to a large extent, the continuing battle
to uphold the authority of the United Nations and the
enduring values of multilateralism and our Charter.
Mr. Kumar (India): Let me begin by congratulating
Brazil for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also convey our
appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Carlos
Alberto Franco França, Foreign Minister of Brazil, for
presiding over today’s open debate on the important
and pertinent issue of strategic communications in
peacekeeping operations. I thank Secretary-General
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

António Guterres for his valuable remarks. I also
thank the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Lieutenant
General Marcos De Sá Affonso Da Costa, and the
Director of Research, International Peace Institute,
Ms. Jenna Russo, for their respective briefings.
On behalf of my delegation, I offer tribute to all
the men and women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations who continue to defend peace through their
professionalism, dedication and courage and to those
who have made the supreme sacrifice in serving the
cause of peace.
India has been a pioneer in United Nations
peacekeeping since its inception, having deployed more
than a quarter of a million troops, in as many as 49
United Nations peacekeeping missions. In keeping with
this tradition, we have today more than 5,500 personnel
deployed across nine missions. Serving under the
blue flag, 175 gallant Indian soldiers have made the
supreme sacrifice, the largest number among troopcontributing countries.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have,
over the years, evolved to become multidimensional
missions, operating in difficult security environments,
particularly in Africa. Peacekeeping operations are
increasingly called upon not only to maintain peace
and security but also to facilitate political processes,
protect civilians, disarm combatants, support elections,
protect and promote human rights and restore the rule
of law. The expansion of terrorist groups in Africa has
added another challenging dimension to the already
complex peacekeeping matrix.
In recent years, peacekeeping has been facing
another new challenge mounted by inimical forces
and terrorist groups, which are increasingly using
information technology to target blue helmets. There
have been growing misinformation and disinformation
campaigns adversely affecting the activities of missions
and putting lives of peacekeepers in danger.
There are also misplaced expectations among local
communities about peacekeepers and regarding the
mandate to protect civilians. Such misunderstandings
are further aggravated by the use of ambiguous
terminology such as “robust mandate”, “robust posture”
or even “offensive posture” in the peacekeeping
mandate resolutions of the Security Council, creating

S/PV.9090

room for speculative and arbitrary interpretations of
those mandates.
Besides, missions with so-called robust mandates
have become the targets of terrorist and armed groups.
The empirical data shows that while the situation
pertaining to the protection of civilians in conflict
zones has not improved, attacks on peacekeepers have
increased manyfold, leading to an exponential growth
in fatalities. Indeed, one third of all malicious activities
against peacekeepers have taken place in the past
decade alone.
It is therefore inevitable that peacekeeping
missions should address those issues by engaging
local communities, building trust and helping them
understand what peacekeepers can do for them and what
they cannot, including explaining the responsibilities
that primarily lie with the host State. We believe that a
flow of authentic information is crucial to addressing
misinformation. Communication through the right
messengers is also critical. Since disinformation
comes in multiple shades, targeted strategies for
preparedness and response pertaining to various forms
of disinformation need to be developed. Therefore, an
effective communication strategy aimed at achieving
those goals is sine qua non for peace operations.
In that regard, allow me to submit the following
eight observations.
First, the starting step of an effective strategic
communication of peace operations begins in the
Security Council, with the drafting of comprehensible
and implementable mandates. A mandate that lucidly
delineates intent, minimizes ambiguity and correlates
tasks and resources will go a long way towards
clarifying mission purpose. The Council needs to avoid
terminologies and formulations while crafting mission
mandates that generate false hopes and expectations.
Second, the goals and objectives of missions’
strategic communications should clearly be defined
in line with the mandate of peacekeeping missions.
Extra-mandated communications can lead to confusion
and friction with host State authorities. Further, the
main objective of strategic communication should
be to improve the understanding of mandates among
local populations and enhance the safety and security
of peacekeepers.
Third, strategic communication should be uniform
and harmonious across all platforms of communication

22-420279/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

as well as within all organs of the peacekeeping
mission. A harmonious and coherent mission
communication strategy helps peace operations to not
only convey their message clearly but receive feedback
from the population they serve and further improve
mandate implementation.
Fourth, the principles of peacekeeping, particularly
the consent of the host State, should be fully respected.
No strategic communication in any manner should try
to encroach upon the sovereignty of the host State or
undermine its interests. Trust and coordination between
the mission and the host State is essential for success.
Fifth, strategic communication should also
sensitize the local population to the need for the safety
of peacekeepers as well as accountability for crimes
committed against them. At the mission level, concrete
steps should be taken to ensure the safety and security
of mission personnel, camps and infrastructures.
Sixth, situational awareness empowers strategic
communication. Platforms such as UNITE Aware,
which our delegation assisted the United Nations in
implementing last year, are key enablers for strategic
communication. That helps in the prioritization of
needs and the direction of efforts. In 2021, India
contributed $1.6 million towards the rolling out of the
UNITE Aware platform as pilot projects across four
peacekeeping missions.
Seventh, the role of women peacekeepers cannot
be overemphasized in the effective implementation
of strategic communication. India takes pride in
the fact that the first-ever all-women peacekeeping
contingent was from India and stationed in Liberia and
is remembered even to this day in that country. Women
peacekeepers have been instrumental in enhancing the
impact of peacekeeping, be it in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS).
Eighth, the need to address the insecurity of
local populations caused by terrorist groups cannot
be ignored. It is important that mission strategic
communication be supplemented by measures aimed
at improving the capacities of the security forces of a
host State by providing them with adequate training
and logistical support as well as building the resilience
of the local population through peacebuilding efforts
to improve their livelihoods and provide for their
basic needs.
10/33

12/07/2022

I would like to conclude by saying that the safety and
security of peacekeepers should be an utmost priority
for all of us. When the Council crafts peacekeeping
mandates, we need to keep that cardinal principle in
our minds. We cannot let the bearers of the blue flag be
put in harm’s way without providing them the resources
necessary to tackle such threats. With that belief,
in 2022 we have provided support of $310,000 for a
strategic communication project aimed at enhancing the
role of women in peace and political processes. Several
quick-impact projects in southern Lebanon were funded
by India and executed by the Indian battalion in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in areas such
as health, education, waste disposal and electricity. We
also deployed veterinary officers in UNMISS, over and
above our commitment in Mission areas where pastoral
communities and livestock form the major basis of the
community’s economic activities.
India, as one of the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries, remains committed
to supporting all efforts to enhance strategic
communications in peacekeeping.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Brazil for having organized this open
debate on such an important and innovative topic
as well as your personal championship of this issue,
Mr. President. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for sharing the efforts of the United
Nations to integrate strategic communications into
all areas of its work. I would also like to thank the
excellent briefers today, Lieutenant General Marcos
de Sá Affonso da Costa, United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo Force Commander, and Ms. Jenna Russo,
Director of Research at the International Peace Institute,
for their comprehensive briefings.
Strategic communications are undeniably a key
component of peacekeeping, as we have heard today.
When skilfully used, they are a powerful tool that
helps to connect peacekeeping operations with all
stakeholders, amplify constructive messages, address
misinformation and disinformation and contribute to
the safety and security of United Nations personnel.
Effective strategic communications can also
enhance information-sharing, which in turn improves
the implementation of the mandate. But perhaps the
most meaningful impact of strategic communications is
that they provide an opportunity for local communities
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to directly engage with peacekeeping missions, thereby
strengthening local ownership of peace efforts and as a
result their sustainability.
In those critical ways, strategic communications
can maximize the impact of peacekeeping. We must
therefore keep in mind that developing effective
strategic communications in peacekeeping actually
begins with the Security Council. As Council
members, we have the responsibility to ensure that all
mission mandates outline clear objectives and provide
missions with the assets needed to develop effective
strategic communications.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates would like
to highlight the following elements.
First, the Council must treat strategic
communications as an element that is central not only to
the planning of peacekeeping operations but also to the
Council’s own work. Efforts to adapt Council messaging
to local contexts and ensure that it is understood clearly
can significantly improve its ability to bring about
positive change with regard to the issues on the agenda.
In addition, press statements and Council outcomes, in
particular those responding to local dynamics, should
be systematically translated into local languages.
Secondly, the Council and the United Nations should
address the pernicious effects of disinformation and
misinformation campaigns against peace operations.
The targeting of United Nations peacekeepers does not
happen in a vacuum and is not just the result of the
actions of terrorist groups. It is often the direct result
of a hostile environment that spreads misinformation
and disinformation about peacekeeping missions.
Troop- and police-contributing countries are making
important sacrifices to deliver on our mandates. Our
responsibility is to ensure their protection.
Thirdly, peacekeeping requires strong collaboration
with the communities they serve to achieve effective
outcomes. Two-way communication is indeed essential
to ensure that missions are not simply sharing
information with local communities but also being
informed by them. To that end, the Council must ensure
that peacekeeping personnel regularly engage with host
Governments, local partners and civil society at large
in order to better understand and tailor peacekeeping
approaches to local dynamics and different audiences.
In addition, the leadership of peacekeeping
missions must integrate strategic communications in

S/PV.9090

their work on mandated tasks, such as the protection
of civilians, strategies for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, support for the women and peace
and security agenda, and responses to sexual and
gender-based violence. That includes ensuring
that accountability is established for acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse and that peacekeepers are
held to the highest standards of accountability by the
United Nations.
We welcome the fact that those links are increasingly
being established in United Nations policies and
guidance for peacekeeping operations and encourage
further efforts on that front. In doing so, peacekeeping
missions also need to ensure that there is a genderresponsive approach to all strategic communications
or — to use Ms. Russo’s terminology — to employ a
gender-transformative approach through narratives and
context-relevant storytelling.
From
inception
to
conclusion,
strategic
communications can help create conditions for the more
efficient implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
They can also contribute to a successful transition
by minimizing the impact of a mission’s withdrawal.
The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that when
correctly leveraged, strategic communications can act
as an enabler for peace.
We thank Brazil once again for highlighting this
important topic.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me also start by thanking
Brazil for convening the first-ever debate on this
important topic. Let me also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his important remarks and the two other
briefers for their very informative statements.
Norway is deeply worried that armed groups
and other spoilers seem to be increasing the use of
misinformation, disinformation and hate speech
directed at United Nations peacekeeping operations.
That undermines the ability of operations to fulfil
their mandates and endangers the safety and security
of peacekeepers. The Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative has identified strategic communications
as a priority. The situation just described therefore
demonstrates the merits of that focus. We must
help missions manage their risks, using targeted
messaging, dialogue with local communities and hostGovernments, and increased digital presence and
communications expertise.

22-4202711/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

This issue also highlights the importance of general
messaging by missions about their mandates. Missions
must be able to successfully reach local populations and
manage expectations about what they can and cannot
do, at least with regard to the protection of civilians. We
therefore need to invest in increasing the capabilities
of strategic communications within missions, based
on a whole-of-mission approach and grounded in the
mission’s political objectives.
There is also an opportunity for using strategic
communications to advance the women and peace and
security agenda. Through gender-specific engagement
with local communities and women’s groups,
peacekeepers can help promote women’s meaningful
participation in political processes. That is vital.
Without their inclusion, those processes are more likely
to fail.
Norway looks forward to the finalization of the
communications strategy, as well as the policy guidelines,
tools and training for addressing misinformation and
disinformation, that are currently being developed
by the Department of Peace Operations. Norway
also supports the proposal for a review of strategic
communications across United Nations peacekeeping
operations in order to identify gaps and challenges, as
well as measures to address them.
Lastly, we once again reiterate the importance of
today’s discussion. It is the responsibility of this organ
to strengthen the focus on strategic communications
in peacekeeping operations. The safety and security
of peacekeepers and the people they are there to help
protect depend on it.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Brazil for convening this meeting and the briefers for
their presentations.
Strategic communications for peacekeeping
operations must be used for the protection of civilians and
the implementation of their mandates. They can ensure
that real-time information is provided to populations
on their security environment. They must contribute to
the effective functioning of early-warning and earlyresponse networks. In taking advantage of the potential
of digital technology, strategic communications can
help combat hate speech, the incitement to violence and
attempts at misinformation and disinformation.
With respect to the host State, strategic
communications must nurture mutual trust and
12/33

12/07/2022

regular dialogue in order to ensure the effectiveness
and acceptance of the peacekeeping operation.
Information-sharing with regard to the situation on the
ground and stakeholders’ expectations contributes to
the implementation of mandates. The work of listening
to and educating local authorities and communities
must be pursued in order to strengthen partnerships
and protect civilians. In that regard, I commend the
exemplary role in providing reliable information to the
population played by Radio Okapi within the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mikado FM
in Mali.
Peacekeeping operations are facing increasingly
hostile environments and are directly targeted, including
in the area of communications. Massive misinformation
and disinformation campaigns are being conducted in
the Central African Republic and Mali. The campaigns
carried out in social network campaigns are intended
to undermine the credibility and reputation of the
Blue Helmets. They make the operational environment
more complex.
Measures have been taken to strengthen the security
of the Blue Helmets and improve their image on the
ground. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan has
developed a WhatsApp group with influencers to respond
to misinformation and disinformation concerning its
work. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali trains journalists in factchecking and broadcasts messages in local languages to
prevent attempts at misinformation and disinformation.
Such initiatives must be increased. To strengthen
them, France is counting on the implementation of
the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping. It will enable capacity-building
within operations aimed at detecting, analysing and
responding to potential disinformation elements.
Lastly, the United Nations must have adequate
means to develop strategic communications. We should
prioritize an integrated approach to communications,
mission by mission, at every level, structured around
shared messages, especially in promoting the women
and peace and security and youth and peace and
security agendas. An integrated approach will also help
to strengthen coordination between the military, police
and civilian components of operations. That approach
should extend to all United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes when a peace operation is in transition or
in a drawdown phase.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peace operations must be provided with the
necessary means. Mastering information and
communications technology is essential, especially if
we are to reach the youngest members of populations.
The Secretary-General can count on France’s support
in that regard. We provided nearly $700,000 in 2021
and 2022 for digital peacekeeping communications.
But it is the women and men on the ground who are the
faces and voices of peace operations above all. Their
communications must be proactive, adapted to the
environment and in the local language. It is essential
to train personnel for that, and that work is primarily
the responsibility of troop-contributing countries.
France will continue to support multilingualism in
peace operations, in particular through the training
of instructors for French-speaking contingents in
partnership with the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
There is still much to be done. France will
continue to support the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative, including by harnessing
the potential of strategic communications for peace.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for Brazil’s leadership on this
topic. I also thank our briefers today. I would like to join
others in paying tribute to all peacekeepers, especially
those who have lost their lives in the service of peace.
Today’s debate underlines the fact that effective
strategic communications are essential enablers of
mandate delivery. They help to build trust and amplify
the voices of those building and sustaining peace. They
are also vital to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
As we heard from the Secretary-General, almost half
of peacekeepers have said that disinformation hinders
mandate delivery and threatens their safety and security.
I would like to make three points in that regard.

S/PV.9090

security of peacekeepers, including in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and Mali. Since the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group
deployed in Mali, we have seen a significant increase
in the volume of dangerous lies being spread about
the mandate and activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). That puts peacekeepers’ lives at
increased risk in an already volatile environment. It
sows distrust, which discourages local communities
from sharing information with MINUSMA, and that
hinders the Mission’s ability to prevent attacks on
civilians and peacekeepers alike. The continued spread
of disinformation and misinformation will lead to more
lives lost. There is no excuse for such activities.
Thirdly, I would like to underline the importance of
strategic communications in supporting the women and
peace and security agenda. I am proud of the efforts that
British peacekeepers and their German counterparts
have been making in MINUSMA in that regard. They
have met with local women’s associations and helped
local radio stations reach out to female audiences.
That has helped build mutual understanding and given
Malian women platforms for their peace advocacy.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the six
actions the Secretary-General set out and stress that
the United Kingdom will continue to offer its full
support to United Nations peacekeeping, including in
mainstreaming an innovative, modern and integrated
approach to strategic communications.

First, strategic communications should be a
whole-of-mission activity, integrated into planning
and mandate implementation and measured by the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System. They should leverage digital technologies to
keep pace with changing communication landscapes.
We support efforts to that end under the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative and the Strategy for the
Digital Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping.

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Brazilian presidency for taking
the initiative to convene today’s high-level public
debate. It is particularly important to my country,
Gabon, which has been involved in peacekeeping
efforts in the Central African subregion for several
years. This meeting is of particular interest because it
provides us with an opportunity to address strategic
communications, one of the seven priority areas of
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. I welcome
the Secretary-General’s advocacy. He has always
advocated diplomacy for peace while making reviews
of peacekeeping operations one of the pillars of United
Nations reform. We also thank today’s briefers for their
excellent and informative briefings.

Secondly, all actors should refrain from anti-United
Nations misinformation and disinformation, which
undermine mandate delivery and the safety and

More than 60 years after the deployment of the
first generation of Blue Helmets, there can be no doubt
that over the years, peacekeeping operations have

22-4202713/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/07/2022

become an essential tool in United Nations efforts to
maintain peace and security throughout the world.
They play a crucial role in a global context that is more
than ever marked by numerous crises and new threats
to international peace and security. The increasingly
complex and changing environment requires the United
Nations to continually reinvent itself in order to provide
responses that are commensurate with the security
challenges it faces. Opting for solid, effective strategic
communications that are adapted to the situation on the
ground therefore becomes a necessity. It is essential to
ensure that such communications take into account the
environment in which peacekeeping missions operate
so as to help start a constructive dialogue with the host
country and build the trust needed for the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

global conflicts, such as in the form of hate speech,
radicalization and incitement to discrimination and
violence in all forms, which are disseminated via the
Internet and primarily target vulnerable women and
young people. Such techniques are used today to spread
terror and fear and perpetuate crises.

Effective peacekeeping operations cannot be
achieved without the buy-in and support of local
populations and communities. They must be assured
and convinced of the relevance of peacekeeping
mandates. The support of local populations increases
the likelihood of countering asymmetric threats
as effectively as possible while fostering civilians’
unwillingness to provide support to armed groups. Such
communication efforts must be combined with other
outreach activities to create a positive perception of
United Nations forces and ensure better protection for
peacekeeping personnel. Community support networks
are therefore major assets in optimizing actions on the
ground and enhancing the effectiveness of mandates.

We also call for the principle of multilingualism to
be taken into account in peacekeeping operations, as
it facilitates communication and builds trust between
local populations and troops deployed on the ground,
while facilitating peacebuilding actions.

Peacekeeping operations now rely more than
ever before on a solid ecosystem of technology and
innovation that not only strengthens tools for conflict
management and prevention but also enhances
situational awareness, improves support provided to
missions and facilitates a more robust implementation
of United Nations peacekeeping mandates, often in
complex environments.
It is clear that the world is at a tipping point
towards the robotization or digitization of our societies
and governance, both nationally and globally, in
particular with respect to our rights and obligations.
Unfortunately, that technological evolution is not
exclusively beneficial — it brings with it consequences
and sources of concern, like any knowledge that is not
subject to the guidance of the conscience.
Often considered a catalyst or force multiplier,
technology can become a factor that exacerbates
14/33

It is against that backdrop that we reiterate our
support for the Strategy for the Digital Transformation
of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech. My country of course reaffirms its support
for the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, which
makes the accelerated implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda a cross-cutting concern
and includes the need to establish effective strategic
communications among its priority areas.

In conclusion, Gabon welcomes the strengthening
of cooperation between the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations, particularly in the context of crisis
resolution on the continent. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the Sudan and
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are
excellent examples of that cooperation.
AMISOM’s experience in particular shows that
when backed by predictable funding and adequate
logistical support, the African Union is capable of
conducting peace operations under even the most
difficult conditions. That example should serve the new
African Transition Mission in Somalia, as well as the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and future
missions under African leadership.
In a regional context increasingly dominated by
the terrorist threat, a United Nations-AU partnership
consolidated by appropriate funding is essential if
the African Union’s actions on the ground are to be
effective and yield the expected results.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Brazil for organizing today’s debate, the first-ever on
strategic communications in peacekeeping operations.
I also thank Lieutenant General Affonso Da Costa and
Ms. Russo for their valuable information.
I would like to make five brief points.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

First, every day we see the spread of misinformation
and disinformation worldwide affecting our daily
lives. Unfortunately, that scourge is also affecting the
security sector, impacting civilians and United Nations
troops on the ground as well. Albania fully endorses the
Action for Peacekeeping Plus priority 6, on strategic
communications, and believes that it helps to minimize
disinformation and misinformation as obstacles
to peace.
Misinformation, disinformation, hate speech,
propaganda and conspiracy theories have disastrous
consequences, as we have seen on more than one
occasion. Disinformation undermines facts, hides
crimes and distorts realities. Therefore, careful
communication is key to properly and securely
implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations
on the ground.
Secondly, the transparency of United Nations
operations in every aspect of every field of activity,
including peacekeeping operations, is crucial for
maintaining and consolidating trust and support for
the work of the Organization. We welcome every step
taken to shed light on all cases of sexual exploitation,
abuse and harassment. Blue Helmets must fulfil their
mission with due diligence in order to protect civilians
and not take advantage of those that they should help
and protect.
We commend the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and all United Nations missions
that are prioritizing transparency in that regard, with
concrete measures undertaken to ensure accountability.
That leads to my third point, which concerns
support for the development of a strategy for digital
transformation. We believe that there is room to improve
communications by expanding it in the digital space, as
well as for the United Nations as a whole. Enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers with new means is
much easier and can be implemented more swiftly with
the proper use of digital technology.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians is the core task
of each mission — it is a priority and a must. Therefore,
it requires continued and improved communication
to successfully challenge the prejudices that are
detrimental to peace operations and win the trust
of communities.

S/PV.9090

In that context, we highlight the importance of
gender-sensitive communications and the women and
peace and security agenda. We commend peacekeeping
operations for supporting women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in local conflict prevention and
resolution and political transitions, promoting women’s
work and strengthening women’s voices. Given the
specifics of women and peace and security mandates for
peacekeeping operations, it is of paramount importance
to raise awareness among the general public about how
essential the women and peace and security agenda is
for peacekeeping operations.
My fifth and final point relates to communications
between peacekeepers and local communities. Again,
I refer to the case of MONUSCO, where the United
Nations works with the security forces to warn local
authorities and police of the slightest security threat.
Prevention saves lives and in order to ensure
prevention good communication is instrumental. The
use of technology for dialogue with communities
should be encouraged as a best practice to maintain
dialogue and should feed into the political process,
wherever possible. Therefore, we support the call for
the Secretary-General to provide a review of strategic
communications across United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including at the Headquarters level.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil to the Chamber
today and thank Brazil for organizing this discussion.
We certainly look forward to the adoption of a
presidential statement later this morning. I would also
like to thank our briefers this morning.
Ireland shares with Brazil and many others
here today a deep and long-standing commitment
to peacekeeping.
The Security Council deploys peacekeepers to the
most difficult contexts. Too many of them have made
the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace. Therefore,
we around this table have a real responsibility to ask
what more we can do to ensure that peacekeepers come
home safely. Effective strategic communications is an
essential tool in that regard.
The deployment of a peacekeeping mission should
send a clear message of hope to populations on the
ground in conflict environments. That message should
make it clear that the international community stands
with them and that we are working to give them the

22-4202715/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

chance of a better life in their own countries. But for
such missions to succeed, it is critical that they be
able to communicate effectively and systematically
with local communities, host countries and all parties
to conflicts.
The importance of strategic communications
is clearly reflected in the Secretary-General’s own
Action for Peacekeeping Plus implementation strategy.
Peacekeeping operations are deployed to the most
complex environments, often with competing narratives
around conflict. Clearly explaining to populations
on the ground — in particular those that are hard to
reach or most at risk of harm — why peacekeepers are
there and the role they can play, as well as managing
expectations in that regard, is critical. That requires
a concerted whole-of-United Nations approach, from
the highest strategic levels to the operational and
tactical levels.
We have learned through experience the hugely
negative impact that misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech can have on both peacekeepers and the
civilians they are sent to protect. Put simply, effective
strategic communications enhances force protection
and can reduce violence and help sustain peace.
Irish troops serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions have always placed strong emphasis on
outreach operations to ensure effective communications
with the local authorities and populations. In the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, for example, that is
done through key leader and community engagement, as
well as through civil and military cooperation projects.
In the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
it is done through quick-impact projects.
Strategic communications cannot take place in a
knowledge vacuum. Peacekeeping intelligence should
inform coherent strategic communications strategies.
That, in turn, will help to enhance the safety and
security of our peacekeepers, while also improving
mandate implementation.
We see that as particularly important for the
protection of civilians. We must take every opportunity
to raise our voice in the name of those who cannot
raise their own. We must oppose narratives of hate; we
must refute misinformation and disinformation; and
we must ensure a zero-tolerance policy for all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse. Creating protective
environments requires engagement with local actors,
including young people, as well as the promotion of
16/33

12/07/2022

women’s participation and leadership. We want to
underline and commend the work being done in some
of the most challenging contexts to promote women’s
role in peace and security.
We believe that strategic communications
are particularly important during United Nations
transitions. It is vital that transition planning
incorporate the design of an effective communications
strategy to ensure that the roles and responsibilities
of a reconfigured United Nations presence are clearly
understood by all, particularly the local population. It
is vital that no group feel left behind and that we see
engagement with civil society as key.
As I conclude, I also want to note that the digital
revolution has fundamentally changed our world, of
course, and, importantly, how audiences receive their
information. Peacekeeping operations are no exception
and must adapt to those new realities. The effective
use of strategic communications can play a significant
role in mandate implementation and in ensuring that
our peacekeepers and those they are deployed to
protect are safer. As a country with a long-standing
record of contributing to peacekeeping, Ireland is
fully committed to building strategic communications
capacity in peacekeeping. We thank the Brazilian
presidency again for raising that issue.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks, as well as the
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Lieutenant General Affonso da Costa, and
Ms. Jenna Russo for their briefings.
As a troop- and police-contributing country for
nearly five decades, Kenya appreciates the nature of
the audience locally, regionally and internationally
that strategic communication targets. Whenever
possible, our personnel embrace communication with
local communities and other critical stakeholders. We
believe that most peacekeeping missions, with a change
of approach and an injection of relevant expertise, can
turn strategic communications into an even more potent
tool for furthering their mandate implementation.
Allow me to make three recommendations,
which, if acted on, would enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

First, and perhaps most important, missions must
internalize the fact that operations are themselves
forms of communication or miscommunication.
The planning of every operation, ranging from the
protection of civilians to offensive operations as part
of peace enforcement, must have communications
expertise involved from the start. The decision-making
on the operation’s aim and conduct and the attendant
risks in terms of the message that reaches the relevant
audiences must be informed by that prioritization of
strategic communications.
Secondly, a mindset that prioritizes communications
is especially relevant in operational areas that have
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) groups. Those groups are sophisticated in
their use of communications. In fact, it can be argued
that even their use of terrorism is itself a form of
communication. They seek to control the perception
and reaction of different audiences, ranging from the
local population to national leadership and international
audiences. They take constant aim at the continuity and
legitimacy of Government, using cultural and religious
texts deployed to achieve maximum effect at the local
level. Their use of communications yields them recruits.
It justifies their campaigns. It characterizes the State
as unable to protect civilians and as an illegitimate
actor pursuing aims that are antithetical to the values
and interests of the populace. In time, it has the ability
to turn large numbers of the population into active
opponents of the State, even though the group’s aim
itself is ultimately sinister to the hopes of the people for
peace and development.

S/PV.9090

their ideology and how to counter it in the local and
national contexts. It is also important that missions have
the ability to counter and disinformation by negative
actors in the relevant local languages and idioms.
Thirdly, it is crucial that, in renewing or designing
new mandates, the Security Council give strategic
communication a core role, which should then be
reflected in the mission’s resourcing. Part of that
resourcing is for the United Nations to identify,
and prepare for recruitment, the relevant strategic
communications expertise, particularly with regard
to hate speech, disinformation and the ideological
messaging of Al-Qaida and ISIS groups. Such
capabilities must cross over into the digital realm,
which is a major destination for misinformation,
disinformation and other information operations by
those hostile actors.
In that regard, United Nations missions would
be well advised to collaborate with local experts and
civil society to deliver peace and mission-positive
strategic communications.
Our overall contention is that United Nations
peacekeeping is at the start of a potential transformation
in the way in which it employs strategic communications.
We welcome all efforts to advance that important pillar
of expertise, and look forward to its full deployment
in all areas of operation. In time, enabling host
Governments and security forces to also achieve such
competences is a key deliverable in supporting the
longer-term aims of conflict-resolution, reconciliation
and the strengthening of the social contract.

While peacekeeping forces may not be mandated
to undertake classic counter-terrorism operations,
their mandates are often based on supporting effective
governance and the Government’s stability. It therefore
stands to reason that peacekeeping missions cannot
ignore the information operations of terrorist groups
if they are to meaningfully implement their political
stabilization mandates. That requires that the missions
have the ability to understand the messaging that
the terrorists are producing and the audiences being
targeted for radicalization, recruitment and perception
management. The missions must then design and
deliver countermessages, with a similar, if not greater,
level of ambition and sophistication, and support the
Government’s ability to do the same.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your personal participation,
Mr. Minister, in today’s meeting. We highly appreciate
your country’s contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. We are grateful that such
an important issue as strategic communications in
peacekeeping has been brought before the Security
Council for discussion. We supported the initiative to
prepare a relevant document. We appreciate the work
done by your country’s delegation. We also associate
ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers. We thank the Secretary-General and the
other briefers for their briefings.

In areas with Al-Qaida- or ISIS-affiliated or copycat
groups, that expertise should include a knowledge of

The Blue Helmets carry out their noble duty in
extremely difficult and dangerous conditions, risking

22-4202717/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

their lives every day. We would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to all peacekeepers who
honourably carry out their service, as well as to express
our condolences to the States and families of those who
lost their lives in the line of duty.
Strategic communications are designed to facilitate
the fulfilment of the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, contribute to the protection
of the Blue Helmets themselves from malicious
information and provocation and increase the level of
trust in their activities among the warring parties and
the local population.
Undoubtedly, the key task is to establish effective
work within the missions themselves. Modern
peacekeeping operations are complex and multifaceted.
Their tasks range from purely military, in some cases
even offensive, to bordering on replacing certain
State functions, such as protecting human rights and
strengthening the rule of law, as well as working with
children and young people. In some cases, when a
mission has been in a country for years and sometimes
decades, it integrates into the domestic political
process. Whether that is good or bad is a rhetorical
question, but it is important to understand that in such
circumstances it is impossible to imagine a situation in
which a mission cannot be subject to criticism.
We are confident that all those functions, which the
Security Council entrusts to operations, should be clear
and serve one goal — to achieve a political settlement,
establish peace and stabilize host countries. Mission
leadership plays a key role in that regard.
Secondly, and perhaps an even more important part
of strategic communication, is building constructive
cooperation with the host country and cultivating
reliable contacts, primarily with the Government and
the local population. Peacekeeping missions should be
perceived as partners — not through their words, but
through their actions — in achieving the common goals
of the State and its people and as impartial assistance
for solving the problems of the most vulnerable
countries. It is unacceptable for missions to serve as
political controllers overseeing sovereign Governments
or introducing imperatives formulated across oceans
to new ground. It is of the utmost importance that all
components of the operation act coherently, only within
the framework of the mandate, and do not contradict each
other. We are confident that sooner or later we will have
to revive the discussion about what exactly impartiality,
18/33

12/07/2022

lack of bias and objectivity of the United Nations means
in the context of changing circumstances — and to do
so in a way that cannot imply inaction.
The third issue we would like to address in today’s
debate is the operationalization of steps to improve
strategic communication. In fact, the issue of criticism
of peacekeeping operations is not new. We saw this
many years ago in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Haiti, and now in South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and Mali. Some missions have been more
successful in meeting these challenges by explaining
their mandate, working with the local population
through radio and television and implementing various
local projects — others less so. But in most cases,
quick-impact projects have proven helpful as they are
not very costly, make it possible to establish contacts
and bring practical benefits to vulnerable segments
of the population. This approach was highly valued in
Haiti, where it was, incidentally, actively promoted by
the delegation of Brazil, as well as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In our age of new technologies,
clearly social networks and other methods of social
outreach play a significant role, but we must not forget
that actions speak louder than words. We urge the
Secretariat, which will prepare the relevant report, to
pay special attention to this.
The concept note prepared by the Brazilian
delegation (see S/2022/539, annex) and negotiations on
the presidential statement focused significant attention
to the safety of peacekeepers. In that regard, we would
like to emphasize that this issue has always been a
priority for the Russian Federation. Recently, we, like
many other troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, lost a peacekeeper
in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We therefore take this topic very seriously and call
for a comprehensive and substantive discussion on
the matter.
It is no secret, and it has been confirmed by the
reports of the Secretary-General, including for the
General Assembly Special Committee — peacekeepers
primarily suffer from asymmetric attacks, the actions
of armed groups, improvised explosive devices, the
overstretching of peacekeeping forces and a lack of
necessary equipment and evacuation means. Recently,
the coronavirus pandemic and natural disasters have
become a significant problem for the Blue Helmets.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

These are the main enemies of peacekeepers and must
be addressed as a matter of priority.
As for the spread of false information and
disinformation, there is no doubt that this phenomenon,
unfortunately, is gathering momentum around the world
and should be denounced. Regrettably, the ubiquitous
fundamental norms and principles of ensuring the
freedom of expression and access to information and
protecting the rights of journalists have been eroded
at an unprecedented scale. We are facing a deliberate
infodemic that has captured the leading global media,
serving the interests of a narrow group of countries.
There is censorship of the information space by online
platforms, primarily the information technology giants
that have a monopoly on social networks and video
hosting platforms.
It is important that both the United Nations
Headquarters and missions themselves be fully aware
of these processes. After all, it is most dangerous when
unreliable information is used to achieve military and
political advantages on the ground. It is vital to have early
detection and prevention of disinformation campaigns
in order to neutralize and minimize their ramifications.
Even here in the Council, blurry photographs from
social networks and media publications have been
presented as irrefutable evidence of unlawful acts. Even
today, we were unable to dodge politicized propaganda
from some colleagues. Attempts to instrumentalize the
topic of the safety of peacekeepers in order to achieve
narrow political goals that have nothing to do with the
protection of Blue Helmets and the stabilization of
countries in conflict are dangerous.
We urge the United Nations not to neglect
cooperation with the law enforcement agencies of
host countries because, under international law,
they bear the primary responsibility for the safety of
peacekeepers. Any threats to the life and health of
Blue Helmets, let alone any attacks on them, should be
investigated in accordance with national legislation.
As for critical publications or even protests, as we
said earlier, it is vital to have painstaking explanations
of each mandate in order for the local population to
have realistic expectations. Nothing can enhance the
image of peacekeepers like the effective discharge of
their mandate, including with regard to the protection
of civilians.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Mr. President, to New York to preside

S/PV.9090

over this meeting. China commends and supports
Brazil’s initiative to hold this meeting on strategic
communications and adopt a presidential statement. We
believe that this meeting will make a major contribution
to increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Lieutenant General Da Costa and Ms. Russo
for their briefings.
China aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
all Blue Helmets committed to peacekeeping under the
banner of the United Nations. Strategic communications
can help the world know more about peacekeeping
and help peacekeeping better serve the world. The
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative
includes strategic communications in the peacekeeping
operation toolbox, as it is an important measure to
enhance safety and security for peacekeepers and
improve the performance of peacekeeping operations.
China believes that to enhance strategic
communications, we need to work on the following
four areas.
First, we must create stronger partnerships. A
peacekeeping operation can be compared to a concerto
performed by stakeholders. The United Nations
should enhance communication with the host country,
troop- and police-contributing countries and regional
organizations in order to share information, align goals
and coordinate activities.
The host country is the most important of all
stakeholders. The deployment of a peacekeeping
operation requires consent from the host country. The
security of personnel needs to be ensured by the host
country, and the implementation of its mandate requires
cooperation from the host country. The United Nations
should therefore continue to improve communication
with host countries, listen to their opinions, attach
importance to their concerns and seek their support.
The monitoring of ceasefires, among other
things, is traditionally a core part of the mandate for
peacekeeping operations, and it has stood the test of
history. At present, the mandates of some missions
keep expanding in a mindless way. They try to cover all

22-4202719/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

aspects but fail to yield intended the intended results.
The Council should create a mandate in a reasonable
manner based on the needs of the host country. Missions
should also improve their communication with local
communities to facilitate the public’s understanding
and support of their mandates and their means to fulfil
these mandates.
Secondly, on better protecting the safety and
security of peacekeepers, these days, peacekeepers
are faced with increasingly serious safety and security
challenges. Last October, in Abyei, because of the lack
of communication and mutual trust between the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and local
tribes, a medical evacuation was delayed, leading to
the death of a peacekeeper. Strategic communications
could help reduce such heart-wrenching losses of life
and property.
There is a need to enhance security-information
exchanges between missions and host Governments
and improve the situational awareness and riskprevention capacities of missions. In areas where many
forces conduct operations, host Governments could
consider creating an information-sharing mechanism
to avoid misunderstanding or misjudgement.
Missions, host countries and the Secretariat should
work together to prevent the emergence of any
misinformation on peacekeepers and create safe and
favourable public opinion environments for them in
order to facilitate effective mandate implementation in
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, with regard to promoting the effective
discharge of the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
restoring peace in the host country is a primary
responsibility for peacekeeping operations. A mission
should, based on thorough communication with the
countries concerned and relevant regional organizations,
promote the resolution of conflicts through dialogue
and communication. Military means alone cannot
fulfil the mandate to protect civilians. Missions should
improve communication with local communities so as
to be able to detect and address security risks as soon
as possible, to effectively prevent conflicts and better
protect the safety of civilians.
When reporting on a human rights situation, a
mission should check facts with host countries. While
investigating human rights violations, missions need to
get the consent of host countries.
20/33

12/07/2022

Fourthly, with regard to improving strategiccommunications capacity-building, the Secretariat
will soon update the strategic-communications and
public-information policy. We hope that the Secretariat
will take this opportunity to integrate strategic
communications into all components and units of
peacekeeping operations and, in the process, keep close
communication with stakeholders, including TCCs.
The
Secretariat
should
include
strategic
communications in trainings for peacekeepers, so that
they will have a deeper understanding of local cultures
and the situations of host countries in order to more
closely facilitate the implementation of the priority
national policies of these countries. The communication
capacity of a mission’s management is of critical
importance. During the appointment process, the
Secretariat should fully consider equitable geographic
distribution and, in particular, ensure that middle and
senior managers in a force have a good grasp of the
realities on the ground.
As the second-largest contributor to the
peacekeeping budget and a major TCC, China has
always been committed to peace through concrete
actions. We have included strategic communications in
our training system, which has provided peacekeepers
from dozens of TCCs with targeted training, helping
them to improve their communication capacity.
Peacekeepers from China have provided free
medical services and built infrastructure in mission
areas in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Lebanon, which has helped improve local
communities’ understanding and trust of peacekeeping
operations and maintained the good image of the blue
helmets. China will continue to work with peace-loving
nations to contribute to the maintenance of world peace
and security.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. Minister, for convening this discussion
today. I also thank all the briefers for their insightful
contributions. My delegation found the comments of
Ms. Russo on gender and its value and use in strategic
communications particularly thought-provoking, and
so I thank her for those. The United States welcomes
this forum as important for discussing such a timely
and critical issue, and we thank Brazil for its leadership.
I begin by echoing what many have underscored
today. Strategic communications are critical to ensuring
effective implementation of peacekeeping mandates,
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enhancing the safety and security of our peacekeepers,
advancing a comprehensive approach to the protection
of civilians and the women and peace and security
agenda, and to building trust among local communities,
which is so important, as our briefers have emphasized.
As the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative clearly outlines, peacekeeping missions
can help improve relationships with local stakeholders
by publicly promoting successes, managing the
local population’s expectations and addressing
disinformation and misinformation that obstructs
mandate implementation and ultimately threatens the
safety and the security of peacekeepers. Fundamentally,
any peacekeeping mission’s ability to engage in effective
strategic communications rests on that mission’s ability
to know what is happening on the ground and to
produce timely and accurate reporting. This establishes
United Nations missions’ reputations as a credible and
impartial source of information, and that reputation is
essential for United Nations missions to achieve every
other strategic-communications objective.
We welcome the ongoing efforts by the SecretaryGeneral to bolster strategic-communications capacities
both at United Nations headquarters and in the field,
and in that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposals and recommendations this morning. This need
is particularly pressing in the Central African Republic
and Mali, where disinformation targeting the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali threatens peacekeeper
safety and security and has undermined those missions’
abilities to protect civilians, investigate human rights
violations and abuses, and facilitate political dialogue.
In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
comments of the United Kingdom delegation this
morning, noting that this information, misinformation
and disinformation has increased in both countries
since the arrival of the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group
in both countries. Is it mere coincidence, or is there
causal link? We will let each Council member and
troop-contributing country make its own decision.
But, for that reason, I am pleased to point to
MINUSCA’s weekly United Nations radio show as
a best practice. As others have mentioned, this show
provides a really useful platform for mission leadership,
United Nations agencies, Central African authorities
and locals to dispel rumours and counter disinformation

S/PV.9090

about MINUSCA’s mandate and activities. However,
the challenges in the Central African Republic remain
considerable, and we must expand and amplify
these efforts.
The United States firmly condemns disinformation
campaigns and incitement to violence against
peacekeepers, as they contribute to a climate of mistrust,
impede mandate implementation and undermine
the United Nations core mission of maintaining
international peace and security. To mitigate these
risks, effective communication strategies, as we have
heard, must engage local media and other actors,
proactively shape the mission’s public messaging in
ways that will resonate with the local population,
and address disinformation and misinformation head
on. The United Nations Secretariat and peacekeeping
missions may benefit from efforts to monitor sources
of disinformation and misinformation and analyse
country-specific and regional trends. Gathering such
information at the mission and headquarters levels
would equip the United Nations to calibrate appropriate
strategic-communications initiatives to address this
kind of disinformation and misinformation.
In conclusion, once again we thank Brazil for its
leadership on this important issue. We look forward
to working closely with Brazil and other partners to
ensure that the peacekeepers we send into harm’s way
are equipped with the needed strategic-communications
tools to fulfil their missions.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My country welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Brazil to the Security Council and thanks
him for convening today’s debate. I thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his briefing, as well as
Lieutenant General Marcos De Sá Affonso Da Costa,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Ms. Jenna Russo, Director of Research,
International Peace Institute, for the timely reflections
they shared with the Council.
There is no doubt whatsoever that strategic
communications play an increasingly important role at
all stages of peacekeeping, from the planning stages all
the way to the assessment of the mission’s work. The
rigorous and sensitive use of communication tools,
including digital technologies, is crucial in order to
better understand the environment in which missions
operate so as to raise awareness about their mandates

22-4202721/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and create bonds of trust with the host societies and
national authorities with which they interact.
I should like to highlight the importance of two
of the many objectives that communications can
achieve: first, in contributing to changing gender-based
stereotypes and discriminatory practices, which can
prevent sexual violence and the abuse of minors; and,
secondly, in promoting the full, equal and significant
participation of women and young people in the public
and political life of host countries.
Strategic communications and the effective use
of technologies are also key components of earlywarning mechanisms, which can prevent humanitarian
crises, mass atrocity crimes and other violations of
human rights, leading to more effective protection
of the civilian population, especially of traditionally
disenfranchised groups.
Also, in peacekeeping operations’ transition phase,
it is vital to have an effective communication strategy in
place to prevent the population from being abandoned
and its trust from being eroded during the transfer
of responsibilities from missions to United Nations
country teams and national authorities.
Like other members of the Council, Mexico
has observed with great concern the increasing use
of disinformation campaigns aimed at creating a
climate of animosity or distrust vis-à-vis United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Such actions curtail
the capacity for Security Council mandates to be
fulfilled and jeopardize the safety of the personnel of
peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
strengthening communication tools geared to fighting
disinformation and hate speech. That is particularly
urgent in contexts that we all know well, such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Central
African Republic, to mention just a few examples of
countries where explicit communication campaigns
against United Nations peacekeeping missions have
been detected.
In order to neutralize those campaigns, closer
cooperation is required between missions and the
United Nations country team in each country as well
as with local communities, including civil-society
organizations and especially women and young people.
While it is true that strategic communication
will not in and of itself be able to resolve the various
22/33

12/07/2022

challenges facing peacekeeping in the world, the
instrumentalization of communication strategies, along
with a truthful process of reflection on the various
factors that have an impact on both the successes and
failures of Council mandates, might be more appropriate
than ever.
It is no coincidence that disinformation campaigns
against United Nations missions are more effective
precisely in those places where a perception exists of
the limitation of some of those missions to break the
cycles of violence that plague the local population.
It is therefore very important that local populations
understand not only the scope of peacekeeping missions
but also their limitations.
The Security Council must also contribute to the
effectiveness of such missions through better-crafted
mandates based on realistic and relevant objectives,
and, of course, it is also crucial to endow peacekeeping
operations with the capacity and financing necessary
for the full implementation of their mandate.
Along that line of ideas and actions, and as part of
the strengthening of its participation in peacekeeping
missions, Mexico is prepared to send a company of
engineers with some 240 staff, including 67 women.
My country believes that the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative is the appropriate context for enriching
the discussion on the performance of peacekeeping
operations, in which the United Nations system, actors
on the ground, regional organizations, the private
sector, civil society and academia should participate.
In sum, peacekeeping should be the responsibility
of all without exception. That is a powerful strategic
communication message that perhaps all of us States
Members of the United Nations should develop jointly
as a result of this debate.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2022/5.
I have been asked to remind speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9090

I now give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.

and the security of all United Nations personnel in their
noble endeavour.

Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

We thank our co-Chair, Brazil, for hosting
this timely open debate on the key role of strategic
communication in peacekeeping operations. It is in
line with the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative,
which emphasizes strategic communication as one of
its priorities.
The Group of Friends remains deeply concerned at
the persistently high number of attacks against United
Nations peacekeepers that has recently been seen
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We convey our deepest
condolences to the families of those who made the
ultimate sacrifice in the service of peace.
We emphasize the direct link between strategic
communication and the success of peacekeeping
operations in implementing their mandate, including in
ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers and
the protection of civilians.
We are especially concerned at the proliferation
of disinformation, misinformation and hate speech
targeting United Nations peacekeeping operations or
the civilian population.
The Group of Friends highlights the importance
of effective communications between United
Nations peacekeeping operations, host Governments
and other relevant stakeholders to build trust and
mutual understanding.
We call on the Secretariat to continue its efforts to
develop communication strategies aimed at building trust
and confidence between United Nations peacekeeping
operations and key stakeholders, including the host
Government. That could be done, among other ways,
through the dissemination of accurate information by
United Nations peacekeeping missions to help manage
the expectations of local communities.
Peacekeeping missions need to be equipped with
clear mandates and adequate resources to deliver on
them. We also emphasize the importance of training
and partnership, including strategic communication.
I would like to conclude by calling on all parties
to strengthen our collective efforts to ensure the safety

Mr. Osuga (Japan) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this open debate on this increasingly
important topic. Strategic communications are
important in many ways with regard to the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates, but I
would emphasize their extremely important role in
ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers,
which is a prerequisite for carrying out any mission.
Strategic communications for that purpose, as well
as for the protection of civilians, must be practiced in
concert with peacekeeping intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance.
The broader challenges related to strategic
communications, including combating disinformation
and misinformation, extend well beyond technical
issues, which can be resolved by training peacekeepers
and the mission leadership or by introducing advanced
information technology. Overcoming such challenges
involves ensuring freedom of expression and free
access to information in the host State and is predicated
on building the local populations’, communities’ and
authorities’ trust in peacekeepers in particular and the
United Nations in general. A comprehensive approach
that cuts across the development, humanitarian and
peace nexus is therefore essential. I would like to
elaborate on a couple of factors that are essential to
effective strategic communications, which are based on
Japan’s own experience on the ground.
First, strengthening the communications capabilities
of each peacekeeping mission requires a bottom-up
approach adapted to its specific local context. As a
long-standing contributor to peacekeeping training, we
believe that capacity-building efforts must be tailormade. A one-size-fits-all approach does not work. We
encourage the Secretariat to collect best practices and
examples of successful strategic communications on
the ground.
Secondly, Member States also have a critical role
to play in improving strategic communications by
providing support to host countries and communities.
For example, in South Sudan between 2012 and 2018,
Japan provided technical assistance to the South
Sudan Broadcasting Corporation in conjunction with
the activities of the United Nations Mission in South

22-4202723/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Sudan and the Japan Self-Defence Forces. The Japan
International Cooperation Agency provided technical
assistance and training to the Broadcasting Corporation
and its staff and helped disseminate a strategic vision
for peace and stability. We encourage others to share
good practices within the Security Council and
Peacebuilding Commission in order to garner a better
understanding of strategic communications, which is
easier said than done. Japan stands ready to continue
to play its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand welcomes
Brazil’s timely initiative in this open debate of the
Security Council to highlight the important role of
strategic communications in peacekeeping operations.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the briefers for their contributions.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers. In addition, I want to underscore the
following three points.
First, we need a strategy for communications
in peacekeeping that is clear, comprehensive and
implementable, while being adaptable to new situations.
To that end, Thailand supports expanding consultations
between the Security Council, host countries, troop- and
police-contributing countries and other stakeholders on
strategic communications in peacekeeping. That should
cover not only mission planning, but also evaluations
of the impact seen on mandate implementation and
identifying key lessons learned. Thailand also supports
cooperation on the issue under the auspices of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. That
includes the enhancement of strategic communications
capabilities at Headquarters and the relevant missions,
which is in alignment with the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
Secondly, communications related to peacekeeping
operations must be clear, timely, consistent and where
possible tailored to different groups of audiences.
They should also aim to support future efforts in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard,
Thailand emphasizes the importance of equipping
peacekeepers with strategic communications skills and
an enhanced understanding of local conditions, contexts
24/33

12/07/2022

and cultures. That could be further strengthened through
partnerships, including on increased use of relevant
digital technologies and continuing engagement with
the host country and relevant stakeholders.
That leads me to my third and final point, which
is building the trust and confidence of the host
Government and local actors. That is part and parcel
of effective strategic communications in peacekeeping
and perhaps at the heart of it. For its part, the Thai
peacekeeping contingent in the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan has helped build and repair more
than 400 kilometres of road in South Sudan and has
shared with the local communities Thailand’s best
practices in areas such as sustainable agriculture and
water and land management. If done correctly, with
foresight and consultations, such infrastructure and
skills will far outlive the presence of peacekeepers
and ensure sustainable peace and development. To that
end, we must continue to ensure timely and adequate
resources for community engagement by peacekeeping
operations and peacekeepers, in particular activities
that would support local development in line with host
countries’ national priorities. Their needs matter most.
Thailand also stands ready to share its best practices
in that regard, including our home-grown development
approaches of the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy and
the Bio-Circular-Green Economy Model.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
my own country, Denmark — I want to thank Brazil
for convening this timely meeting. I also wanted to
thank today’s briefers — Secretary-General António
Guterres,
Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Lieutenant General Marcos De Sá Affonso
Da Costa and Ms. Jenna Russo — for their insightful
remarks and above all, their important work on
addressing the key role of strategic communications in
United Nations peacekeeping.
The distribution of accurate content and the
countering of misinformation and disinformation
have taken on added importance in recent years.
Malicious actors are exploiting the rapid advances
in technology and the evolution of social media. In
recent years, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have become more frequent targets of misinformation,
disinformation and hate speech, posing new operational
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and reputational risks for United Nations missions.
Many examples could be cited. Let me mention just a
few. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, false
information is circulated on social media with the
malicious intention of discrediting the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Simultaneously, there has
been an escalation in hate speech and incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence that exacerbates
mistrust among communities and fuels violent conflict.
In Mali, influential militia and foreign mercenaries
are leading disinformation campaigns against United
Nations peacekeepers, falsely claiming that the United
Nations creates terrorist organizations. That undermines
the ability of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to support
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, protect civilians and facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid. And it puts the lives of
civilians and peacekeepers at increased risk.
The Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative
recognizes the enabler and multiplier effect of
strategic communications through its focus on
increasing confidence in peace processes, responding
to public sentiment and building support for
missions’ mandate among local populations and other
relevant stakeholders. Strategic communications
are strong tools for countering emerging threats by
addressing misinformation and disinformation, which
if left unchallenged hold the potential to inflict longterm damage on the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions.
Despite considerable progress, more needs to be
done, not just by the Secretariat and mission leadership
but also by Member States, including troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as by host
nations. Let me outline a few actions.
First, we need to acknowledge that effective strategic
communications can help improve the safety and
security of our peacekeepers. When troops and police
are unable to adequately protect themselves, they are
unable to protect those they serve. A survey conducted
by the Department of Peace Operations in March shows
that 44 per cent of peacekeeping mission personnel
indicate that misinformation and disinformation have
a severe or critical impact on the work of missions.
Therefore, as mission theatres become increasingly
dangerous, effective communications become critical
in securing the political and public support that United

S/PV.9090

Nations peacekeeping needs in order to create a safe
operational environment.
As Member States, we have a shared responsibility
to ensure that robust mandates and complex tasks
are matched by the specialized skills and capabilities
that they require. The use of emerging technologies is
paramount in that regard. We, the Nordic countries,
welcome the work on detecting, analysing and
addressing misinformation and disinformation that
has been initiated under the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping.
It is absolutely key that emerging technologies
be accompanied by adequate staffing with trained
and equipped personnel so as to proactively address
misinformation and disinformation, as well as by sound
policy and guidance that treat strategic communications
as central to mission planning and decision-making.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should scale up the use of a whole-of-mission approach
to strategic communications, which fosters local
dialogue and engagement and creates a more protective
environment for civilians. To that end, the Security
Council, together with the United Nations and troopand police-contributing countries, should ensure that
United Nations peacekeeping operations are able to act
as trusted sources of information.
Strategic communications can contribute to the
protection of civilians objectives in several ways, such
as by building trust; ensuring that mission strategies
are informed by the priorities and concerns of local
communities under threat; managing expectations
by informing local communities about the mission’s
strategy and measures; clarifying and correcting
misinformation; discouraging local populations from
joining armed groups; and countering narratives that
encourage and exacerbate violence.
It is therefore vital for United Nations peace
operations to proactively monitor and combat instances
of hate speech and incitement to violence. That requires
an active engagement with local communities, whose
voices also often have more resonance than those
coming from United Nations officials.
Thirdly and finally, United Nations peacekeeping
operations need to ensure the systematic use of
gender-sensitive communications in order to advance
the women and peace and security agenda as a tool
for changing gender norms, addressing issues related

22-4202725/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to gender-based violence and promoting women’s
participation in political or public life. Similarly,
proactive and transparent communications with local
actors to create a protective environment for civilians
are critical for preventing conflict-related sexual
violence in mission areas.
In conclusion, the importance of strategic
communications in United Nations peacekeeping
is indisputable. It is a critical whole-of-mission
responsibility. New technologies and communication
platforms offer new capabilities for sharing information
with the public and gathering public input to enhance
the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.
The Nordic countries remain steadfast in providing
support for exploring the possibilities offered by
new technologies, and we will continue to work to
promote the key role of strategic communications
in United Nations peace operations with all relevant
stakeholders. In that regard, the Nordic countries
welcome the initiative by the Secretariat to develop
a new communications strategy that will provide the
basis for much-needed training materials for civilian
and uniformed peacekeepers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Rizk (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to welcome you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council and congratulate Brazil on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. We wish Brazil every success in this
task. I also thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important meeting.
I would like to pay well-deserved tribute to our
martyr peacekeepers who sacrificed their lives in the
service of peace.
Egypt believes in the pivotal role played by United
Nations peacekeeping operations throughout the
world, which is evident in its support and its active
and extensive participation as a troop- and policecontributing country in those operations. Egypt is now
the sixth-largest troop-contributor in the world. Egypt
was also one of the first countries to support the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. We launched the Cairo Road
Map for Enhancing Peacekeeping Performance, which
seeks to translate the political commitments agreed
upon by Member States into practical and balanced
26/33

12/07/2022

measures that will help to reform the peacekeeping
system and increase its effectiveness.
Against that backdrop, Egypt is well aware of the
importance of strategic communications as an enabler
of United Nations peacekeeping operations that ensures
their smooth implementation in a safe and supportive
environment. In that context, I would like to share with
the Council the following points.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
are currently conducted in extremely difficult and
complex environments and are at times subjected to
misinformation and smear campaigns, as well as hate
speech. That calls for developing communication
strategies that take into account specific operational
environments and the challenges faced by such
operations, as well as harnessing modern technology to
achieve that goal.
Secondly, effective strategic communications
help increase peacekeepers’ situational awareness and
knowledge of the environments in which they operate.
They also provide an outlet for receiving intelligence,
which plays a pivotal role in assisting peacekeepers
in effectively carrying out their duties, in particular
the protection of civilians, as well as in promoting
the security and safety of peacekeepers by avoiding
potential risks.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must intensify
their efforts to communicate with the authorities of host
countries and local communities in order to explain
the nature of their mandates, manage expectations
and build mutual trust, which facilitates the work of
peacekeepers. One clear example of operations where
such communication is needed is the peacekeeping
operation in Mali, which is one of the most dangerous
operations, as it acts in an asymmetric environment
marked by activities carried out by armed groups,
despite the fact that peacekeeping operations do not
have counter-terrorism mandates due to the nature
of their duties, composition, equipment and the main
principles governing their work.
Fourthly, we underscore the fact that it is a key
responsibility of the Security Council to adopt clear
and realistic mandates for peacekeeping operations
and to avoid polarization, ambiguity and different
interpretations that undermine the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and make it difficult for
them to communicate with the authorities and local
communities in host countries.
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fifthly, we must provide adequate human and
financial resources for peacekeeping operations in
order to guarantee effective communication strategies
using local languages.
Sixthly, peacekeeping operations must coordinate
and cooperate well with host countries in order to
ensure integrated efforts and unified messages when
communicating with local communities, while taking
into consideration the mutual commitments between
the United Nations and host countries, based on statusof-forces agreements.
Last but not least, the Secretariat must develop
integrated training material to assist in training and
rehabilitating peacekeepers during the predeployment
phase, while using communication strategies and tools
and enhancing their effectiveness.
In conclusion, I would like to stress Egypt’s support
for promoting strategic communications in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. I thank you again,
Mr. President, for convening and presiding over today’s
important meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I want to express my warmest thanks to Brazil
for convening this important meeting and for devoting
this open debate to a topic as crucial as the role of
strategic communications in peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and commend him for his ongoing
efforts to enhance peacekeeping and strengthen its
effectiveness and efficiency. We are encouraged by the
work of the Secretariat, in particular the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, to bolster momentum to
achieve further progress, as well as by the tangible
improvements and positive developments that have
already been made. I want to reiterate to the SecretaryGeneral that he can count on my country’s full support
for the ongoing reforms that he continues to lead. The
Kingdom of Morocco will always be by his side in that
noble undertaking.
Peacekeeping remains the most effective and
profitable way to provide the necessary practical
support in reaching lasting political solutions to crises
and conflicts. Unfortunately, the reality is that such
efforts have been obstructed in the past two years by
disinformation campaigns targeting peacekeeping

S/PV.9090

operations through the media and across social networks.
In his report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
the Secretary-General rightly underscored that
disinformation poses an existential risk to humankind.
That only further emphasizes the crucial importance
of facilitating access for all to reliable information and
verified facts. In order to do that, in the specific context
of peacekeeping operations, we need to mobilize globally
to implement concrete action, and that could include
strengthened partnerships between the United Nations
and host countries in their various capacities in order to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
Among other things, the success of peacekeeping
operations depends on a properly planned and carefully
developed mandate based on national ownership and
the support of the international community, as well as
the consent and support of the parties concerned, along
with adequate funding.
First, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation should be accompanied by an appropriate
communications strategy that helps to manage the
expectations of the civilian population well and that
clearly and transparently defines its responsibilities, its
scope and its operational limits. The role of the media is
crucial in that regard, because media attention enables
us to shed light not only on the mandates, objectives
and successes of peacekeeping operations but also on
the problems they encounter.
Secondly, inter-United Nations coordination is
crucial to implementing awareness-raising strategies
aimed at eradicating stereotypes that could contribute
to negative views of peacekeeping operations. In that
connection, we welcome the existing coordination
between the Department of Peace Operations and the
Department of Global Communications, as well as
the joint activities undertaken to build the capacity
of missions on the ground, including in the field
of strategic communications. We are particularly
encouraged by efforts to train personnel dedicated to
the detection and surveillance of disinformation and to
develop innovative, situation-specific communications
strategies that seek to raise awareness among the
general public of the work done by peacekeepers and the
challenges they face in an often increasingly unstable
operating environment.
Thirdly, new technologies must be integrated into
peacekeeping operations, as their use is becoming more
and more essential — indeed, it is now imperative in
complementing existing efforts aimed at improving

22-4202727/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

early-warning capacity and providing additional
tools in terms of follow-up and conflict analysis.
The inclusion of such elements among the objectives
of the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of
United Nations Peacekeeping is all the more welcome
because it will contribute to strengthening the safety
and security of Blue Helmets and other United
Nations mission personnel at a time when they are
more and more frequent targets of violent attacks and
disinformation campaigns.
Through their commitment and their sacrifice,
Blue Helmets have become true symbols of the United
Nations, making it recognizable around the world to all.
By communicating effectively in ways that are as well
adapted as possible to specific peacekeeping missions
and their objectives, we will be able to promote the role
of the Blue Helmets, provide them with the most relevant
and effective tools at the disposal of the international
community and of course the United Nations, guarantee
their safety and security and strengthen the reputation
they have built over more than 70 years.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to pay
heartfelt tribute to all civilian and uniform personnel
who have made the ultimate sacrifice while serving in
the name of the noble cause of peace under the United
Nations flag.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank the Permanent Mission of Brazil
for convening this open debate and the SecretaryGeneral and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
Mr. Carlos França, for their presence here this morning.
I also thank Lieutenant General Marcos de Sá Affonso
Da Costa and Ms. Jenna Russo for their briefings and
contributions today, particularly in the current context,
in which the escalation of situations of armed conflict
poses a threat to international peace and security and
especially to the safety of peacekeepers and their
fulfilment of their mandates.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers, and we would like to
make some additional remarks in our national capacity.
Uruguay believes that peacekeeping operations
continue to be one of the most important instruments
28/33

12/07/2022

at the disposal of the United Nations in its efforts to
maintain international peace and security. We recognize
the importance of strategic communications as a key
tool to improve the fulfilment of mandates, as well
as to ensure the security of peacekeeping personnel
and strengthen the protection of civilians. Nor should
we fail to mention that strategic communications
must be aligned with both the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its Action for
Peacekeeping Plus implementation strategy. In that
regard, we acknowledge the efforts of the Department
of Peace Operations in developing policy guidelines,
tools and training to address misinformation, promote
a positive narrative and encourage support for United
Nations peacekeeping.
Strategic communications should also align with
the women and peace and security agenda. In that
regard, I would like to highlight not only the importance
of women’s participation at all stages and at all levels,
but also in this case the key role that women play in
communicating with local communities, particularly
in the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence
and as a channel of communication with victims and
survivors. In general terms, increasing the presence of
women personnel in peace operations is a high priority
for my country.
Peacekeeping operations are dealing with a
growing risk from disinformation campaigns that can
undermine missions’ reputations and harm their ability
to implement mandates, which is a threat to the security
of peacekeepers themselves. Such campaigns can also
erode the confidence of local populations. That is why
we must work to ensure that peacekeeping operations
build trust with host Governments and countries, as
well as with local actors, by providing transparent
information about their activities. To that end, missions
must be adequately trained to act proactively in order to
combat the problem of disinformation.
Strategic communications are a vital necessity in
peacekeeping operations, and the Security Council,
the General Assembly and troop-contributing
countries must therefore work together to improve
strategic communications capabilities, both at United
Nations Headquarters and at the level of individual
peacekeeping missions. That is why we offer our
full support in pursuing those objectives within the
framework of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and by fully promoting the use of the technologies
envisaged in the Strategy for the Digital Transformation
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of United Nations Peacekeeping. In addition to the
matter of the overall framework of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, in such cases we must also
take into account the specific mandate of the respective
peacekeeping forces.
Finally, we cannot forget the fundamental role
of community liaison assistants in the dialogue and
communication between the missions and the local
communities, and I would like to express our interest
in being able to count on their participation in future
open debates of the Security Council or briefings
to the membership, in particular to troop- and
police-contributing countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal
aligns itself with the statements to be delivered by the
representative of the European Union and on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers, and would like to add the
following points in its national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank Brazil for
underlining, with this debate, the key importance of
strategic communications in peacekeeping. Ensuring
that peacekeeping missions properly communicate
with local communities, host Governments and other
stakeholders is crucial to fulfilling their mandates,
protecting civilians and promoting the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

S/PV.9090

We need to step up efforts to counter disinformation,
misinformation and hate speech targeted at missions
and peacekeepers. Human resources, adequate
technology, tools, training and financing are key,
as are good practices, such as the one in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan’s establishment of a
WhatsApp group, with hundreds of influencers who
help to cut misinformation and tell compelling stories
about the Mission’s mandate, and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic’s distribution of tens of
thousands of solar-powered radios to local communities,
facilitating their access to information.
Better communication strategies may also provide
better information about the level of protection that
missions can provide to civilians. At the same time, the
prevention of gender-based violence and discrimination
against women and girls will benefit from a stronger
investment in the protection of human rights and in
human rights education and communication, as well
as in women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership.
Missions should differentiate target audiences
and address certain communications specifically to
women. Gender gaps in access to digital technologies
should be considered. Messages must represent
women and men equally and avoid reinforcing gender
stereotypes, which are among the root causes of
some ethnic conflicts. Ensuring gender parity among
communications personnel, we believe, would make all
the above much easier.

Designing a communication strategy is a task
that should not wait until after a mission has started.
A public information assessment must be carried
out prior to the launch of any mission to identify the
most effective ways of reaching the local population.
That is in line with the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations Principles and Guidelines
and resolution 2594 (2021).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

Portugal participates in several United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and it is clear that we are
facing growing challenges related to misinformation
and disinformation. That can have effects on the
credibility and the perceptions regarding the efficacy
and legitimacy of missions. It can also directly affect
the safety and security of peacekeepers and the
communities that they serve.

The Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative
emphasizes that strategic communication can promote
success, manage expectations and help to address
disinformation and hate speech. We commend the
Secretariat for prioritizing this topic in the follow-up to
A4P+, and would like to highlight the following.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to wish you, Mr. President, every
success in your presidency of the Security Council.
Switzerland thanks you for organizing this open
debate, the first of its kind, and the briefers for their
valuable contributions.

First, in several peacekeeping operations we observe
a mismatch between the mandate and capabilities, on

22-4202729/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the one hand, and the expectations of local populations,
on the other hand. Peacekeepers are often perceived by
the population as the main guarantor of their protection,
whereas they are deployed only in support of the
Government of the host State. Peacekeeping operations
face the challenge of explaining their mandate and the
limits of their action. They should understand local
concerns, particularly those of women, and respond
appropriately in order to prevent additional risks to
peacekeepers. That is particularly the case during the
transition from a peacekeeping operation to another
United Nations presence.
Secondly, strategic communication must advance
key United Nations agendas and use modern channels.
The emphasis on diversity within missions underscores
the importance of the equal role that women should play
in peace processes. Communication channels should
also be tailored to target groups, including young
people — for example, through community liaison
teams or social media.
Thirdly, action speaks louder than words. A United
Nations mission that performs effectively and efficiently
contributes to the implementation of its mandate and the
safety and security of its staff, but it also communicates
its capacity to act. Peacekeeping operations must
become even more effective, particularly through
training and the implementation of the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System, which
allows for the visibility and communication of results.
Finally, effective strategic communication requires
an enabling framework for its implementation.
That framework must advance coordination among
the various pillars of peacekeeping operations. We
welcome the Secretariat’s efforts to develop a general
policy in that area. That should emphasize the need
to integrate communication into strategic planning
with the aim of achieving a proactive and anticipatory
communication that contributes to the success of
peacekeeping operations.
Communication is also important for the Security
Council. The inclusion of perspectives from Member
States, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the voices
of women and civil society, makes the Council’s
communication transparent and credible, and therefore
more effective. As a future member of the Security
Council, Switzerland will work towards that goal.
30/33

12/07/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by commending your leadership, Mr. President, in
convening today’s open debate on this critical issue.
As technologies have become more prevalent
and more sophisticated, we are seeing armed groups
exploiting such technologies to influence public
perceptions and political discourse. In the context of
United Nations peacekeeping, that alarming trend
undermines public trust and confidence in missions,
thereby threatening the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, as well as the delivery of mandates.
As such, strategic communications, as one of the seven
priorities in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus plan, has
become increasingly important. In that vein, I would
like to emphasize the following two points.
First, the United Nations should take an integrated
approach to supporting field missions in responding
to disinformation, misinformation and hate speech. To
tackle such elements, the United Nations must provide
peacekeeping operation missions with the proper
guidance and tools to improve monitoring, detection,
analysis and response capabilities.
In that regard, Korea welcomes the Strategy
for the Digital Transformation of United Nations
Peacekeeping, which seeks to help missions harness
the potential of digital technologies and mitigate their
risks. Korea has already contributed to the development
of the strategy and will continue to work closely with
the United Nations to support its implementation,
especially on the project on countering misinformation
and disinformation.
Secondly, Member States need to focus on
building trust with host and local Governments. When
a mission’s reputation is tarnished by the spread of
misinformation, mandate implementation can be more
challenging as well. Without proper communication
with local authorities, there can be restrictions on
peacekeepers’ movement or delays in resupply. That, in
turn, can threaten the lives of Blue Helmets, as well as
the civilians they are mandated to protect.
We should therefore consider engaging more
actively with local communities through civilian and
military coordination activities. The experience of
Korean peacekeepers, currently deployed to South
Sudan and Lebanon, shows us that such engagement
22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9090

not only improves the safety and security of our
peacekeepers, but also facilitates the implementation
of their mandates. The United Nations Engagement
Platoon is another good example in that regard.

us say, the daily patrols. More efforts could be invested
in impact assessment, which, among other things, could
yield plausible claims about what peacekeepers could
have prevented.

The Republic of Korea takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its concrete commitment to supporting
peacekeeping operations by promoting effective and
strategic communications.

As political actors, peacekeeping operations have
to take part — to a certain extent — in public discourse
and proactively shape ongoing discussions. I would
like to encourage peacekeeping operations to become
as operational as possible when it comes to strategic
communications in the field.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I too thank the
Brazilian presidency and, especially, Minister Franco
França for organizing an open debate on this important
topic. I also thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their valuable insights today.
Let me start by expressing our deep gratitude to
all United Nations peacekeepers. They contribute to
establishing stability, engage in mediation efforts, help
deter violence and offer support for elections. All of
those efforts deserve our full respect and support.
However, local populations tend to overestimate the
ability of peacekeeping operations to achieve immediate
positive impact. Those populations are likely to become
frustrated when security and development problems
persist longer than they had expected and hoped for.
As we heard today, that is further aggravated by
political actors trying to blame the United Nations for
bad governance. Recent smear campaigns on social
media and the increase of deliberate misinformation
have made peace operations more difficult. That
development results in acute and immediate danger
for peacekeepers, and clear communication of the
objectives and limitations of peacekeeping missions
is crucial.
Together we need to echo a shared message — United
Nations peacekeeping is always the common effort of
all States Members of the United Nations to achieve
a peaceful resolution of violent conflict. United
Nations peacekeeping is based on a clear mandate by
the Security Council. We must stand united against
verbal — or worse — physical attacks on peacekeepers,
as they challenge the United Nations at its very core.
Yet, whenever peacekeepers are able to take
decisive action, their popularity increases significantly.
Accordingly,
peacekeeping
needs
to
better
communicate existing efforts on the output level — let

In order to be successful, peacekeepers need to
understand the local context and the evolving security
situation by listening to the population. That requires
more resources and special language training, as well
as specific tools and enablers, such as Community
Liaison Assistants and engagement teams.
We know that the Department of Peace Operations
is working to address those challenges, specifically with
an important new project on countering misinformation
and disinformation. As one of the largest contributors
to the United Nations peacekeeping budget, alongside
considerable extra-budgetary funding, Germany is
proud to continue to support these efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Benard Estrada (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the Federative Republic
of Brazil, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council for the month of July 2022, for convening this
open debate on the key role of strategic communications
for effective United Nations peacekeeping.
As a troop-contributing country with a protection-ofcivilians mandate, Guatemala recognizes that strategic
communications are critical to peace operations. It is
important to strengthen the communication strategy
to inform the local, national and international public
about the important work of peacekeepers in preventing
threats to civilians.
Guatemala
recognizes
that
strategic
communications must be at the forefront in order
to promote the safety and security of peacekeepers
operating in dangerous environments, while at the same
time preserving the basic principles of peacekeeping, in
particular the principle of the consent of the parties.
The evolution and dynamics of strategic
communications can offer peace operations new

22-4202731/33

S/PV.9090

United Nations peacekeeping operations

capabilities to share information with various relevant
stakeholders. The High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations noted that “United Nations peace
operations often struggle to communicate their
messages to the local population and the broader global
community” (S/2015/446, para. 306).
Today peacekeeping operations can improve their
strategic communications so that what is being done
on the ground is truthfully reported. The leadership
of peacekeeping missions needs to use central
communication tools for planning and decision-making.
Most missions lack strategic communications staff with
the necessary specialized skills. There is also a tendency
to use strategic communications in a reactive way.
Guatemala believes that missions should take
into account all audiences and constituencies — at
the national, regional and international levels — and
tailor their messages to each, in line with the principle
of the consent of the parties and respecting the
political independence and sovereignty of host and
neighbouring countries.
The experience of different peace missions of
the Organization has shown that the use of strategic
communications is not only a crucial element for
the full implementation of mandates, but is also an
operational necessity. Therefore, in order to strengthen
and improve the use of strategic communication,
a cultural change is needed in the work with
peacekeeping mission personnel in order to recognize
that effective strategic communication is not only the
responsibility of leadership, but of the entire mission
as a whole. In addition, it is important that information
be shared quickly and effectively with troop- and
police-contributing countries and peacekeepers.
In conclusion, Guatemala believes that adopting
guidelines to develop and coordinate strategic
communications plans will allow for greater coherence
for all actors involved in the mandates derived from
the Security Council. In addition, through efficient
communication, the local population can be made aware
of the work that peacekeeping operations carry out for
the benefit of the populations where they are deployed.

12/07/2022

a discussion on such a topical subject. I would also
like to thank the briefers for their insightful remarks
earlier today and, in the presence of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to pass on to all the women
and men who represent the United Nations in various
peacekeeping operations around the world our great
admiration and respect for that very difficult and
important work.
The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova and the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina align themselves with this statement.
Strategic communications, whether through
traditional media or new technologies, play an
increasingly important role in peacekeeping mandate
implementation. It is an essential tool in protecting
civilians and promoting the safety and security
of peacekeepers. We very much welcome the 2021
Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping and the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative, in which strategic communications
is one of the priorities. We would also like to take
this opportunity to honour those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the pursuit of peace.
The European Union (EU) closely works on the
ground with United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and it is ready to provide further support to the United
Nations in this area. Close coordination among local
and international partners, together with enhanced
strategic communications vis-à-vis the local population
and media, is essential in particular to exposing and
denouncing infringements of international norms by
other actors.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.

While unintentional misinformation poses a
challenge, intentional targeting through information
manipulation, including disinformation by malign
actors, is particularly worrisome. With various levels
of sophistication, information manipulation actions
can be directed either against the host country in broad
terms, at the missions in general or more specifically at
the missions’ and operations’ operational effectiveness,
with a view to undermining them by, for instance,
hindering their freedom of movement or targeting
individual staff members.

Mr. Skoog: I would like to thank Brazil for
convening, for the first time at the Security Council,

Unfortunately, over the last few years, there has
been a significant increase in disinformation campaigns,

32/33

22-42027

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

using social media or other platforms to target United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In Mali, in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, this trend is particularly worrying, as
described in the Secretary-General’s reports related
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Not only do these campaigns,
which often seek to incite hatred and violence, have
an impact on peacekeepers’ security and safety, but
they also complicate their task of protecting civilians.
Furthermore, they exacerbate tensions and foster
instability in the concerned country and region.
We welcome the Department of Peace Operations’
increased engagement in countering disinformation,
along with the commitment of the Secretary-General
and the Department of Global Communications to
countering disinformation in other areas. Sufficient
staff and resources should be allocated to these critical
activities, especially on the ground, close to the
missions. It requires staff who have a good knowledge
and understanding of the national and regional dynamics
at play and are able to engage with local populations at
all levels, as well as with the media.
Rapidly evolving digital technologies make the
scope and potential impact of the threat even greater,
which is why it is key to increase investment and
capabilities to protect United Nations peacekeeping
operations, their staff and the host country from the
devastating and undermining impact of information
manipulation. This should be done through proactive
actions fighting misinformation and through fact-based
and targeted United Nations strategic communication,
using all media relevant to the theatre, including digital
technologies, but also radio and television when most
adapted to the context, as well as through addressing
gender disparities in access to information.

S/PV.9090

The EU is engaged in peace and security in
much the same volatile environments as the United
Nations. Like the United Nations, the EU has also
become a disinformation target. In order to counter
such activities, we have stepped up preparedness to
protect our institutions and operational capacities. On
5 December 2018, the EU adopted an Action Plan against
Disinformation with specific proposals for a coordinated
EU response to tackle disinformation. The Action Plan
builds on four pillars: first, to improve our ability to
detect, analyse and expose disinformation; secondly, to
strengthen coordinated and joint responses by member
States and EU institutions; thirdly, to mobilize the
private sector, including online platforms, to tackle
disinformation; and, fourthly, to raise awareness and
improve societal resilience to disinformation.
In addition, and in line with the Strategic Compass
for Security and Defence, we are currently developing
an EU toolbox to address and counter foreign
information manipulation and interference, including
in our Common Security and Defence Policy missions
and operations. This will contribute to an enhanced EU
engagement on disinformation, also within the United
Nations, as well as to strengthening our preparedness
for cooperation on the ground.
I want to thank the presidency again for taking the
initiative of convening today’s discussion and express
the willingness of the European Union to continue
exchanging lessons learned and good practices with a
view to improving the United Nations response to the
new challenges concerning strategic communications
and peacekeeping.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

22-4202733/33
