UNITED NATIONS

S

URITY

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-EIGHTH

NEW

C

“,
.a

REC

>*: /

;,1B~~~:;

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 17 18) . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 ( I973 );
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973)
(S/10929) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 17 18

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplementin which it appearsor in which jnformation about it is given
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numberedin accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumesof Resolutiorlsand Decisiom of the
Security Council. The new system, which has beenappliedretroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operativeon that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on ,Thursday, 7 June 1973,. a”t 10.30 a.m.
‘President: Mr; Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

meeting. In accordance with. established practice and the
provisional rules of procedure, and with the Council’s
consent, I propose to invite the representatives of Morocco
and the United Arab Emirates to take part, without the
right to vote, in the Council’s examination of the situation
in the Middle East.

Prtisenr: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Zentar
(Morocco) and Mr, A. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates)
took the places resewed for them in the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 7 18)

3. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I invite
the first speaker at today’s meeting, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania, to take a place
at the Council table and I give him the floor.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/ 10929).

4. Mr. MALECELA

Republic

of Tanzania):

through you, the members of the Council for the opportunity given to my delegation to participate in the Council’s
deliberations on the Middle East question.

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. May I also, Mr. President, take this opportunity to
extend to you the congratulations of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. It is a happy coincidence that a man of
your outstanding qualities and dedication, a worthy representative of a great country, should preside over the
deliberations of the Council on so crucial an issue. We are
confident that under your able and wise leadership the
Council will arrive at the right conclusions consonant with
the prevailing situation. To that end, we pledge our fullest
co-operation and wish you and the Council all success.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
{bj Report of the Secretary-General, under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

(United

Mr. President, allow me first of all to thank you and,

Security

1, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its previous
meeting, I shall, with the Council’s consent, invite the
representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Nigeria and Algeria to take part in the Council’s examination of the situation in the Middle East.

6. 1 should also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the service of
peace. Ever since his appointment as Secretary-General he
has left no stone unturned in search of peace. Be it on the
Middle East or on southern Africa he has certainly exerted
all his efforts. If I may say so, one thing is sure and that is
that we cannot accuse the Secretary-General of not trying.

At the invitation of the fiesident, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel), and Mr. A. H Sharaf
(Jordan)
took places at the Council table; and
Mr. J, W. S. Malecela (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. H. G, Ouangmotching (Chad), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian
Arab
Republic),
Mr. 0. Arikpo
(Nigeria),
and
Mr. A. Boutefhka (Algeria) took the places resewed for
them in the Council chamber.

7. At its tenth ordinary session the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African IJnity
@AU) was again seized of this important question of the
Middle East. ‘Certain important decisions were made at that
meeting and one of those decisions wasthat certain Foreign
Ministers, amongst whom 1 was honoured to be one, be
designated to come and make the feelings of Africa known
to this august body regarding the extremely explosive
situation in the Middle East and the dangers inherent in
that situation. It is in conformity with this mandate that I
am now taking the floor.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I should
like to inform the members of the Security Council that, as
President of the Council I have received letters from the
representatives of Morocco and the United Arab Emirates
requesting that their delegations be invited to take part in
consideration of the agenda item before the Council at this
1

8. Since the Israel aggression of 1967-and here my
delegation would not like to go into the historical background-that country has continued to occupy several parts
of territories belonging to independent Arab States, especially the Republic of Egypt, a founding member of OAU. It
has been rightly stated that this situation is a threat to
international security and that, hence, this Council must
not only talk and express pious sentiments without taking
firm and concrete action to dislodge the aggressor and to put
right the situation brought about by that aggression. For us
in Africa the situation is not only a continuing menace to
the territorial integrity of Egypt, but is also a situation
which we view as a direct threat to our own security.
9. Our concern with the situation in the Middle East does
not spring only from the fact that an African State is a
victim of aggression. It stems also from the fact that Israel
has now developed an immunity to international public
opinion comparable to that of the minority racist r6gimes
in southern Africa. The international community has called
on South Africa several times to withdraw from Namibia.
That regime has continued to defy that call. In the same
way this Organization, OAU, the Conference of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, which was held in
Georgetown, Guyana, as well as Governments, institutions
and individuals have called upon Israel to withdraw from
Arab territories, with no favourable response from the
Government of Israel. It has continued to flout world
public opinion and has continued to disregard it completely. Once it painted the picture of a small country
threatened with extinction. In fact when the representative
of Israel spoke yesterday the same picture again was
painted in this Council. Yet now it is proving itself not as a
country which is threatened but as the country which is
threatening others. Further, it has begun to propound and
to practise aggression and expansionism and its behaviour
has continued to be that of an aggressor. It has continuously committed acts of aggression against some of the
Arab States and it has continued to practise its policy of
expansionism by holding on to countries occupied as a
result of aggression while arrogantly maintaining that it
does not envisage withdrawing
to the borders existing
before the war of aggression in 1967. Recently it has
embarked on acts of terrorism as a policy of State and these
acts of terrorism have been endorsed by the highest levels
of Israeli leadership.
10. This Organization cannot accept that position. it is a
position which, if endorsed, will mean the endorsement of
the acquisition of territories through the use of force. It is a
position which if accepted will mean acceptance of aggression as a policy in international relations. It is a position
which, if we endorse it, will really mean endorsing the rule
of the jungle, that is, a world without law. Surely this is not
what this Organization was established to defend and
perpetuate.
11. Yet we have repeatedly stated these things before. We
have called on Israel to withdraw from the territories it
illegally occupies. We have called on it to abide by the law
and to treat the people in the occupied territories in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention. We have
called on it not to change the status of Jerusalem, we have
called on it to respect the legitimate aspirations of the

Palestinian people whom it has forcibly evicted from its
homeland, Lastly we have approved the appointment of the
Special Representative and the initiative which he has tried
to undertake under very difficult circumstances. But the
result of all this is for Israel to reject one initiative after
another, giving one or the other of numerous flimsy
excuses. The refusal by Israel to answer the special
memorandum of the Special Representative is a clear
indication of the contempt with which Israel treats th&
efforts. It is also a clear indication of the complete
contempt of the position of the Special Representative and
through him the Secretary-General. That initiative of the
Special Representative was indeed a step to be commended
as designed to evade the deadlock which had come up at
that stage of the contacts. The Government of Egypt must
be commended for the prompt action it took in answering
positively the questions put to it by the Special Representative. On the other hand, the Government of Israel must
stand condemned for its refusal to respond to the initiatives
of the Special Representative, and of course the proposals
which it put up designed to perpetuate the consequences of
aggression.
12. As I said before, this Organization has called for the
withdrawal of the Israel forces from the occupied territories. The Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Countries
in Georgetown also have called for the unconditional
withdrawal of the Israelis from the occupied territories. On
several occasions OAU has done the same. The Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of OAU took an initiative
to talk to the parties in the conflict in exercise of their duty
to protect the security of Africa, That initiative was again
frustrated by Israil. Israel has turned a deaf ear to all these
calls and has indeed looked at all these calls with complete
defiance. The international community represented by this
Organization cannot and should not stand idle in the face
of this defiance. It was in the light of these considerations
that OAU at its summit session just concluded in Addis
Ababa suggested to its members that they consider taking
all measures, political and economic, against Israel if it is
not going to heed the call of the international community
and withdraw its troops from the occupied territories. It is.
indeed, on those lines that we have come through this
Council, to warn Israel that unless it heeds these inlernational calls it will definitely be compelling OAU to take
such steps.
13. This Council was designed to be an instrument of
peace. It was designed to implement the decision which it
took to see that peace is maintained. That decision has
already been taken. The framework of peace in the Middle
East has been laid down under Security Council resolution
242 (1967). Egypt has through its positive co-operation
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Jarring, demonstrated its willingness and reaclincss to
implement that resolution, while Israel has taken a position
amounting to frustration of it. Therefore it is the duty of
this Council to carry out its obligation so that the Utlitcd
Nations may not be brought into further disrepute.
14. All States, especially those which claim to stand on
the side of justice, should refrain from making it possible
for Israel to enjoy the fruits of aggression. In this respect
the role of certain Governments is indeed crucial. Tll~c

Governments have constantly supplied Israel with arms and
all-out support. Without that support Israel could never
afford to assume the posture of arrogance and indifference
to the opinion of the world community, let alone successfully carve away the Arab territories it now occupies. But
with that support assured it has developed the most
intolerable recalcitrance and arrogance, which must be
condemned by the United Nations.

security and sovereignty of other States while the world
body remains a passive spectator. Such an era would indeed
be hazardous to the freedom and Independence of the not
so powerful States in the world of today- Viewed in this
context, I submit, Israel’s intransigence, expansionism and
aggressive postures should be a subject of concern not only
to the Arab and African States but indeed to the entire
third world.

15. As we are sitting in this Council the Israeli authorities
have just concluded the festivities to mark the twenty-fifth
year of the founding of the State of Israel. On that occasion
Israel not only commemorated its birthday but also boasted
of its activities and achievements since its founding-among
them being, of course, the activity of occupying Arab
territories. Among the festivities staged was a mammoth
military
parade in Jerusalem. As the members of this
Council know, that parade was held once more in flagrant
defiance of Security Council resolutions 250 (1968) and
‘251 (1968), to which the President of the Council had
drawn the attention of the Israeli Government before the
parade. That parade shamelessly demonstrated and epitomized Israel’s contempt for the United Nations and indeed
for the entire world community.

18. We have come to this Council not merely to express
our firm and unequivocal support for and solidarity with a
sister African State-the Arab Republic of Egypt-a victim
of a brutal aggression perpetrated by an extracontinental
State. Nor are we here simply to reiterate our indignation
and concern at the continued forceful occupation of the
Arab lands of Jordan and Syria or for that matter to place
on record our unreserved support for the Palestinian
people, who have for too long been dispossessed,oppressed
and repressed but who have valiantly refused to give up the
struggle for the realization of their legitimate aspirations
notwithstanding the formidable might and ruthlessness of
their oppressors.

16. It is indeed ironical that that State should have found
it approtiriate to commemorate its silver jubilee by an act
of defiance of the decision of this Organization to which it
owes its very existence. Yet we must recognize the cold fact
that from its very inception Israel has sought to defy one
decision of the United Nations after another. The fact that
the size of present-day Israel is far larger than that of the
State created under the partition plan [General Assembly
resoi’ution I81 (Iljl, because of its expansionist policies, is
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that, though Israel is a
product of the United Nations, that State has constantly
pursued aims and policies inimical to the purposes and
principles of our Organization. While one is tempted to
catalogue the series of acts of defiance and violations
committed by Israel before and after the 5 June hostilities,
I must refrain from doing so, This is because I am
convinced that such an exercise is not only unnecessary but
a great waste of the time of the Council, since its members
are more than familiar with the various incidents and
actions. These are actions which have served to alienate the
sympathy that at one time many a country had for Israel
out of consideration for the sufferings inflicted on the
Jewish people by the Nazis in Germany.
I7. While we do not consider it necessary to give a
detailed account of Israel’s hostile actions against the
Organization in the process of consolidating its conquests
and stifling the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
it is, I submit, imperative that we draw the necessary
experience and conclusions from them” Our intervention in
the current debate stems from free Africa’s understanding
of the implications of Israel’s actions and our recognition of
the inherent danger of such practices in the domain of
international relations. For it would be the height of folly
not to recognize that, if such practices are allowed to
triumph, then the world will have entered a new and highly
precarious era in which an aggressive State, because of the
massive support and encouragement that it receives from
one or more powerful States, can play havoc with the

19. Naturally, through our participation in the discussions
of the item under consideration by the Council, we seek to
make our position quite clear on these issues. But there is
an even greater and more fundamental reason behind our
presence here, mandated as we are by the supreme organ of
our continental organization, the Organization of African
Unity: this is to reaffirm our fum determination and
resolve to support and strengthen the United Nations. If I
may put it briefly and clearly, I would say that we, as
members of OAU, have indeed all come here to strengthen
the reputation of the United Nations. We are here,
therefore, to render our full support to the principles and
purposes of the United Nations and to this end to demand
uncompromisingly
that its decisions be scrupulously
adhered to. For, in the final analysis, the aggressive and
expansionist conduct of the Israeli authorities not only
constitutes a serious threat to the freedom, peace and
security of the Arab States but, above all, poses a
continuing menace to the very authority and credibility of
the United Nations.
20. The persistent denial of the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, the consolidation
of the fruits of conquest, the increasingly brutal incursions
into the sovereign State of Lebanon-all these are measures
undertaken with impunity by Israel in flagrant violation of
United Nations resolutions-which puts into serious question the authority of this Organization.
21. Thus it is not just the Palestinians and the Arab people
whose territories are under foreign occupation and who
have to endure the arrogance and humiliating practices of
an occupying Power: it is indeed the United Nations which
is now being made to appear as a hopeless institution in the
face of continuing aggression and scornful and contemptuous behaviour by the aggressor. The African people, who
are already gravely concerned at the erosion of United
Nations authority in dealing with the recalcitrance of the
apartheid and colonial minority regimes in the southern
part of our continent, have every reason to be more
apprehensive and preoccupied at the spectacle of another

28. Fourthly, following the premeditated air attacks on
villages in southern Lebanon, the Council, in its resolution
270 (1969) of 26 August 1969, again warned Israel that it
would have to consider further measures envisaged under
the Charter to ensure against repetition of such attacks.

recalcitrant regime ‘playing havoc with the security and
independence of a North African State, in blatant disregard
for the demands of the international community.
22. Free Africa, which wishes to be left alone in order to
develop its resources for the well-being of its people, to
eliminate the hangover of centuries of degradation and
humiliation, has greater reason to expect from this Council
firm and positive action designed to bring to an end the
anomalous and highly dangerous situation now prevailing in
the Middle East. Because, in order to develop, our
continent needs peace based on the freedom of our people.
And that peace is unthinkable when one of the members of
our family-an older and an important one, at thatcontinues to be subjected to foreign occupation. That peace
becomes fragile when the legitimate rights of a people to
self-determination are trampled under’ foot. Indeed, that
peace becomes Utopian when the law of the jungle is
allowed to hold swayin our present day and age.

29. Fifthly, subsequent to the invasion of Lebanon by
Israeli forces, the Council, by resolution 280 (1970) of
19 May 1970, once again warned Israel that it would
consider further measures under the Charter to’implement
its resolutions; furthermore, a similar warning was given in
resolution 316 (1972) of 26 June 1972, following further
acts of aggressioncommitted by Israel against Lebanon.
30. We ask a very sincere question: When will the Council
take those “effective measures under the Charter” instead of
time and again, repeating the same warning, which is really
now becoming a very stale thing in the documents of the
United Nations?
31, It is quite clear from the foregoing enumeration of the
Council’s previous decisions that this august body has not
been found wanting when it’ comes ‘to condemning ‘the
aggressoror, for that matter, serving an appropriate warning,
Yet, as I said earlier, these condemnations and warnings
make pathetic readings. For while the Security Council has
proliferated ‘its condemnations and warnings, Israel has
intensified its policies of annexation and State terrorism
against some of its ,neighbours. State terrorism has been
practised in particular against innocent civilians of
Lebanon. It is in that country, Lebanon, that the Israeli
military seem to take immense satisfaction in peifeiting
their skills, and at times, ironical as it may be, with the full
glamour of publicity.

23. I have put deliberate emphasis on our expectation for
firm action by this Council. For it is not sufficient to
indulge in mere condemnations or strong warnings. Such
courses of action may on different occasions have had
momentary salutary effects for the Council if not for the
victims of aggression. But, most certainly, they have not
brought solution to the problem any nearer. A close study
of the report of the Secretary-General [S/lCJ929/ -and here
we must again pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for a
well-prepared document-is an eloquent testimony to
Israel’s “immunity”
and indeed its insensitivity to mere
condemnations and warnings, however seriously couched
by this Council.
.,
24. From the June 1967 war to date, that rdgime has been
condemned by the Council at least seven times-1 repeat: at
least seven times. It has also received several warnings-I
repeat: several warnings-to no avail. In retrospect, some of
those warnings make pathetic reading, not to speak of the
fact that they make this Council perfectly ridiculous. To
refresh the memories of the members of the Council, I
would just like to go through some of those warnings which
it has issued.

32. Fulfilling the mandate entrusted by the Tenth Summit
Conference of OAU, the Tanzanian delegation wishes to
make an earnest appeal to the Council ,to’ take decisive
measures to arrest and to terminate the trend of lawlessness
and injustice in the Middle E’ast. We call upon the Council
to decide, here and now, on effective rgeasures calculated
to eliminate the consequences of the 1967 war of aggrcs.
sion; to restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, who
are now compelled to live in exile in conditions of squalor
and utter frustration, and to establish conditions where a
just and lasting peace can prevail in that region.

25. First, in resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March 1968,
after condemning Israel for its attack against Jordan, the
Council warned that repetition of such action would not be
tolerated, and that it would have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts.

33. In this connexion, we particularly expect the Council
to take all appropriate measures to enforce its decisions, and
if the Councilwarns that it will take certain measures under
the Charter, we certainly expect it to take those measures
instead of proliferating the warning. For the uneasy “no
war, no peace” situation that now prevails in that unhappy
part of the world cannot and would not endure for long.
The risk of a serious conflagration whose effects none of
us can escape is too obvious to be empha&ed. The
patience of the victims of aggression, as well as that of the
dispossessedPalestinians, is increasingly running out as the
arrogance of Israeli authorities continues to assume wider
dimensions. Let not history record that on such a clear
issue the Security Council failed to live up to its responsibilities in support of the victims of aggression and thus
paved the way for an international holocaust.

26. Secondly, following Israel’s attack against Beirut
International Airport, the Council, by its resolution
262 (1968) of 31 December 1968 again warned that if such
acts were repeated, it would have to consider further steps
to give effect to its decisions.
27. Thirdly, subsequent to the premeditated Israeli
attacks against Jordanian villages and populated areas, by
resolution 265 (1969) of 1 April 1969 the Security Council
again warned that if such attacks were repeated, the
Council would have to consider further and more effective
steps under the Charter.
4

34. The initiative taken by the delegation of Egypt for an
over-all review by the Council of the situation in the Middle
East is a very timely and commendable one. It is a clear
demonstration of that country’s fervent desire that a
peaceful and diplomatic solution be found to eliminate the
consequences of aggression and wipe out injustices in the
Middle East.
35. The Security Council must respond to the challenge in
search of peace and justice. Failure on the part of the
Council to act, and act firmly and decisively, would
inevitably have far-reaching repercussions. As one of the
spokesmen mandated by the African Heads of State and
govetmncnt to present the position of OAU on the
problem, the United Republic of Tanzania expresses its
confidence that the Council will live up to its responsibility
as the main organ of the world body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We dare
not expect less.
36. Following some of the statements made in the Council
yesterday we should like to outline three major things
which appear to have come before the Council. In the first
place, it would appear that in this Council Israel poses as a
country that is seeking peace. Israel poses as a country that
wants no conflict with its neighbours. But certainly when
one tries to examine what Israel does with its neighbours
this view cannot be maintained.
37. Secondly, it would appear, at least from the statement
yesterday of. the representative of Israel, that he appealed
for quiet diplomacy instead of debates in the Council.
Nevertheless, I think it is more than evident that six years
of quiet diplomacy have not produced any tangible results.
Therefore, the United Republic of Tanzania feels that, in
appealing here again for quiet diplomacy, Israel is really
asking the world to remain calm, to remain quiet, while
Israel continues the consolidation of its aggression.
38. Thirdly, we have noted once again the statement of
the representative of Israel on the question of secured
boundaries. On this we must express our anxiety, because it
woulcl give an indication that the CouncLin actual fact is
being asked to redraw the boundaries between Israel and its
neighbours. We would have thought that the boundaries
of Israel were marked at the time when Israel became
independent under the aegis of the United Nations.
Therefore, to have this theory of secured boundaries
repeated again and again certainly raises anxiety for my
delegation, that ipso facto, the Council is being asked to
redraw the boundaries between Israel and its neighbours.
We do hope that that will not happen.
39. Finally, let me remind the Israelis and their friends of
the lessons of history. Since the days of Alexander the
Great and otller conquerors before and after him the loot
and the rewards of conquest have always been short-lived. I
repeat, they have always been short-lived. Indeed, their
prestige and imperial glory have always ended in smoke.
IsraeI may be a victor twice, or even thrice, over its Arab
neighbours. Yet, if Israel persists in this present course,
history will ensure that it, like other conquerors, will end in
stnoke The only just course for Israel’s continued survival--i repeat, the .only just course for Israel’s continued

survival-is its adherence to recognized norms of international behaviour, which alone can achieve for Israel the
understanding and goodwill of its neighbours and the
support of the community of nations, rather than relying
purely on its military might.
40. May I end by saying again that the continued
existence of Israel very much depends on the goodwill of
the international community rather than the few guns that
Israel may be able to amass.
41. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): The
next speaker at today’s meeting will be the Commissioner
for External Affairs of Nigeria, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table to make his statement.
42. Mr. ARIKPO (Nigeria): Mr. President, please allow me,
first of all, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
office as the current President of the Security Council.
Under the Charter the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. As it is the firm belief of my country, Nigeria,
that the Council is acting on behalf of the entire membership of the United Nations, your task at this meeting is
very grave and onerous. But having regard to the very high
respect in which you are held among your colleagues, and
in view of your undoubted wisdom and experience, no one,
in my view, is better qualified to preside over the Council
on this historic occasion.
43. For the first time since November 1967 Council
resolution 242 (1967) relating to the Middle East situation
is being reviewed and debated in all its aspectsby this most
authoritative body which originally adopted it. I understand that hitherto the Council has always met to deal with
incidents and infractions resulting from the violation of the
resolution, but never to discuss it in its entirety. Because of
the nature of the agenda of the current meeting, I believe
that the outcome of the Council’s deliberations will be of
very profound interest to all the Member States of this
Organization.
44. Secondly, Mr. President, I am very happy that you
come from a country, a very great and powerful country,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with which my
country has the most cordial and friendly relations. I am
sure, therefore, that your country and your very good self
fully understand my country’s concerns and interests which
have brought me here today.
45. Thirdly, I want to thank you and the other members
of the Council most sincerely for the honour you have done
me and my country by allowing me to participate in your
deliberations. My country attaches very great importance to
the current meeting because on it depends whether this
intractable question, the Middle East situation, will continue to be an agenda item of the United Nations or
whether the parties directly concerned should resolve it by
themselves through force of arms, as is becoming increasingly inevitable-a prospect that we must all dread to
contemplate.
46. Since 1967, Nigeria has not participated in the COUP
debates on the Middle East situation. That has been due

his report that Egypt has so far accepted all the resolutions
of the United Nations organs with respect to the situation
and that it has also given a positive response to Ambassador
Jarring’s aide-mkmoire of 8 February
1971 [S/10403,
annex I].

mainly to an act of self.restraint on our part-an act
dictated by two considerations. Throughout 1967 Nigeria
was a member of the Council. When the dark ominous
clouds were gathering over that region, so dear to the hearts
of all Nigerians, and the Council seemed helpless to prevent
the impending war, Nigeria was one of those countries
which worked honestly and tirelessly to prevent it from
becoming a total catastrophe. And when the war did take
place Nigeria also actively participated in all the meetings
and efforts that led to the cease-fire resolutions and
subsequently to the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967. We are therefore not really tenderfeet
in this matter. We know its delicate intricacies and
difficulties and we fully appreciate that a problem so
conditioned in all its essential dimensions by human factors
is not easy of solution.

50. My country, Nigeria, and indeed Africa, has been very
concerned with the situation in the Middle East in general
and, in particular, with the continued occupation of part of
the territory of Egypt, an African homeland, since June
1967. As a result, OAU has at the highest level and on
several occasions passed resolutions reaffirming its support
of resolution 242 (1967) and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly of the United Nations with a view,
on the one hand, to arresting the deterioration of the
situation, a situation which naturally threatens the security,
integrity and unity of the African continent, and, on the
other, to ,preventing the status quo from leading to another
shooting war between the Arab States and Israel.

47. We had hoped that since nearly all the parties
concerned, at least the major ones, had accepted resolution
242 (1967), every effort wouId be made by them to secure
its successful implementation. For the resolution not only
dealt with the immeb ate effects of the June 1967
hostilities but also provided a viable basis for a peaceful
settlement of all the aspects of the Middle East situation.
That hope was strengthened by the fact that we had good
relations with all the parties concerned and therefore had
no cause to doubt their sincerity of purpose nor our good
offices service to them.

51. There have been enough wars in this world. We could
do with an era of peace. Hence the unprecedented effort on
the part of OAU to reactivate the Jarring mission in 1971.
A summation of our continental effort is contained in
paragraphs 95 and 96 of the Secretary-General’s report. My
Head of State, General Yalcubu Gowon, was privileged to
participate in two trips in pursuance of the OAU peace
mission to the Middle East in 1971. Paragraph 96 of the
Secretary-General’s report, which contains the kernel of
the outcome of the mission, read as follows:

48. I come here today deeply troubled that, after six years
of patient waiting, six years that have been marked by some
of the most horrifying tragedies and terrorism in human
history, no satisfactory progress has so far been made to
achieve peace in the Middle East. I am all the more
disturbed by this lack of progress after reading the report of
the Secretary-General [S/10929] of 18 May 1973, together
with all its annexes, and after recalling the resolutions of
the General Assembly of 1970 and 1972 which were
adopted on the same matter in the strong belief that a just
and lasting peace could be established in the Middle East in
accordance with Council resolution 242 (1967).

“The mission noted certain positive elements in the
replies it had received from the two Governments. Both
parties had renewed their acceptance of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and were ready to resume indirect
negotiations under the auspices of Ambassador Jarring.
The mission came to the conclusion that the success of
renewed negotiations could be regarded as assured, if the
practical application of the concept of secure and
recognized boundaries did not oblige Egypt to alienate
part of its national territory and that it was necessary to
obtain Israel’s agreement to the putting into effect
(without territorial annexation) of arrangements offering
sufficient guarantees to ensure its security.”

49. The Secretary-General’s report is very instructive from
the point of view of the facts it contains. But it carries a
budding seed of despair, judging- by its record of Israeli
policy that is tantamount to despisal and defiance of the
several resolutions adopted by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other United Nations bodies. The
report, which is a serious, objective and detailed account of
what has transpired in the Middle East since June 1967, is a
document worth commending for close study by all the
States Members of the United Nations, particularly the
small, powerless ones. For its lesson is self-evident. If
international peace and security are going to be based on
the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, to which all Member States, large and small, have
voluntarily adhered, then parties to disputes brought before
it should be willing to avail themselves of its legitimate
efforts and institutions to resolve them. Otherwise, there is
no future for the small, powerless countries. That was why
I found the reaffirmation of Mr. El-Zayyat, the Foreign
Minister of Egypt, of his country’s loyalty to the United
Nations yesterday most moving. That loyalty is, in fact,
evidenced by the account given by the Secretary-General in

52. During its twenty-sixth session the General Assembly
took into account the reIjort of the ten African Heads of
State and Government who, acting on an OAU mandate,
tried to assist both Egypt, an African country, and Israel, a
country with which many African countries have con.
tinually had friendly relations, to come to an amicable
settlement. In the end, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 2799 (XXVI), paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 of
which read as follows:
(The speaker read out paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the
resolution.]
The General Assembly also invited the parties to the Middle
East conflict to give their full co-operation to the Special
Representative in order to work out practical solutions to
the vital outstanding issues.
53. Since then, as the Secretary-General said yesterdsy,
the report shows that, “great efforts but little progress” 1135
6

been made as regards peace in the Middle East (1717th
meeting, para. 161. One is tempted to ask: Why? Because
IsraeI seems unprepared to consider any alternative for
securing its boundaries other than by the territorial
acquisition of its neighbour’s lands. Surely, no boundary
can be secure unless the communities it separates accept it
as such and agree to respect it and to live peaceably
together side by side.

~~olu~on242 (1967). Beingsmdl andpowerless
countries,
we have come to declare solemnly that in this age of
mindlessviolenceit is high time that morality andlaw take
precedence
over arms.Beingsmallandpowerless
countries,
we have come to say that we shall alwayskeep an open
mind to all possibilitiesof peacefulsettlementof disputes
in accordancewith the provisionsof the United Nations
Charter. Being smalland powerlesscountries,we may not
be able to influence the course of momentousworld
events-at leastnot now. But in the spirit of goodwilland
solidarity, a spirit in which Africa hasfrequentlyrelatedto
Israel,we wishto appealthrough you, Mr. President,to the
friendly State of Israelto pay moreheedto the resolutions
of the United Nationsand to showsomeconsideration
for
the legitimateconcernsof Africa. We may not count for
muchindividually; but, in the aggregate,
it is in the interest
of the friendly State of Israelthat it doesnot force usto
adopt measureswhich, in the final analysis,will not
promote its causefor friendship and understandingin
Africa. That is the message
that the Headsof State and
Government of 41 African States have mandatedus to
deliverto the Councilat this current series
of meetings.

54. As if in anticipation of the Secretary-General’s assessment of the situation, the Heads of State and Government
of 41 independent African countries who met in May 1978
in Addis Ababa, partly to celebrate the tenth anniversary of
the founding of OAU and partly to seek solutions to
problems confronting Africa, were anxiously seized of the
continued occupation by Israel of part of the territory of
the Arab Republic of Egypt. Whereupon, the Assembly of
African Heads of State and Government, representatives of
Jl 41 independent African States, unanimously adopted a
resolution1 which noted with deep concern that, despite
the numerous resolutions of OAU and the United Nations
calling upon Israel to withdraw from all occupied African
and Arab territories, Israel not only persisted in refusing to
implement those resolutions but also continued to practice
a policy of intimidation “with a view to creating in the said
territories
a state of fait accompli aimed at serving its
expansionist designs”. The resolution went on further to
depiore the systematic obstruction by Israel of all the
efforts exerted to reach a peaceful solution to the problem
at both the international and the African levels and to recall
in that respect the negative attitude of Israel towards the
1971 mission of the ten African Heads of State mandated
by OAU to work for the implementation of resolution
242 (1967), which stipulated in particular the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the occupied territories in conformity
with the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territories by force.

57. Deeply consciousof Articles 2 and25 of the Charter
of the United Nations,we, the representatives
of Africa, are
confident that at the endof your presentdeliberations
you
will be able to answersomeof the questionswhich the
ForeignMinister of the Arab Republicof Egypt put to you
yesterdayin the nameof justice and peace.Otherwise,the
future doesnot look too bright either for the Middle East
or for the UnitedNationsitself.
58. The PRESIDENT(translationfrom Russian):I thank
the Commissioner
for External Affairs of Nigeria,who is
representingthe Organization of African Unity at this
meeting,for his statementand for all the kind wordswhich
he addressed
to my country. I fully sharehis opinionthat
friendly relations,mutual understandingand co-operation
really exist and are developingbetweenthe SovietUnion
andNigeria,just asthey are betweenthe SovietUnion and
the overwhelming
majority of the countriesof Africa.

55. Noting further with satisfaction that Egypt had spared
no effort to reach a just and durable solution of the
problem, and that these efforts were already characterized
by the constructive co-operation of Egypt with inter
national as well as African forums, the resolution went on
to state:

59. ‘In the Ministry of ForeignAffairs it wasmy honourto
be concernedfor almosteight years with the relationsof
the Soviet Union with the countries of Africa and I have
every reasonto expressgreat satisfactionthat the relations
betweenthe USSRand Africa are developingin termsof
friendship, mutual understanding and universal COoperation.

/i%e speaker read out the text of paragraphs 2 to 9 Of
UAU resolution AHGJRes. 70 (Xl.]
56. Mr. President, with your permission, I wish formally
to present a little later, for the Council’s perusal and for
circulation to States Members of the United Nations, the
full text of the resolution which the Assembly of the Heads
of State and Government of OAU recently adopted on the
matter. It is in the context of this resolution that my
colleagues from Chad, the United Republic of Tmmk
Guinea, Algeria, Kenya, the Sudan and I are here today as
spokesmen of Africa on this matter. We have come to
demonstrate our solidarity with the United Nations and our
faith in its resolutions. We have come to plead humbly that
every effort should be made to implement the resolutions
which you adopt here in the Security Council, Particularly

60. As to the requestof the Commissioner
for External
Affairs of Nigeriaconcerningthe circulationof the resolution of the Assemblyof Headsof StateandGovernmentof
OAU, I will ask the Secretary-Generalto instruct the
Secretariatto issuethis document asan official document
of the Security Council and to circulateit to all 132States
Membersof the United Nations[seeS/10943/. This will be
a very useful measure.States Membersof the United
Nations will have an opportunity to acquaintthISelVeS
with the -demands,
the wishesand, if I may put it this way,
the voice of Africa, which soundsforth in our time as a
weighty, important and constructive voice seekingto
achievethe noble purposesof the United Nationsin the
strengtheningof peaceand internationalsecurity and the

1 Resolution Al-IG/Res.70 (X), subscqucntly issued in docmcnt
s/10943.

7

development of friendship and co-operation among peoples-to achieve these noble ideals embodied in the United
Nations Charter.

69. The PalestinianArab people never gaveup its national
rights over its own country. The usurpation of its territories
and the illegalacquisitionsby force that followed still stand
asone of the flagrant violations of international law. They
exist due to the force upheld by imperialism. But they are
by their very essence
lawless.

61. The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic is next
on the list of speakers for today’s meeting. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

70. The main Zionist claim, basedon “the right of the
Jewsto Palestine”is only a legalabsurdity. It cannot create
sovereigntyover a territory that doesnot belong to them
and has not belonged to them for over 20 centuries, a
territory where the Jews constituted only one twelfth of
the population. If the principle of a territorial claim after
more than 20 centuries was to be recognized asvalid the
entire world would be turned topsy-turvy.

62. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, I am extremely grateful to
you and also to members of the Council for having allowed
my delegation to participate in this debate on the situation
in the Middle East. However, before going on to that matter
itself, may I be allowed to say how gratified my
delegation is to see you assume the presidency of the
Security Council during this month, a post for which you
are eminently qualified. We are also extremely pleased at
the close co-operation that exists between our two countries and our two delegations and we know that your own
qualifications as a statesman and your concern for justice
will continue to be placed at the service of peace.

71. The architects of the partition of Palestine in 1947
hoped that time would lead to the forgetting of injustice.
But three wars, the last of which almost drew the world
into the abyss,were sufficient proof of the fact that no
solutionof the Palestineproblem not in harmony with law
andjustice could possiblylead to peacein that region.

63. The matter before the Council today is a matter of
principle, .one which touches the very foundations of the
United Nations. The usurpation of the Palestinian homeland continues. The Zionist aggressor occupies by force
territories belonging to three Member States and continues
to develop its annexationist intentions. Is the Security
Council ready to exercise its powers once and for all to put
an end to this situation or is it, through inertia, to continue
to tolerate acts accomplished by force?

72. The refusal of the Arab world to accept that fate for
Palestineand its people is the refusal to allow injustice and
illegality. The Israel-Arab conflict cannot be solved until
the problemof Palestinehas been settled, and that on the
basis of the restoration of the national rights of the
Palestinianpeople.
73. In the courseof its brief existence Israel, under the
pretext of assuringits security, has been guilty of armed
aggression
againstthe neighbouring Arab States. Far from
respectingthe principles of the Charter of the U+tetl
Nations,of which it is one of the creations, Israel has led a
small minority of Powers that constantly violate and
disobeythe Charter. In this conspiracy againstinternational
law the complicity of the United States has been clearly
established.Due to military, economic, political and diplomatic support which it offers Israel, it is encouraging it to
commit thesecrimesagainstthe Palestiniansand the Arabs
in general,to consolidate its occupation and to take no
heed of the decisionsof the Security Council or of the
General Assembly. In advance they offer Israel over1
assurances
againstany punitive measuresby either giving it
assistance
or threateningto usethe veto in order to paralyse
the Council in the adoption of any effective measures.
When last Septemberthe United States did in fact veto a
draft resolutionthat was a simple appeal for a cessationof
military operations, a new phasein the escalation of the
conflict was started. Its encouragementof Israel became
more active, more direct. In fact it stimulated Israel to
intensify its aggression
with impunity and assuredIsrael o1’
“overwhelming military superiority over its enemy”. Thus
the United Statesproclaimeditself at one with Israel in its
animosity againstthe Arabs, againstSyria in particular, and
againstthe Palestinianpeople.

64. At the very root of the Arab-Israeli conflict lies the
problem of the Palestinians. The Arab Palestinian people
were expelled by force from their homeland. A Zionist
State was artificially created and upheld by imperialist
States under the leadership of the United States, and it
immediately revealed its aggressive and expansionist nature.
65. Peace has escaped the Middle East only because of the
very origin of the crisis. Efforts were made to deprive the
Palestinian Arab people of its inalienable right to selfdetermination, a right that was proclaimed as one of the
fundamental rights of the Charter, in fact in Article 1 of
that document, and then these people were made refugees
or second or third class citizens and placed under the
Zionist colonial and racist yoke.
66. Since 1921, the date on which the British Mandate
was imposed on them under the pretext of a “sacred
mission”, and up until the present time the history of these
Palestiriians has been a history of a constant heroic struggle
to regain their sacred national rights.
67. The immigration of foreign settlers followed. It also
laid the groundwork to destroy the Arab society of the
Palestinians, Christians and Moslems and to replace them by
a society of transplantedJews,a foreign body politic.

74. Yet the United States constantly speaksof impartiality. Did it at leastask Israelabout the fact that money it
had given Israel wasused to create colonies of immigrants
in the occupied territories? Is this not unquestionable
evidenceof annexation? If Israel were truly respecting the
resolutions of the United Nations, what happened to

68. Neither the Balfour Declaration of 1917 nor the
GeneralAssemblyresolution on the partition of Palestinein
1947 csn deprive the Palestinianpeople of its soverejgnty
and grant it to that alien group of settlers.
8

resolution 236 (1967) adopted by the Security Council on
11 June 1967, enjoining Israel in terms leaving room for no
doubts to return to the lines from which it had launched its
aggression against Syria? Why is it consolidating its
occupation in the Golan Heights by building colonies one
after the other, as it has done in all the other occupied
territories? What ties does it envisage between peace and
the establishment of these colonies, such as Ramat
Magshimim, Nahal Al, Neot Golan, Mero Chama, Givat
Yoav, Ramot, Kfar Ginar, Bnei Yehuda, Ramat Shalom,
Nor, Hispin-and I am mentioning only those that are on
the Golan Heights? What has become of the official United
States declarations regarding respect for the territorial
integrity of the countries of the region? What is its exact
attitude regarding the illegal acquisition of territories by
force?

their homes, to regain their own possessions and to resume
their old existence, a right recognized in more than one
resolution of the United Nations. This problem has never
ceased to exist, in the manifestations of life in the region,
and on the humanitarian, political, economic and international levels. The problem will continue as long as the
world conscience and international efforts fail to influence
Israel. Injustice engenders revolt, and the revolt of peoples
and nations is a symptom of the waning of the international
system and of the deterioration of world peace.
81. The Arab people is today the victim of an operation of
whose scope goes beyond the operation of
the Nazis. In fact this is a two-fold colonialist experiment,
intended to suppress the very existence of the Arab people
and to subject the survivors to direct colonial domination.

extermination

75. I do not intend once again to rehearse the long
inventory of Israeli aggressions, which have been almost
uninterrupted since 1948; nor shall I dwell on the sufferings
of the Palestinian Arabs expelled from their homes or on
the ravages that have been inflicted on the neighbouring
Arab countries.

82. The same colonialist logic which from the outset held
that the expulsion of the Palestinians was inevitable has also
created another Zionist imperative: that is, that the
Palestinians ousted from their homeland must never return
to it. The rationale behind this inflexible Israeli policy was
stated undisguisedly by General Moshe Dayan when he
admitted that “economically
the refugees could be
absorbed”
but, nevertheless, categorically rejected the
return of the displaced Palestinians as not being “in
accordance with our aims”. He explained, “This would
make Israel a binational State or a poly-Arab-Jewish State,
instead of a Jewish State-and”‘
he went on, “we want a
Jewish State.”

76. One need only examine the frequent condemnations,
the numerous resolutions adopted by the Security Council
to be aware. of the, frequency of these aggressions and of
Israel’s, contempt for all the resolutions of the United
Nations. No other challenge to the international community and the universal conscience has been as flagrant, as
arrogant and as unpunished.

83. The apologists for the Zionists consider that the
Palestinians became refugees only because they resisted and
that, having resisted and failed, they lost their right to
return to their homes and to their homeland. But that is a
morally and historically fallacious argument, In fact, the
sole choice open to the Palestinians from the outset,
according to Zionist logic, was to become willing refugees
or to become refugees by force. Furthermore, how absurd it
is to contend that any effort to defend one’s natural right is
sufficient ground for being deprived of it. That is tantamount to saying that any unarmed owner of something, if
attacked or mugged, must be dispossessed of his rights and
deprived of his property. Such a principle has never been
accepted by the United Nations.

77. Therefore the Council can only pronounce itself on
the specific situation. If the acquisition of territories by
force is admissible, the United Nations has lost its raison
d’btre; if not, the Security Council must adopt the
necessary measures to redress the situation.

78, Israel’s attitude is well known. Its leaders announce
aloud that their armed forces will never return to the
4 June 1967 lines and that they wish substantially to
modify those lines. What is meant by that? Does it mean
annexation or not? Let them tell the Council what they
mean. Let their partners and their protectors shed some
light on the matter for the benefit of the Council.
79. If we give them what they want, we shall be digging
the grave of this Organization and crushing the hopes,

84. Shortly after the forced exodus of the refugees in
1948 the General Assembly recognized their right to return
to their homes or be compensated. That recognition has
been upheld and restated in 24 formal resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly since 1948.

placed in the Organization, that humanity wouid be saved
from the scourge of war and that the law would prevail.
The independence and sovereignty of all the small nations
will
be at stake; the international community as such will
no longer exist, and its place will be taken by the law of the
jungle.

85. Subsequent expulsions of smaller groups of refugees
beyond and out of the “demilitarized
zones” since
1950-these were known as “intermediate refugees”-were
always followed by Security Council resolutions callirtg foi
their return as soon as possible.

80. Thus peace and security in our region are threatened
by these two factors: the expansionist policy systematically
practised by Israel, on the basis of military aggression, as
attested to by the annals and the records of the United
Nations; and the tragedy of the Palestinian people, the
majority of whom have for a quarter of a century been
living in camps far from their own homes, far from their
native land, living on international charity doled out to
them sparingly despite their inalienable right to return to

86. In 1967 a larger number of refugees-the new refugees-were the subject of debate in six organs of the United
Nations, which called for their immediate repatriation in 17
resolutions.
9

87. The treatment of the population of the territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 has also been covered in 10
formal condemnations by the international community.
88. Five international organs have called for international
inquiries regarding the acts of the Israelis in the occupied
territories, and two Committees specially set up for the
purpose, one by the General Assembly and the other by the
Commission on Human Rights, are at present working on
the matter; but thus far, because of the refusal of Israel to
allow them accessto the occupied territories, the efforts of
the Organization have been unsuccessful.
89. But that attitude should not surprise us. Israel’s denial
of the right of the Palestinians, its repressive practices in the
occupied territories, and its sabotaging of international
inquiries lie at the very roots of Zionist expansion.

94. But what is the main threat to peace and security ia
the region? What has been the constant source of upheaval
and instability and the cause of frequent conflicts? What
are the true guarantees of future peace? For many years
the people of the region lived in peace and tranquillity. It is
only during the past 25 years that the world has seen these
great dangers to universal peace and security as a result of
the situation created in the Middle East.
95. I have repeatedly stated the position of my Govern.
ment. It is based on the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, on the rules of international law and on the
tenets of justice and equity. At this stage I should like to
sum up what my Government and people expect from the
Security Council.
96. An end must be put to Israeli aggression, The
consequences of that aggression mu& be’liquidated, beginning with thk immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all
Israeli forces from all the occupied territories. The right of
the Palestinian people to their land, to their country, and to
the free exercise of their right to self-determination must be
recognized. This could lead to constructive results; it could
create a climate conducive to progress towards a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

90. If it is true that the United Nations has constantly
condemned Israel’s persistent contempt for the numerous
international assurances given to the Palestinian people, it is
equally true that this disapprobation on the part of the
international community will be futile as long as it is not
accompanied by corrective action. But the will to adopt
such measures has not been evident.

97. As long as the Arab people of Palestine and their
inalienable rights are not recognized by Israel, we shall
never progress towards peace; we shall only be following a
mirage. But we will reject any conditions or any resolution
based upon an invasion. We urge you to remove all traces of
the aggression. Any solution that might perpetuate the
occupation of our country must be categorically rejected
by us, because we consider that such a solution would mean
only one thing, namely, yielding to the logic of force and
conquest, and that is a course that we firmly refuse to
follow.

91. The debates of the United Nations from the summer
of 1967 to the present time have dealt exclusively with the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from occupied territory; but,
having achieved its main political goal of creating a State,
having achieved the majority-though
not all-of its territorial objectives, and having in the present circumstances
done as much as it could to obtain its demographic
objectives by reducing the number of indigenous Palestinians under its jurisdiction to controllable proportions
and gathering together the Jews of the world in the land
which it had conquered, Israel states that it is now ready
for “peace”. But this is a peace intended to guarantee to
Israel the enjoyment of its gains and to legitimize the faits
accomplis achieved by the force of arms.

98. The United Nations must confront a situation of a
historic and inevitable nature. But the problem is not only
an Arab problem. The problem affects any individual of the
international community whose country might, one day or
another, become the victim of an invasion. To do away
with the results of aggression, to punish the aggressors.
spells a victory for the international Organization, for the
principles of the United Nations and for all the great and
noble human values.

92. What, then, is this peace that the leaders of Israel
profess? Is it peace dictated by aggression? Is it peace
based on annexation? Is it the peace of Deir Yassin and
other monstrous massacres? Is it peace based on an
out-and-out denial of the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people? What peace? And what trust can
anybody place in the words of the Israeli leaders when they
are refuted by the threatening declarations of their military
or militarist leaders?

99. The moment of truth has arrived. What will tlze
Security Council do regarding this grave and explosive
situation now confronting it? First of all, it must be
recognized that the territories of three Members of the
United Nations have been deliberately violated, with
premeditation, by another State represented here. The
troops of this last State today stand on the soil of those
first three countries. Therefore, the aggressor must immcdiately be obliged to withdraw to the lines it occupied before
the 5 June attack. To allow ,Israel to preserve what it
conquered will be tantamount to allowing the aggressor to
make use and to enjoy the fruits of its aggression as B
bargaining point in order to achieve the objectives for
which it unleashed the war in the first place. It would be
immoral and it is intolerable. Another danger inherent in
such political blackmail is that as long as Israel remains in
possession of these lands it will continue its aggression.

93. We want peace in our region, because that is an
imperative condition if we are to safeguard our civilization
and continue the progress we have already begun to make.
In fact, all our plans for collective security are defensive in
nature-defensive against any armed surprise attack by
Israel against all or any part of our territory. However, the
Israelis continue to adduce fallacious arguments that are
completely beside the point in order to justify their
military occupation and their persistent refusal to withdraw
from the territories that they conquered by aggression.
They contend that withdrawal without sufficient guarantees of what they refer to as the future peace and
security of the region would be unacceptable.
10

100. We are here to express our trust in the international
conscience represented by the Security Council, the United
Nations organ primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our Arab people, together
with all the peoples of small peace-loving countries throughout the world, consider these meetings as our last hope to see
right, reason and justice triumph over the law of the jungle,
the law of conquest, and the logic of force.

proved that this is the most effective way of settling
conflicts. Indeed, the Foreign Minister of Egypt would be
welcome in Jerusalem for peace negotiations. Such exchanges would doubtlessly be more fruitful than exchanges
of acrimony in the Security Council debates.
107. The indispensability of establishing secure and recognized boundaries, and not restoring the chaos and peril of
the old military lines, has been convincingly demonstrated
today by the appearance of the Syrian representative. The
Syrian statement confirmed Syria’s unequivocal denial of
Israel’s right to exist as a sovereign State and Syria’s
rejection of any notion of peace with Israel.

101. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have just received a letter from the representative of
Somalia requesting that the delegation of Somalia take part
in consideration of the question now before the Council. In
accordance with the usual practice and with the consent of
members of the Council, I propose to invite the representative of Somalia to take part, without the right to vote,
in the consideration of this question.

108. This is of course not new. The State which has used
today the facilities of the Security Council to broadcast
over the entire world its voice of war, a voice of barbaric
terrorist outrages and of suppression of human rights of the
hapless Jewish community of Syria, has openly rejected
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) the basis for
peace-making efforts in the Middle East, and barred all
contact with the mission of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative.

102. Since there are no objections, I invite the representative of Somalia to take a place at the side of the
Council Chamber, on the understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when his turn
comes to speak.

109. Syria has time and again declared that its objective is
to destroy Israel. Thus the President of Syria stated a few
years ago:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. H. Nur Elrni
(Somalia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
103. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call
on the representative of Israel to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.

“We say: We shall never call for, nor accept peace. We
shall only accept war . . . . We have resolved to drench this
land with our blood, to oust you, aggressors, and throw
you into the sea for good.”

104. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Egypt’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs asked yesterday that the Security Council change
resolution 242 (1967), and in particular to replace the
establishment in agreement between the parties of secure
and recognized boundaries by the Egyptian diktat to
restore the insecure provisional old line of 1967; and to
replace the call for a just settlement of the refugee problem,
which appears in resolution 242 (1967), by a provision
referring to the so-called Palestinian rights, implying in
effect, as we heard yesterday, the dismemberment of
Jordan, a State Member of the United Nations.

I submit that the appearance in the Security Council debate
of a State which openly strives to annihilate another
Member State of the United Nations is a travesty of
international law and of the United Nations Charter and a
disgrace to this Organization. In any case, Israel cannot take
lightheartedly Syria’s attitude as Syria is Israel’s neighbour.
Syria, whose proclaimed aim is Israel’s liquidation, is about
to enter a federation union with Egypt. Moreover, Egypt’s
own attitude, as indicated by me yesterday, is not free from
similar overtones.
110. Yesterday afternoon, a spokesman of the Egyptian
Permanent Mission explained that Minister El-Zayyat’s
remark to the Security Council to the effect that Egypt is
ready for talks with Israel without pre-conditions should be
considered merely as a rhetorical point. Should more
significance, then, be attributed to other seemingly positive
points-for example, even to the declaration that Egypt has
accepted the central obligation of resolution 242 (1967): to
conclude a peace agreement with Israel? Was that declaration made really in a sincere desire to establish genuine
peace, or was it also only for tactical propaganda reasons?

105. Mr. ELZayyat said that he does not seek a verbal
victory. He would unquestionably obtain at least that were
the Security Council to accede to his demands. There is no
doubt that a change in the substance or interpretation of
resolution 242 (1967), if it were allowed to pass, would
earn some headlines. However, it would also create a
complete void in the United Nations framework as far as
the Middle East situation is concerned, with resolution
242 (1967), the only basis for United Nations efforts
acceptable to both parties, shattered and gone. For all we
know, the Foreign Minister of Egypt may wish to take such
a vacuum back home with him.

111. In a statement to the People’s Assembly in Cairo on
12 February 1973, Epypt’s Foreign Minister explained:

106. If that were the outcome of the Security Council’s
debate, not all avenues to peace would of course be closed.
The absence of any common basis for United Nations
activities might in fact hasten the negotiating process
outside the United Nations. And the experience with
international problems in other parts of the world has

“We must realize the true dimension of the battle that

we are now experiencing and that began before we elected
Al-Sadat President of this Republic, before Israel attacked
Egypt in 1967 and before the outbreak of the revolution
in 1952. Egypt wrested from Israel its most importanl
11

weapon in the propaganda field when it answered in the
affirmative to Jarring’s aide-m6moire of February 1971.”
112. The present battle, the Egyptian Parliament was thus
told, is the same that has been waged against Israel for 25
years. Egypt’s affirmative answer to Jarring’s aide-mbmoire
should be viewed as part of the propaganda contest with
Israel. That attitude could in fact have been discerned from
the very first, because only 10 days after Egypt’s reply to
the Jarring aide-memoire Hassanin Heykal, President
Sacl’at’s close confidant and adviser, wrote:
“There are only two specific Arab goals at this stage:one, elimination
of the consequences of the, 1967
aggression through Israel’s withdrawal from all the lands
it occupied that year; and two, elimination of the
consequences of the 1948 aggression through the eradication of Israel.”
113. President Sadat stated on 17 February 1972:
“Israel is a foreign limb which has been forced on to the
body of the Arab nation and this body rejects it. Nor do
we have the right to compel the Palestinian people to
accept the Security Council resolution becausethe land is
their land, both those areas occupied in 1948 and the
remainder of Palestine occupied in 1967.”
114. On 17 May 1973 Minister El-Zayyat declared to
German newsmen, in a programme recorded for Radio Free
Berlin:
“Egypt demanded only that Israel withdraw to the
borders of Palestine since this would also put the
Palestine problem proper into its natural context. To
Egypt this is not in contrast to the Palestinians who
demand the dissolution of the State of Israel.”
We heard echoes of that attitude in the statement made
yesterday by Egypt’s Foreign Minister. .
115. In the light of this, Egypt’s refusal to negotiate with
Israel appears not only as a rejection of the method of quiet
diplomacy, a rejection of the method of dialogue-a
method never tried before, the only method that could
bring about agreement with Israel-but as a reflection of
Egypt’s denial of Israel’s fundamental rights asan independent State. Indeed, as Prime Minister Golda Meir wrote in
the quarterly review Foreijy Affairs of April 1973:
“The heart of the problem is what caused the Six-Day
War, not the territories administered by Israel after the
war. Simply put, the root issue is the Arab attitude to
Israel’s very existence and security. Once the Arab
countries accept the legitimacy of Israel, as we have
always accepted theirs, there is no reason for their
intransigence against negotiating the differences between
us. In this connexion, let me state as firmly as I can that
Israel’s insistence on negotiations, direct or indirect, is
not a manoeuvre devised to bait our Arab enemies. The
vehement refusal of the Arab leaders to discuss with us
the terms of a peace settlement must raise the question as
to whether they are really prepared to live in peace with
us, This is the crux of the conflict.”

Unless the crux of the conflict is taken into consideratiorr,
there can hardly be a constructive examination of the
problem.
116. References have been made to anti-Israeli resolutions
adopted in various international organs by virtue of the
numerical superiority of the Arab States, resolutions whiclr
ignore Israel’s basic rights and legitimate views and inter.
ests. Indeed, on the one hand there are the unbalanced
resolutions reflecting the partisan and ephemeral views of
their supporters; on the other,’ there are, however, the
precepts of international law and morality ripplicahle to ail
nations at all times. Israel will insist that the conduct of
Arab States towards it be based on the fundamental
principles of international law and of .the United Nations
Charter and not on political texts which testify merely ta
the fact that the State of Israel is outnumbered by its
opponents.
117, This condition is not new. We have lived with it
throughout the ages. We have always been small in number.
That has never weakened our determination to survive. Our
deprecators have always been many, but that has never
shaken our faith. There is no solitude when justice and
history are with us. The knowledge of the basic righteousness of the Jewish people’s struggle to remain alive, to
preserve its civilization and to restore its sovereignty has
always given us the strength to be few in the midst of
many. And so it is today.
118. Our struggle to exist has not ended. Israel has never
menaced Egypt’s existence, but since 1948 Egypt has
openly fought against Israel’s right to be. Israel’s experience
since independence does not permit it to disregard thal
fact. Too many of our young men have given their lives
because Arab States try to deprive Israel of its independence, Too many of our children have been killed because
Egypt did not want them to be free. Egypt would have the
world disregard everything except a line drawn through a
desert-a line which in the 1949 Armistice Agreement Israel
and Egypt agreed was “not to be construed in any senseas
a political or territorial boundary, and is delineated without
prejudice to rights, claims and positions of either party to
the Armistice as regards ultimate settlement”.2 Egypt bases
its case on the alleged sanctity of that line. Israel basesits
case on the sanctity of human life, on the right of the
Israeli people to exist, on the need to ensure that the Arab
States abandon their desire to destroy it, on the obligation
to try to free future generations from the necessity to fight
endless warsof survival.
119. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1 cdl
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of
Egypt.
120. Mr. ELZAYYAT (Egypt): I owe it to my colleagues
the Foreign Ministers of the United Republic of Tanzania and
Nigeria to say how deeply and sincerely I wasmoved by their
statements. I should like to explain to my colleague
from the United Republic of Tanzania why in my stalement I avoided mentioning the Council’s earlier warnings
2 See Official
Records of the Security
Special Supplement No. 3.

Council, Fmrrth

Yew,

that it would have to take measures under the Charter to
put an end to Israel’s aggressions and attacks. I did not do
so because I have not flown over mountains and seas to
come lucre and try just to assert rights or ask for measures
which I know beforehand will be blocked. I have tried to
search not only for what is right but also for what is
pragmz$ically possible. For the situation is so dangerous, so
historical-indeed
we feel we are carrying the burdens of
millions of people, their future and their destiny-that in all
humility my voice has to be as low as possible, However, I
assure Africa of my appreciation, appreciation that will
never be forgotten-not by me, not by my Government, not
by the people of Egypt, and not by all those Africans who
have long suffered and are now emerging to take the
position. which is theirs. The voice of these 41 States is still
ringing in my ears, and I hope in yours also, and it will have
its effect.

what Israel thinks of the principle of the non-acquisition
of territories by force, that is, of any territories, small or
large. Perhaps we can establishnow what Israel can or
cannot claim under that principle.,
125. We say that we have acceptedand do accept all the
resolutions of the United Nations. If those resolutions
mean ending the occupation and usurpation of territories
by force, then that is the way to free the will of those who
are under occupation, so that they can be valid interlocutors with the United Nations.

121. Yesterday I heard a sentence about distortion by
misquotation. Today I have heard a whole exercise in how
it is done. I needed that, because yesterday in this Council,
in this chamber, I said-and thank God there is a verbatim
record--that it is within the framework of the United
Nations that we put our case. I then said: “Egypt accepts to
have <any talks without prior conditions. But do not let us
be fooled.” (1717th meeting, para. 46.1 Two prior conditions are laid down by Israel. If they remove them, then
this statement will be true. First, Israel has officially
notified you, the Council, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, through Ambassador Jarring, that it will
not withdraw to the pre-5 June boundaries:to wit, it will
have to take a part of Egypt and a part of Syria and a part
of Jordan. That, I said yesterday, is one pre-condition. I
also said-and this can be checked in the verbatim recordfhat another pre-condition is the pre-condition of occupation, Then followed my statementthat even if anagreement
were obtained under occupation it would be obtained
under duressand would be null and void. I amnow saying
that again. It is being saidby all membersof my mission;
thy
have saidit in the past, and we say it again.Without
thesepre-conditions, the road within the framework of the
United Nations is open for peace.
122. If I have hurt someoneby showingthat the slogans
with which he was fighting were taken from him, if this
allegation that Israel is ready for negotiations without
pre-conditions is shown to be only a way of deceiving
peopleand trying to castshadowsupon people’sthinkingif that now has been shown in its complete truth, then I
have no apologiesto make to anyone. But I should like to
repeat here again, with all the feelings of responsibility
which I hope everyone around this table will share, the
three points I shouldlike to leavewith this Council.
123. First, we have accepted and we accept all United
Nations resolutionspertinent to the so-calledquestion of
the Middle East, including the resolutionson Jerusalem,on
the rights of the Palestiniansand on the ways to try to find
peaceon the basis,assuggested
now, of the Charter and the
principlesof international law.

126. SecondIy, i .ive, modestly I think, requestedthat no
obstaclesbe put ill thal path, either positive or negativethat is, positive obsi,icles by commission or negative
obstaclesby omission. One obstaclewould be the establishment of the so-called new facts by Israel in the occupied
territories. That is an obstacle;to any solution. A second
obstacle to peace would be providing the aggressor,the
occupier, with the meansto sustainits occupation. I do not
want to appear fussy, but I say that the United States
Governmenthas never really askedthe peopleof the United
States whether or not they want to underwrite and
guaranteethe conquestsmade by Israel. A third obstaclethat is, the negative one-would be the failure of the United
Nations to provide, in keeping with the Charter, assistance
to the victims of aggressionin freeing themselvesand
assistanceto those seekingto enjoy the rights that belong
to everyone.
127. Thirdly-and this is obvious in every resolution, in
every debate and even in every statementmadeoutsidethis
Council and outside the United Nations-the problem of
the existence of the Palestiniannation cannot be wished
away. The argument over whether it doesor doesnot exist
is really a futile exercise. There are 2.5 million Palestinians
who have the right to self-determination,exactly like the
right that wassought and guaranteedin the 1947resolution
[General Assembly resolution 18I II)] to the JewishState.
They have the right to live in peace, within secure,
recognized boundaries, in the fixing of which they should
be partners. They have the right to know where they live.
This is not only the spirit, but even the letter, of many
United Nations resolutions.In any event, thesearethe facts
of life, if we want to look at and think of the facts of life.
128. Thoseare my three points.
129. The Council cannot end this debatewithout replying
to the questions that I put yesterday: Could it have been
that the Council wanted the international boundariesto be
breached’? Did the Council intend to partition Egypt
between Egypt and the Jewish State? Did the Council
intend to partition Syria between Syria and the Jewish
State? Did the Council try or intend to partition Jordan
between Jordan and the Jewish State? If everyone concedesthat the reply is in the negative--and I am sure it
is-then againWChave a block on the road to peace.
130. It is with a heavy heart and the greatest senseof
responsibility that I say againthat we arepatiently waiting
to seewhat light will come out of this Council. A green
light, a faint green light, opening the door to living
sovereign and free, would enable us to develop our

124. By the way, I put a request to the President
yesterday which perhaps he has forgotten. I asked the
Presidentwhether he could ask the representativeof Israel
13

re.wurces and to try to improve the conditions of the
Egyptians, thus making them better citizens of the world. If
there is no light, I repeat again that we shall be living in a
cold world, in which everyone will have to fend for himself.

134. i repeat what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt said in his last words: “They’‘-the Palestinians“have the right to live in secure and recognized boundaries
in the fixing of which they should be partners.”

131. The PRESIDENT (trunsiution ji’om Russian): I call
on the representative of Israel to speak in exercise of his
right of reply and I should like to put to him the question
raised by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
concerning his attitude to the principle of non-acquisition
of territory by force or the threat of force.

135. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1 call
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.

132. Mr. fEK0AI-I (Israel): The reply to the question will
be found in the statement I made yesterday if the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt will study it.
133. I should only like to recall that in my earlier
intervention I drew the Council’s attention to the fact that
Minister El-Zayyat has come before it and suggested, and
indeed requested, that the Council should change resolution
242 (1967) in two central points: one, to replace the need
to establish secure, recognized boundaries in agreement
between the parties by the Egyptian diktat to restore the old
provisional line of 1967, and two, to replace the call which
appears in resolution 242 (1967) to arrive at a just
settlement of the refugee problem by a provision which
would refer to the so-called rights of the Palestinians,
implying the dismemberment of Jordan. In his reply the
Foreign Minister of Egypt did not refer to the fust point to
which I drew attention. I should like, however, to express
my appreciation for his confirmation of the second point
which I emphasized, and that is that when Egypt speaks of
Palestinian Tights it refers to a situation which would
necessitate the dismemberment of a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations, Jordan.

136. Mr. EL-ZAWAT (Egypt): There is an exercise in a
conspiracy of silence by which perhaps the existence of the
thousands of Palestinians under Egyptian trust in Gaza is
completely forgotten. Secondly, about the arms agreements
and the reservations made about the green lines, that is,
about the ,armistice lines, they were entered at the requcsl
of Egypt because we did not implicitly OT explicitly wishto
recognize anything that Israel has obtained by force of arms
after the partition of 1947 and the borders allotted to it by
the United Nations and recognized as such by the United
States, the USSR and all other countries which recognize
Israel.
137. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call
on the representative of Jordan.
138. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Reference has been made to
the territorial integrity of Jordan. I feel that I must make a
very brief comment about the territorial integrity of
Jordan, but what is more important is that Jordan as a
national entity is based on objective factors and on factors
of consent, agreement and common destiny which am
stronger than any transient factors or considerations. But it
is curious, in the light of the situation on the ground, that
the Israeli representative should pose as the defender of the
territorial integrity of Jordan.
The meeting rose at I.35 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$IJ.S. 1.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)
