S/2003/752

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 18 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In accordance with article 4, paragraph 13, of the Peace Agreement of 12
December 2000, the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission has transmitted to the
United Nations the Decision pursuant to article 15 B of the Commission’s
demarcation directions. The Decision and transmittal letter, dated 15 July 2003, are
attached to the present letter.
I should be grateful if you could bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-43707 (E)

220703

*
0
3
4
3
7
0
7
*

S/2003/752

Annex
Letter dated 15 July 2003 from the Registrar of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission addressed to
the Secretary-General
Article 4, paragraph 13, of the Agreement of 12 December 2000 between the
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the State of Eritrea provides as follows:
“Upon reaching a final decision regarding delimitation of the borders, the
Commission shall transmit its decision to the parties and Secretaries-General
of the OAU and the United Nations for publication ...”.
In the spirit of the language of the 12 December 2000 Agreement, the
President of the Boundary Commission has requested me to transmit to you and the
Interim Chairperson of the African Union the attached text of the Commission’s
Decision pursuant to article 15 B of the Commission’s Demarcation Directions.
(Signed) Bette E. Shifman
Registrar of the Boundary Commission

2

S/2003/752

Enclosure
7 July 2003

Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission
Decision pursuant to Article 15B of the Commission’s
Demarcation Directions
1.

In its Order of 9 February 2003, the Commission decided that a difference
which had arisen over the appointment of Field Liaison Officers (FLOs) should
be dealt with in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 15B of the
Demarcation Directions. In accordance with that procedure, the Special
Consultant prepared a report and transmitted it to the Commission and to the
Parties. The Parties communicated their comments to the Commission within
the fifteen-day period stipulated in Article 15B.

2.

The Commission has carefully considered the Special Consultant’s report and
the comments of the Parties. The Commission takes note of difficulties which
have arisen in the initial appointment of FLOs, attributable to a lack of
specificity in appointment procedures, notably differences regarding the
appointment of currently serving military officers. The Commission has
concluded that it is important now to put aside whatever difficulties may have
arisen and move forward to achieve an expeditious demarcation of the
boundary laid down in its Delimitation Decision.

3.

Consequently, the Commission had decided that now FLOs need to be
appointed for the remaining demarcation activity along this boundary, under
more detailed appointment procedures. The Parties shall appoint these FLOs
forthwith, in accordance with the provisions of Article 6B of the Demarcation
Directions, which is hereby amended as follows:
a.

Paragraph B of Article 6 of the Demarcation Directions shall be
renumbered B(i).

b.

There shall be added a new paragraph B(ii) as follows:
(ii)

c.

Field Liaison Officers shall be persons who have not served in that
role, otherwise than in an ad hoc capacity, prior to the date of this
Decision, and who are not currently serving as military personnel.
Notice of each Party’s selections as Field Liaison Officers shall be
forwarded for information to the other Party and to the Registrar of
the Commission and shall be accompanied by the following
information in respect of each Field Liaison Officer:
(a)

an up-to-date curriculum vitae, including full name,
professional qualifications, current position and occupational
responsibilities;

(b)

a record of any military service or responsibilities since 1989.

There shall be added a new paragraph B(iii) as follows:
(iii) A person’s nomination as a Field Liaison Officer becomes effective
upon that person’s selection by the nominating Party as a Field

3

S/2003/752

Liaison Officer and the required accompanying information being
forwarded to the Commission and the other Party. Should any
disagreement arise with regard to a person’s nomination as a Field
Liaison Officer, that disagreement shall be resolved by the
Commission, whose decision shall be final.
d.

There shall be added a new paragraph B(iv) as follows:
(iv) In the event of replacement of a Field Liaison Officer, the Party
making the replacement shall follow the procedure set forth in subparagraph (ii) above.

7 July 2003
Signed by the Commission:

4
