A/73/777–S/2019/193

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
28 February 2019
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-third session
Agenda item 40
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fourth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2405 (2018), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, dated 7 December 2018 ( A/73/624–
S/2018/1092).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Efforts towards a negotiated settlement to the conflict intensified, with progress
reported in talks between the United States of America and the Taliban. The
Government of Afghanistan also continued its preparations for an intra -Afghan peace
dialogue, although no formal talks between the Government and the Taliban were
held. The aftermath of the October 2018 parliamentary elections remained
contentious, amid delays in the counting process, widespread irregularities and
allegations of corruption. The Independent Election Commission pos tponed the 2019
presidential elections by three months until 20 July. Nominations of candidates for
the presidential elections concluded on 20 January, with 18 candidates registered,
including incumbent President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah.
Security remained volatile, with a slight decrease in violent incidents in line with
seasonal trends. Civilian casualties continued at record high levels. The Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations co-hosted the Geneva Ministerial Conference
on Afghanistan, resulting in the adoption of the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework for development assistance. The humanitarian situation remained grave,
compounded by ongoing drought and high levels of displacement.

19-02943 (E)

050319

*1902943*

A/73/777
S/2019/193

A.

Political developments
4.
The previous three months were dominated by three crucial and related
processes: the aftermath of the parliamentary elections, held on 20 October; the
presidential elections constitutionally mandated to take place in 2019, now scheduled
for July; and the redoubled effort to reach a durable political settlement between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban insurgency.
5.
Efforts to end the conflict in Afghanistan through political reconciliation
accelerated in the second half of 2018. During the reporting period, the Government
continued its preparations for an intra-Afghan peace dialogue. At the Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, held on 27 and 28 November, President Ghani
announced that he had established a Government negotiating team, led by his Chief
of Staff, Salam Rahimi. On 9 December, President Ghani announced the appointment
of Mohammed Umar Daudzai as his special representative to the region for peace and
concurrently as the new executive secretary of the High Peace Council. Mr. Daudzai
announced reforms to the High Peace Council, including the suspension of the
provincial peace committees. He also embarked on regional visits, travelling to
Pakistan from 8 to 12 January and China on 26 January to discuss regional consensus
on the Afghan peace process. On 12 December, the Government issued a presidential
decree establishing the High Advisory Board for Peace, comprising 33 members,
mainly Government officials and political opposition figures, including two women.
On 11 February, President Ghani held the first national consultative meeting on the
peace process. Following working group discussions, the President addressed the
gathering, emphasizing the need for a Government-led and inclusive intra-Afghan
process and tasking Mr. Daudzai with convening a jirga of prominent Afghans by the
end of February to identify the parameters of peace.
6.
Meanwhile, the United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, made several trips to the region to gain sup port for
the Afghan peace process. During a regional visit from 4 to 22 December,
Mr. Khalilzad held talks on 17 and 18 December with Taliban representatives in Abu
Dhabi and governmental representatives from Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. It was reported that the three countries asked the Taliban to consider
announcing a ceasefire and publicly signalling its willingness to enter into direct talks
with the Government of Afghanistan. These intra-Afghan talks did not materialize,
however, despite the presence of a Government delegation in Abu Dhabi.
Mr. Khalilzad made a further visit to the region from 8 to 26 January, beginning with
trips to India and China. On 21 January, he travelled to Qatar for six days of intense
negotiations with the Taliban Political Commission, reportedly over the military
withdrawal of the United States from Afghanistan and ensuring that the country did
not become a haven for international terrorists. On 26 January, Ambassador Khalilzad
and the Taliban issued separate public statements noting that important progress had
been made, although the meetings had concluded without a formal agreement.
Mr. Khalilzad then visited Kabul to brief President Ghani on the outcome of the talks.
In a media interview, he acknowledged that the Taliban had refused to engage in direct
talks with the Government of Afghanistan, as the movement believed that this would
mean accepting the Government’s legitimacy. President Ghani subsequently gave a
public address on 28 January, in which he portrayed progress in negotiations between
the United States and the Taliban as part of an overall framework initiated by the
Government of Afghanistan. President Ghani reiterated his call for the Taliban to
engage in intra-Afghan dialogue, warned against the mistakes of past Afghan peace
processes and called for the withdrawal of foreign troops and for the peace process to
be conducted in an orderly and sustainable manner.

2/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

7.
On 5 and 6 February, a meeting was held in Moscow between a 10 -member
Taliban delegation and a number of Afghan political figures, many affiliated with
opposition positions, including former President Hamid Karzai and several
presidential and vice-presidential candidates, as well as several former Taliban
members. Two women participated in the meeting. Speaking at the conference,
Mr. Karzai welcomed recent peace efforts and emphasized that a free and democratic
Afghanistan could be achieved only through national unity. A representative of the
Taliban Political Commission, Sher Mohammad Abbas Stanekzai, gave a speech in
which he outlined steps towards a peace process, including the delisting of the Taliban
from sanctions lists, the release of detainees and the formal opening of a Taliban
office, and highlighted the need for international guarantees of an eventual peace
agreement. Parliamentarian Fawzia Koofi said that the gains of the past 18 years,
including the political participation and socioeconomic rights of women, should be
protected in any peace process. At the conclusion of the conference, participants
issued a joint declaration calling for an inclusive intra -Afghan dialogue. In the
declaration, they also called for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan
and expressed support for ensuring the educational, political, social and economic
rights of women, as well as for the freedom of speech of all Afghans, in accordance
with Islamic values. Subsequently, President Ghani emphasized the need for the peace
process to be led by the Government of Afghanistan.
8.
The United Nations continued its efforts to support an Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led peace process. In partnership with the Government of Norway, the United
Nations organized an experience-sharing seminar in Kabul where experts on recent
peace negotiations concerning Colombia and the Philippines shared insights with the
High Peace Council and members of the Government negotiating team and the High
Advisory Board for Peace. As part of ongoing efforts to support local-level
peacebuilding, field offices of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) supported the implementation of three local peace initiatives during the
reporting period, including one aimed at reducing the impact of resource disputes on
marginalized communities in Badakhshan Province.
9.
These efforts to find a lasting peace continued in parallel with two electoral
processes: preparations for the 2019 presidential elections, and the delayed and
contentious resolution of the October 2018 parliamentary elections. The tabulation of
results for the parliamentary elections progressed slowly. Following widespread
complaints of corruption and procedural irregularities, full or partial recounts were
conducted in all 33 provinces where elections were held. Nevertheless, these did not
assuage the concerns of many candidates and political parties, who alleged that some
commissioners and staff of the electoral management bodies were tampering with the
results of the recount. On 28 November, the National Directorate for Security arrested
the Independent Election Commission’s acting head of field operations over
allegations of corruption. His case was subsequently referred to the Office of the
Attorney General for investigation. During the extended counting period, protestors
dissatisfied with recounts or the preliminary results held largely peaceful
demonstrations in over 20 provinces across the country, temporarily blocking
electoral offices in at least 11 provinces. While some candidates did have grievances
with the electoral process, the majority followed the appropriate procedures and
submitted complaints to be investigated by the Electoral Complaints Commission.
10. The parliamentary constituency of Kabul Province, with the highest number of
seats and largest registered voting population, proved partic ularly contentious. On
6 December, the Electoral Complaints Commission announced that it had invalidated
the Kabul election and called for the termination of five senior electoral officials,
including the Independent Election Commission’s Chief Electoral Officer. The
decision prompted the Second Vice-President, the Chief Justice, the Attorney General
19-02943

3/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

and the Head of Independent Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of the
Constitution to mediate between the two bodies, which subsequently agreed to a
recount at a limited number of polling centres. This controversy further delayed the
release of results for Kabul Province. On 14 January, preliminary results for Kabul
Province were announced. Following an initially quiet response to these results,
which had originally been due to be announced on 10 November 2018, unsuccessful
candidates staged a protest in the city of Kabul on 22 January, blocking the four main
entrances to the capital before ending the protest later the same day.
11. The Electoral Complaints Commission received 4,946 complaints regarding the
preliminary results, of which 2,980 complaints and 198 appeals were adjudicated. Of
these, the Commission forwarded 119 cases to the Office of the Attorney General for
further investigation. Following the complaints process, the Commission began
announcing the final results of the elections, with the results in nine provinces
announced on 20 January, three provinces on 23 January and six provinces on
30 January.
12. On 30 December, the Independent Election Commission announced that it
would postpone the 2019 presidential elections from 20 April to 20 July. Although
preceded by consultations with political actors and civil society, the announcement
was met with criticism and concern over the delay. The Independent Commission for
Overseeing the Implementation of the Constitution issued a legal opinion on
31 December 2018 in which it concluded that the postponement constituted a breach
of the Constitution. Although it was not binding on the Independent Ele ction
Commission, the opinion added weight to public criticism surrounding the
postponement of the elections. Also scheduled for July are provincial and district
council elections, as well as the parliamentary election for Ghazni Province, which
could not be held in 2018 owing to the volatile security situation and protests blocking
the provincial office of the Independent Election Commission, both of which
inhibited voter registration efforts in the province. Several stakeholder groups
expressed scepticism about the Commission’s capacity to conduct all four elections
in July.
13. The electoral commissions, supported by the United Nations, nevertheless
continued logistical preparations for the presidential elections. In January, the
Independent Election Commission concluded a lessons learned process on the
parliamentary elections, and, in line with its recommendations, began discussions
with the Government over strengthening the structure and staffing of the
Commission’s secretariat. Both commissions started preparing their operational plans
and budget. The Government allocated approximately $23.4 million for four elections
in its 2019 national budget, for use by the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission. Following the preparation of a draft operational
plan, a draft budget of $112,189,045 was prepared to fund the activities of the two
commissions, as well as the United Nations Electoral Support Project. The
nomination of candidates for the presidential elections commenced on 22 December
and closed on 20 January, with 18 presidential candidates registering, including
President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah. No female presidential candidates
registered, but three women were among the running mates registered on presidential
tickets. Verification of documents by the Independent Election Commission was
completed on 4 February while candidate vetting for links to illegal armed groups by
the Election Complaints Commission will continue until 22 March. On 7 January, the
regulations for the voter registration update were approved, with the registration
process scheduled to take place in March. The Commission has also begun to explore
the use of technology, including the improved use of biometric voter verification
equipment, which had functioned inconsistently during the parliamentary elections.
In response to a Government request, two international non -voting members of the
4/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

Electoral Complaints Commission were identified and, on 5 February, an official
letter of recommendation was sent to President Ghani for his approval.
14. The perceived mismanagement of the parliamentary elections and allegations of
fraud and corruption generated calls for the removal of electoral commissioners and
reinvigorated the demands for reforms to the electoral system. In December, the
Grand National Coalition of Afghanistan and the contact group of political parties
called for fundamental reforms in the structures of both commissions. The parties also
warned, however, against Government interference that could undermine the
credibility of the upcoming presidential elections. On 13 January, Second
Vice-President Sarwar Danesh publicly signalled the Government ’s plans to consider
reforms of both commissions. On 16 January, the Government began consultations
with political actors and civil society to build consensus on potential changes to both
commissions and the mechanisms for replacing commissioners. On 11 February, an
ad hoc technical committee led by Second Vice-President Danesh, comprising
Government officials, political parties and civil society organizations, agreed to
proposed amendments to the Election Law, including a new appointment process for
members of both electoral commissions. The draft amendments to the law were
approved by the Cabinet on 12 February. On the same day, President Ghani issued a
decree removing with immediate effect the seven commissioners of the Independent
Election Commission and the five commissioners of the Electoral Complaints
Commission from their positions and appointing the heads of the secretariats as
caretakers of the two commissions, pending the selection and appointment of new
Chairs.
15. In parallel, political actors continued their efforts to mobilize support ahead of
the presidential elections. On 28 January, a spokesperson for the opposition Grand
National Coalition of Afghanistan told the media that efforts to support a single
presidential candidate as previously intended had failed. The formation of tickets also
prompted a new round of debate over the political arrangements governing
Afghanistan, with several candidates, including Chief Executive Abdullah and former
National Security Adviser Hanif Atmar, signalling their support for decentralization
and political reform. Persistent rumours about the possible estab lishment of an
interim administration also sparked debate among presidential and vice -presidential
candidates about the sequencing of presidential elections and a peace process. Further
controversy was generated on 24 January upon President Ghani ’s announcement that
Second Chief Executive Officer Mohammad Mohaqeq, who had registered to contest
the 2019 presidential elections as Mr. Atmar’s nominee for Second Vice-President,
had been dismissed from his post. The following day, Mr. Mohaqeq issued a statement
rejecting the President’s decision, while Chief Executive Abdullah issued a statement
in support of Mr. Mohaqeq. The move prompted a debate over the legality of President
Ghani’s decision, with the Government claiming that it had the authority to dismiss
senior officials under the Constitution, while Mr. Mohaqeq ’s supporters argued that
his position was grounded in the September 2014 National Unity Government
agreement and that his dismissal therefore required consultations with Chief
Executive Abdullah.

B.

Security
16. The security situation remained volatile, with a consistently high number of
security incidents. In 2018, the United Nations recorded 22,478 security -related
incidents, a 5 per cent reduction as compared with the historically high 23,7 44
security-related incidents recorded in 2017. UNAMA recorded 13,805 armed clashes
in 2018, representing 61 per cent of all security-related incidents and a 10 per cent
decrease compared with 2017. Incidents relating to the use of improvised explosive

19-02943

5/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

devices remained the second largest category of incidents. Reported airstrikes, which
had already increased by 67.6 per cent from 2016 to 2017, rose by an additional 42 per
cent, from 950 in 2017 to 1,352 in 2018. The Taliban succeeded in temporarily
capturing 21 district administrative centres throughout the year, the second highest
level since the security transition to the Afghan forces at the end of 2014. Targeted
killings and abductions increased by 9 per cent compared with 2017, while
106 suicide attacks were recorded, the highest number since 2014 and a 5 per cent
increase as compared with 2017. The southern and eastern regions recorded the
highest number of incidents, accounting for 52 per cent of all security incidents.
17. Between 16 November 2018 and 7 February 2019, UNAMA recorded a total of
4,420 security-related incidents, an 8 per cent decrease compared with the same
period the year before. The southern region saw the highest number of incidents,
followed by the eastern and northern regions, with these three regions accounting for
67 per cent of all incidents. Established trends remain unchanged, with armed clashes
dominating the security incident profile, accounting for 58 per cent of all incidents, a
12 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2017. Suicide attacks
decreased by 61 per cent, possibly reflecting successful interdiction efforts by Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces in the cities of Kabul and Jalalabad, while air
strikes by the Afghan Air Force and international military forces increased by 51 per
cent as compared with the same period the year before.
18. The Government made significant changes to its security leadership. On
23 December, President Ghani announced the appointment of Assadullah Khalid as
acting Minister of Defence and Amrullah Saleh as acting Minister of the Interior.
Mr. Saleh subsequently resigned from office on 19 January to stand as a candidate for
First Vice-President on President Ghani’s re-election ticket. On 20 January, President
Ghani appointed National Security Adviser Hamdullah Mohib as officer in charge of
the Ministry of the Interior. On 11 February, the Government appointed Massoud
Andarabi, a former deputy director of the National Directorate for Security, as the
new acting Minister of the Interior.
19. Localized clashes between Government forces and anti-government elements
continued across Afghanistan, at marginally lower levels, in line with seasonal
patterns, with neither side achieving significant territorial gains. Winter operations of
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were focused on the southern
region, as well as Nangarhar in the east, Balkh and Faryab in the north, Ghazni in the
south-east and Herat and Farah in the west. They continued to face challenges with
regard to improving overall security along major roads across northern Afghanistan.
Between 16 and 19 January, a large Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
resupply convoy, travelling between the cities of Maymana and Mazar-e Sharif, was
attacked multiple times, resulting in an estimated 50 casualties and 40 vehicles
destroyed, a setback for the efforts of the Afghan security forces in the area. Air
strikes continued to underpin Afghan and international military efforts against
anti-government elements around the country, with an unprecedented number of air
strikes recorded during the reporting period. The largest number of air strikes –
approximately one third – occurred in Helmand Province, where the Taliban’s
designated shadow governor, Mullah Manan, was killed on 1 December by a drone
strike, followed by Farah, Uruzgan, Nangarhar, Ghazni and Faryab provinces. During
the reporting period, five international military servicemen were reported as killed in
action, including two in the first three weeks of January 2019.
20. Several high-profile attacks occurred during the reporting period, mainly in the
city of Kabul, despite an overall lower tempo of suicide and complex attacks
nationwide. Responsibility for two significant attacks in the city of Kabul re main
unclaimed: a suicide attack against a religious gathering on 20 November and a
complex attack against the compounds of the Ministries of Public Works and of
6/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled on 24 December. United Nations staff
inside the Ministry of Public Works facility during the attack were protected by
elements of the Afghan Diplomatic Protective Service and safely evacuated.
Responsibility for two attacks targeting international compounds linked to military
efforts claimed by the Taliban: on 28 November against Camp Anjuman and on
14 January against the Green Village compound. Ten United Nations staff members
present in the Green Village compound during the attack were unharmed, while two
staff members were slightly injured. Another significant asymmetric attack against
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, claimed by the Taliban, occurred
on 21 January when an explosive-laden humvee detonated inside an Afghan Quick
Reaction Force base in Wardak Province, killing 39 security p ersonnel and injuring
another 58.
21. A number of protests occurred around the country linked to the elections,
civilian casualties or the arrest of high-profile individuals. Within the span of a week
in late November, at least four demonstrations against civilian casualties as a result
of pro-government military operations were held in Gelan District (Ghazni Province),
Jabal us Saraj District (Parwan Province), Muhammad Aghah District (Logar
Province) and Gomal District (Paktika Province). On 25 November, the National
Directorate for Security arrested Ali Pur, a Hazara militia commander, on suspicion
of involvement in criminal activities. The arrest sparked widespread demonstrations
in the cities of Kabul and Bamyan, where they escalated into violence, as well as in
the provinces of Herat, Balkh, Daykundi and Wardak. Ali Pur was subsequently
released on 26 November. The localized protests against the preliminary results and
vote recounts for parliamentary elections resulted at times in the closure of roads or
the provincial offices of electoral management bodies.
22. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP)
remained resilient, despite Afghan and international military forces maintaining a
high tempo of operations against its strongholds in Nangarhar and Kunar provinces.
These operations, including air strikes, had a significant impact in degrading ISILKP. UNAMA recorded clashes in Kunar Province between the Taliban and ISIL -KP,
suggesting that it was one of the most active locations for Taliban and ISIL-KP
confrontation, although clashes also continued in Nangarhar Province. Increased
measures implemented by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces have
improved security in the city of Jalalabad in 2019, after the provi ncial capital
witnessed a 10 per cent increase in suicide attacks in 2018, primarily driven by
ISIL-KP. On 23 November, ISIL-KP claimed one suicide attack in a mosque situated
in a military base in Manduzai District, Khost Province, reportedly killing 35 s ecurity
personnel.
23. Nine incidents affecting United Nations personnel were reported, including two
cases of intimidation and seven crime-related incidents.

C.

Regional cooperation
24. Regional engagement with regard to the Afghan peace process inte nsified during
the reporting period, as the Government of Afghanistan and countries of the region
enhanced their mutual efforts. In January, the National Security Adviser of
Afghanistan, Hamdullah Mohib, visited India, China, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates to discuss the peace process, counter-terrorism, and bilateral and
multilateral ties. Interlocutors expressed their support for the Afghan reconciliation
process and for sustained cooperation in that regard.
25. The Islamic Republic of Iran also increased its engagement in support of the
Afghan peace process. On 26 December, the Secretary of its Supreme National

19-02943

7/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

Security Council, General Ali Shamkhani, met in Kabul with President Ghani, Chief
Executive Abdullah and National Security Adviser Mohib. On 30 December, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran reported that a Taliban
delegation had visited the Islamic Republic of Iran for discussions regarding the peace
process in Afghanistan, and that those talks had been held with the knowledge of the
Government of Afghanistan. On 5 January, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Abbas Araghchi, visited Kabul, meeting with
President Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, Salahuddin Rabbani. Mr. Araghchi briefed on Tehran ’s talks with the
Taliban and reiterated his country’s commitment to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process.
26. Pakistan also continued its engagement with Afghanistan through bilateral and
multilateral channels. From 24 to 26 December, its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Shah
Mahmood Hussain Qureshi, visited Kabul, Tehran, Beijing and Moscow as part of
Islamabad’s regional outreach in support of peace efforts. On 15 December, the
second Afghanistan-China-Pakistan Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue was held in Kabul.
In their joint statement, the three sides agreed to continue building mutual political
trust and to support reconciliation efforts and other key areas of trilateral cooperati on,
including development and connectivity, security and counter-terrorism. The three
sides agreed to implement the consensus of the second Dialogue through the trilateral
Vice-Ministerial Strategic Dialogue, Vice-Ministerial Consultation on CounterTerrorism and Security, and Director Generals’ Practical Cooperation, as well as other
agreed mechanisms.
27. The trade connectivity of Afghanistan received a boost on 13 December with
the inauguration in Herat of the Lapis Lazuli Corridor by President Ghani. T he
Corridor is expected to facilitate the export of Afghan products, particularly to
European markets. During the reporting period, the first batch of Afghan goods
reached Turkey via this route.
28. In November 2018, the 7th regional technical group meeti ng on counterterrorism confidence-building measures under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process was
held in Abu Dhabi. At the meeting, participating countries expressed interest in jointly
developing and implementing a unified regional counter-terrorism strategy.

III. Human rights
29. On 25 February 2019, UNAMA released its 2018 annual report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. The Mission documented 10,993 civilian casualties
(3,804 people killed and 7,189 injured) between 1 January and 31 December 2018,
the highest number of civilian deaths recorded in a single year since UNAMA began
systematic documentation in 2009, and an overall increase of 5 per cent compared
with 2017. UNAMA attributed 63 per cent of all civilian casualties to anti -government
elements (37 per cent to the Taliban, 20 per cent to ISIL-KP and 6 per cent to
unidentified anti-government elements, including self-proclaimed ISIL-KP), 24 per
cent to pro-government forces (14 per cent to Afghan national defence and security
forces, 6 per cent to international military forces, 2 per cent to pro -government
militias, and 2 per cent to undetermined or multiple pro -government forces), 10 per
cent to unattributed crossfire during ground engagements between anti -government
elements and pro-government forces and 3 per cent to other incidents, including
explosive remnants of war and cross-border shelling.
30. The use of tactics involving improvised explosive devices, including suicide and
non-suicide attacks, caused the most civilian casualties in 2018 (42 per cent),
resulting in 4,627 civilian casualties (1,361 people killed and 3,266 injured), an 11 per
8/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

cent increase compared with 2017. A particularly egregious attack during the
reporting period occurred on 20 November when a suicide a ttacker detonated his
body-borne improvised explosive device at a gathering marking a religious holiday,
resulting in the death of 60 civilians and the injury of 86 more. Ground engagements,
the second leading cause, accounted for 3,382 civilian casualties (814 people killed
and 2,568 injured), amounting to 31 per cent of all civilian casualties, marking a slight
decrease compared with 2017. UNAMA continued to document increasing levels of
civilian casualties from aerial strikes by pro-government forces, documenting a
record high of 1,015 civilian casualties (536 people killed and 479 injured) in 2018,
an increase of 61 per cent compared with 2017, with women and children comprising
64 per cent of those casualties. Search operations by pro -government forces caused
an increasing number of civilian casualties, resulting in 353 civilian casualties
(284 people killed and 69 injured). UNAMA notes also that it has documented a high
ratio of civilian deaths from search and air operations, with many of the search
operations involving air support by international military forces. UNAMA
documented 3,062 child casualties (927 children killed and 2,135 injured) and
1,152 adult female casualties (350 women killed and 802 injured) in 2018, both of
which marked a decrease compared with 2017. The leading cause of child casualties
in 2018 continued to be ground engagements, which caused 1,192 child casualties
(276 children killed and 916 injured). Non-suicide attacks involving improvised
explosive devices by anti-government elements were the second main cause of
casualties among children, with 517 child casualties (129 children killed and
388 injured). Of concern, aerial operations by pro-government forces in 2018 caused
492 child casualties (236 deaths and 256 injured), an 85 per cent increase compared
with the previous year and a 107 per cent increase in the number of children killed.
Children continued to comprise the vast majority (87 per cent) of casualties from
explosive remnants of war, with 426 child casualties (136 child ren killed and
290 injured) in 2018.
31. From 1 October to 31 December 2018, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 69 incidents
targeting schools and related personnel, compared with 33 incidents during the
previous quarter. The task force attributed 65 incidents to anti -government elements
(55 by the Taliban, 7 by ISIL-KP, 2 by undetermined armed groups and 1 jointly by
ISIL-KP and the Taliban) and 4 to pro-government forces (2 by the Afghan National
Army and 1 each by international military forces and a pro -government militia). The
increase is mainly the result of attacks by the Taliban against schools used as polling
centres. The task force verified 48 election-related incidents affecting education
(46 by the Taliban, 2 of which involved mass abductions of education officials on
election duty; 1 by a pro-government militia; and 1 resulting from fighting between
the Afghan National Army and the Taliban).
32. ISIL-KP continued to target girls’ schools in retaliation against aerial attacks by
pro-government forces in the eastern region. Of the 12 attacks against health facilities
and health-care personnel verified by the task force, 8 attacks were against facilities,
2 attacks against health-care personnel and 2 against facilities and personnel,
compared with 19 incidents in the previous reporting period. The task force attributed
10 incidents to armed groups (9 to the Taliban and 1 to ISIL-KP) and 2 to international
military forces.
33. The task force verified five incidents of abduction of children by armed groups,
involving 11 boys (four by the Taliban affecting 9 boys and one by ISIL-KP involving
2 boys), compared with five incidents in the previous quarter, involving 15 boys .
Moreover, the task force verified two incidents of the recruitment and use of children
by armed groups, involving two boys (one by the Taliban and one by undetermined
anti-government elements).
19-02943

9/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

34. The Government took further steps for the promotion and protection of women’s
rights. On 18 December, the Government approved a policy promoting women ’s
access to inheritance and property ownership rights, with the aim of increasing
women’s economic empowerment and financial independence, which will come into
force in March 2019. On 20 December, Afghanistan submitted its third periodic report
on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
The report noted the Government’s achievements in promoting women’s participation
in the political, economic and legislative spheres, such as the implementation of the
national priority programme on the economic empowerment of women. The report
further noted progress on the implementation of recommendations of the Committee,
particularly regarding women and peace and security, legal protection mechanisms,
violence against women and harmful practices. The Government also continued
efforts to increase the representation of women at senior levels in the civil service.
On 4 December, the Government appointed the first ever female Deputy Minister of
the Interior, responsible for policies and strategies. Also for the first time, on
14 December, a woman assumed the position of ambassador of Afghanistan to the
United States and on 31 December a woman was appointed Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan to the United Nations. At the municipal level, on 2 January, the Kabul
Provincial Municipality appointed 11 women as deputies in 22 district municipalities.
The reporting period saw heightened concern regarding the preservation of the
achievements of human rights, particularly women’s rights, over the past 18 years.
This propelled advocacy and lobbying efforts by rights defenders countrywide
encouraging the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to incl ude women as
equal participants in discussions on the peace process.
35. On 21 January, the third cycle of the universal periodic review of Afghanistan
was held in Geneva. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review adopted
the report on Afghanistan on 25 January. In its national report to the Human Rights
Council, Afghanistan noted measures taken to implement recommendations of the
second-cycle review, including for the protection of civilians, protection of women ’s
rights and the achievement of progress to align national development priorities with
the Sustainable Development Goals. From 7 to 9 January, the United Nations
implemented a technical assistance programme to prepare the Afghan delegation for
the review and to strengthen the capacity of the relevant ministries to implement
recommendations of the review.
36. Journalists and media workers continued to face high levels of conflict -related
violence. During the reporting period, UNAMA documented five incidents that
resulted in the killing of two journalists, one abduction, and threats against media
workers in Farah, Kabul, Nangarhar and Zabul Provinces. During the reporting
period, UNAMA organized seven events to promote the safety of journalists and the
role of human rights defenders and media workers for the protection of human rights.
These events were attended by 246 participants, including 41 women, in Baghlan,
Helmand, Herat, Kunduz, Paktiya, Sari Pul and Zabul Provinces.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
37. On 27 and 28 November, the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
co-hosted the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, where the Government
and the international community took stock of the implementation of the country ’s
reform agenda. The Government noted that certain challenges, in particular the
ongoing armed conflict, had undermined efforts towards self-reliance. Participants
held in-depth discussions on the issue of peace, emphasizing the linkages between
peace and development. The conference concluded with the adoption of a joint
communiqué and the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, which consists of
10/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

24 short-term deliverables outlining mutual responsibilities for aid programmes in
2019 and 2020. These included one deliverable aimed at increasing women’s
participation in the civil service, and another aimed at improving women ’s protection.
Following the Conference, the Ministry of Finance began developing an
implementation plan for the Framework with inputs from the donor communit y.
UNAMA, together with the World Bank and development partners, also initiated a
discussion centred on paragraphs 6 and 15 of the communiqué, dealing with the
socioeconomic requirements for peace. Work also began to develop a package of
economic initiatives, including a prioritized list of policy reforms and public
investments to achieve improved economic outcomes in Afghanistan.
38. By the time of the Geneva conference, all 10 national priority programmes had
been finalized and approved by high development councils. All are currently under
implementation. According to the progress update on national priority programmes,
issued in November 2018, the implementation of the Citizens’ Charter programme
had begun in more than 11,000 communities across all 34 pr ovinces, reaching nearly
10 million people. As at January 2019, more than $100 million in community grants
had been disbursed to communities and more than 4,000 projects were under way.
Women’s participation in local decision-making increased under the programme, with
women making up more than 49 per cent of more than 200,000 elected community
development council members and 50 per cent of council leaders. An estimated 78 per
cent of eligible female voters participated in the elections, which was higher tha n the
participation rate among male voters.
39. On 31 December, the National Assembly approved the 2019 national budget,
marking the first time the budget was approved on its first submission. The security,
infrastructure, education, health and agriculture sectors received the greatest share of
budget allocation. Of the total budget, 71 per cent is allocated to operational
expenditure, leaving 29 per cent for development initiatives. The 2019 development
allocation increased by 12 per cent compared with 201 8. The Government will fund
about 47 per cent of the budget, with the balance to be financed by donors. On
25 December, the Ministry of Finance reported that development expenditure had
increased by 91.5 per cent in 2018 compared with 67 per cent in 2017, attributing the
increase to reforms in budgetary processes, including improved consultations during
the budget preparation phase.
40. The Government continued its efforts to implement civil service reform. On
31 December, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission
launched a three-year public administration reform programme, entitled “Tracking
Afghanistan’s government human resource management and institutional reforms ”,
financed by the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. The pro gramme is aimed at
improving human resources planning, enhancing merit-based recruitment and
strengthening the capacity of government ministries and agencies. It is also aimed at
increasing the representation of women in the civil service, through the impo sition of
an additional quota of 10 per cent for women in all new recruitments in order to meet
the Government’s commitment that women will represent 30 per cent of the civil
service by 2020. The Government also made progress towards the implementation of
its subnational governance policy. On 26 December, the President issued a decree
establishing a ministerial-level subnational governance committee under the High
Council for Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption to coordinate the implementation of
policy.
41. On 25 December, a subcommittee of the High Council for Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption, chaired by Second Vice-President Danesh, finalized its revisions to
the Government’s anti-corruption strategy, incorporating suggestions from UNAMA
and international partners aimed at making the strategy’s benchmarks easier to
measure. The adoption of the revised strategy by the High Council remains pending.
19-02943

11/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

On 30 December, the commissioners of the new Access to Information Commission
were appointed, paving the way for the implementation of the Access to Information
Law.
42. The Government continued its efforts to combat impunity for high -level
offences, with mixed results. On 25 December, a former Minister of
Telecommunication and Information Technology was acquitted on a charge of misuse
of authority relating to recruitment and collection of tax revenue, in a special panel
case which had been pending before the Supreme Court for more than two years.
Separately, the former Minister was convicted by the Anti -Corruption Justice Centre
for another charge of misuse of authority committed when he was a deputy minister.
Since its establishment, the Justice Centre has finished 49 cases involving
199 defendants on trial and 45 cases involving 142 defendants on appeal. The
enforcement of arrest warrants for Justice Centre cases remains a concern. As at
January 2019, about one third of pending warrants had been executed, with none of
the concerned defendants in detention.

V. Humanitarian assistance and refugees
43. Between 1 November and 10 January, 49,001 people were newly displaced by
the conflict, bringing the total number of displaced in 2018 to 364,883 people. More
than half of this figure (58 per cent) comprised children under the age of 18. Although
conflict-related displacement in 2018 was down by more than a quarter compared
with 2017, many displaced families continued to have no immediate prospect of
returning to their areas of origin in safety and dignity. In 2018, humanitarian partners
provided life-saving assistance to 114,697 people displaced by conflict.
44. In November 2018, heavy fighting among ethnic groups in the Khas Uruzgan
district of Uruzgan Province spilled over to the Jaghuri and Malistan districts in
Ghazni Province, affecting Hazara communities and resulting in the displacement of
almost 5,000 families to surrounding villages and provinces. In response, displaced
families received a combination of assistance from the Government, United Nations
agencies and humanitarian partners, including fuel and firewo od for heating,
multipurpose cash, food and non-food items, as well as family reunification and
psychosocial support.
45. The number of trauma cases in which treatment was received in the period from
1 November to 31 January was 30,934, an increase of 17 per cent compared with
2017. The need for trauma care was particularly high in Nangarhar, Kandahar and
Helmand Provinces, where clashes have taken heavy tolls and access has been
reduced. During the reporting period, 15 partners from the health cluster prov ided
consultations to 593,643 people, of whom 61 per cent were women and girls.
46. During the reporting period, two new cases of polio were identified, bringing
the total number of polio cases in 2018 to 21. Fifteen of these cases were in the
southern region, while five were in the eastern region. Polio vaccination campaigns
faced access challenges in the southern region, where a ban on house -to-house
vaccination has remained in place since May 2018. Through dialogue with community
representatives, the programme gained access to fixed sites; however, this approach
is not adequate to interrupt polio transmission. Two subnational campaigns were
conducted during the reporting period: the first in December 2018 targeting
4,313,221 children, and the second in January 2019 targeting 2,375,710 children. The
programme was unable to reach approximately 800,000 children during December
owing to access constraints.

12/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

47. In the final two months of 2018, the humanitarian community significantly
scaled up its operations to respond to the 22 provinces most severely affected by
drought, as well as the worsening displacement in the western region. As at
31 December 2018, humanitarian partners had reached 3.5 million drought -affected
people with a range of humanitarian assistance. Three million people received food
and livelihood support, 1 million people benefited from access to clean water,
800,000 received emergency health services and 15,100 families in Badghis and
Herat Provinces received emergency shelter. Of the total assisted caseload, 2.3 million
people were reached by the United Nations with 40,000 metric tons of food and more
than $3.24 million in cash-for-food transfers. According to the most recent analysis,
around 13.5 million people, representing over a third of t he population, are facing
crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity, placing them at increased risk of excess
morbidity and mortality. The Famine Early Warning System Network noted that a
combination of drought, ongoing conflict and low financial remit tances had resulted
in atypically high demand for food and livelihood assistance, and predicted that
Badghis, Badakhshan and Daikundi Provinces were likely to remain in emergency
conditions until at least May 2019, unless humanitarian partners continued to deliver
food and livelihood assistance in rural areas.
48. The United Nations and partners continue to implement a two -pronged response
to the drought, with sustained assistance planned in drought -affected rural areas until
the next harvest in order to prevent further displacement, restore livelihoods and
encourage returns. At the same time, they are providing winterization and emergency
shelter support to displaced families in urban centres for at least the first quarter of
2019. As at the end of 2018, the United Nations and partners had assisted more than
400,000 displaced people in the western region, while also relocating 484 displaced
families at risk of eviction to the Shahrak-e-Sabz site in Herat Province. In total, there
are approximately 29,500 displaced families living in informal sites in Herat Province
and more than 13,000 displaced families in Badghis Province.
49. Also in November, the country’s first all-female demining team successfully
cleared one of the last minefields in Bamyan Province. The 13-member team released
51,520 m2 of contaminated land back to the community. In December, the United
Nations cleared contamination from explosive remnants of war in and around the
Girls’ Central High School of Almar district in Faryab Province. As a result, students
were able to return to school and take their exams before winter break. From
November to January, the United Nations and its partners cleared 4.78 km 2 of
contamination from high-impact explosives, benefiting 46 communities. Responding
to the protection concerns of returnees from Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of
Iran, approximately 80,715 people received United Nations-funded risk education
across the country during the reporting period.
50. A total of 156,280 undocumented persons and returnees arrived in Afghanistan
between 1 November 2018 and 20 January 2019, with 5,285 undocumented returnees
from Pakistan, 146,633 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 3,299 returnees from
Europe. In the same period, 823 refugees returned from Pakistan , 219 from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and 21 from other countries. The number of registered
refugees returning to Afghanistan in 2018 (13,584 from Pakistan, 1,964 from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and 151 from other countries) was 73 per cent lower than in
2017. The number of undocumented returns from the Islamic Republic of Iran reached
a historical high, with 773,125 returnees and deportees in 2018 compared with
460,000 in 2017. In January 2019, the Government of Pakistan extended Afghan
citizenship cards for some 327,000 Afghan nationals residing in Pakistan until
23 March 2019, after which Afghanistan and Pakistan have agreed to the return of
50,000 holders of such cards by 30 June 2019.

19-02943

13/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

51. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a total of 79 incidents
affecting the United Nations and its humanitarian partners between 1 November 2018
and 27 January 2019. In 2018, a total of 317 incidents were recorded, including the
killing of 28 aid workers. Moreover, an additional 53 aid workers were injured and
88 abducted. The trend towards more violent and deliberate attacks on health facilities
and health workers also continued, while deminers faced a particularly heightened
risk of kidnapping and armed violence. Humanitarian access in contested areas and
areas under the control of anti-government elements remained a persistent challenge.
The increased presence of anti-government elements on major transit routes, such as
the highways between Kabul and Kandahar, Herat and Badghis, and Kandahar and
Tirin Kot, continues to be problematic for the movement of humanitarian aid workers
and assets.
52. The 2018–2021 humanitarian response plan was revised in November 2018 to
accommodate emerging drought-related needs. With a view to reaching 5.2 million
people by the end of 2018, the plan called for $599 million to support these activities.
According to the Financial Tracking Service, a total of $537.3 million in funding was
received for humanitarian action in Afghanistan in 2018, including $468.1 million for
activities included in the plan, or 78 per cent of the total funding requested.

VI. Counter-narcotics
53. The Government, supported by international partners, continued its
counter-narcotics operations. Between 1 November and 31 January, law enforcement
authorities conducted a total of 1,004 counter-narcotics operations leading to seizures
of 850 kg of heroin, 3,250 kg of morphine, 4,574 kg of opium, 205 kg of
methamphetamine, 244,688 kg of hashish, 2,196 kg of cannabis, 3,595 tablets of
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), 45,514 kg of solid precursor
chemicals and 82,315 litres of liquid precursor chemicals. Eight heroin manufacturing
laboratories were dismantled, and 28 narcotics storage facilities were destroyed.
These operations led to the arrest of 1,144 suspects and related seizures of
182 vehicles, 330 weapons and 12 radios. Two officers of the Counter-Narcotics
Police of Afghanistan were killed while carrying out operations.
54. The Government and its partners conducted several initiatives in support of the
licit agricultural sector. In a joint initiative between the Ministry of Agriculture,
Irrigation and Livestock and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), a one-day national conference on investment in development of the pine
nut trade was organized on 8 January in Kabul. The event was attended by the
Minister of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, the Chief Executive of the
Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and representatives of the private
sector. Participants discussed the potential benefits of the pine nut value chain and
explored investment opportunities for the private sector. On 16 December, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock inaugurated the first farmer call
centre as part of its alternative development activities supported by UNODC under
the national drug action plan of Afghanistan. The service provides free advice and
information to farmers in local languages and is aimed at establishing consultative
contacts between local farmers and agricultural experts of the Ministry.

VII. Mission support
55. As at 31 January, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 9 per cent for international
staff, 4 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for local-level staff,
compared with the approved rates of 7 per cent, 5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
14/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

The proportion of female staff remained very low. As at 31 January, the percentage of
women in each category of staff stood at 34 per cent for international staff, 36 per
cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Professional Officers and
8 per cent for local-level staff. Between 1 November and 31 December, UNAMA
conducted 110 road and 13 air missions, as well as 568 reverse outreach missions,
during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
56. The current moment represents perhaps the most significant chance to date for
a negotiated settlement to the long and devastating conflict in Afghanistan. It is my
hope that the ongoing efforts by Member States toward s a comprehensive peace
process will bring about direct talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban. As these efforts continue, I reiterate that a sustainable peace agreement can
be reached only through comprehensive intra-Afghan dialogue. I call for the
beginning of immediate, direct and substantive talks, towards the hope of ending this
conflict and its unacceptable toll in lives.
57. To be durable, any peace process must be inclusive. Finding the path to domestic
consensus will require time, vision and faithfulness to the values of life and dignity
which underpin all societies. While the eventual cessation of violence itself offers
promise, it is not enough: there must be confidence in a shared future through the
guarantee of the rights of all Afghans. Any accord will be the stronger in safeguarding
such principles as civic and political participation, socioeconomic empowerment,
access to health care and education, and protection under the law for all citizens. I
call upon all parties to facilitate the meaningful participation of women at all stages
of the peace process, at both the local and national levels, and to ensure that any
resulting peace agreement guarantees the protection and promotion of women’s rights
in accordance with the Constitution and international obligations of Afghanistan.
58. It is important for any peace process to provide opportunities for countries in
the region to participate. Achieving a regional consensus on stability in Afghanistan
will be critical in ensuring the sustainability of any peace agreement. I welcome the
expansion over the past years of engagement between Afghanistan and its regional
partners, as well as their continued efforts to promote economic and security
cooperation and connectivity for the mutual benefit of the wider region. During the
current critical period, I encourage Afghanistan and neighbouring countries to
strengthen their cooperation towards a more peaceful and prosperous region.
59. Given the many internal challenges facing Afghanistan, there is a true need for
a representative and engaged legislature. I stress the importance of finalizing the
results of the October 2018 parliamentary elections, to allow for the inauguration of
a new parliament. The responsibility for successful elections is shared by political
leaders from both Government and opposition parties, as well as the electoral
management bodies. Leaders and their supporters should commit to challenging
results through legal and peaceful means only. Moving forward, it will be important
to draw lessons from the past parliamentary vote and work collaboratively to
implement the necessary electoral reforms. As preparations continue for the
presidential, provincial council, district council and Ghazni parliamentary elections
in July, I call on all political actors to refrain from interference in the ongoing
electoral processes and to acknowledge their collective and individual responsibility
to ensure that future elections are credible and legitimate, so that all Afghans seeking
to exercise their constitutional right to vote are able to do so.
60. I remain profoundly concerned by the impact of the armed conflict on the
civilian population, as the United Nations continues to document record -high
19-02943

15/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

numbers of civilian deaths. While 2018 saw continued reductions in civilian
casualties from ground engagements, this decrease was more than offset by the record
levels of civilian casualties from suicide attacks by anti-government elements and
aerial attacks by pro-government forces, both of which increased dramatically last
year. Of particular concern is the increased targeting of civilians by anti-government
elements, mainly using improvised explosive devices designed, planned and
detonated with the deliberate intention of killing and maiming civilians and
destroying livelihoods. I urge all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations
under international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
61. I am encouraged by measures undertaken by the Government to protect and
promote women’s rights, which have resulted in increased women’s participation at
the higher echelons of the civil service as well as in local-level decision-making,
particularly through their representation on the community development councils.
Nevertheless, the prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence and discriminatory
practices continues to impede the full participation of women in political, economic
and social life. Addressing such issues will require concerted efforts on the part of
political and religious leaders, policymakers, judicial officers and security personnel
to prevent violence and promptly hold perpetrators to account. I encourage further
efforts for the protection of women human rights defenders and for the expansion of
access to education for women and girls, to support their full social , economic and
political participation.
62. In line with commitments at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
I encourage the Government and the international community to continue their close
collaboration, to ensure the continuity of both essential Go vernment reforms and
international financial assistance as the political situation in Afghanistan continues to
evolve. In this respect, I welcome the commencement of efforts by the international
partners of Afghanistan, in collaboration with the World Bank and the United Nations
family, to develop an action plan for the continuing socioeconomic development of
Afghanistan following a possible peace agreement.
63. The accountability of the public institutions of Afghanistan can be maintained
only through inclusive government processes and active engagement by citizens. The
Government’s progress in implementing the Access to Information Law marks an
important step towards enhancing the accessibility and transparency of the country ’s
governance structure. I encourage the Government to increase its efforts to combat
impunity for corruption-related offences, including by strengthening the cooperation
between the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre and security institutions to ensure the
timely enforcement of arrest warrants. I also welcome the constructive engagement
between the Government, civil society organizations and international partners as the
Government works to implement the revised Anti-Corruption Strategy.
64. The rising incidence of polio cases in Afghanistan is deeply troubling, as access
constraints continue to impede the implementation of site -to-site vaccination
campaigns in some southern provinces. Recalling the obligation to allow and facilitate
humanitarian access to civilian populations, I call on all parties to allow unimpeded
access for polio vaccinators as they carry out their vital work.
65. The effects of the drought continue to impact the humanitarian situation,
particularly in the western provinces of Afghanistan. Over the short term, drought
conditions have triggered large-scale displacement and worsened the conditions of
food insecurity already experienced by millions of people, many of them children.
Even after the immediate crisis is alleviated, many more millions of Afghans will
continue to face loss of livelihood and long-term economic uncertainty. I am grateful
to international donors for their generous response to the country’s immediate
drought-related humanitarian needs, and encourage the Government of Afghanistan,
16/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

its international partners and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
continue working collaboratively to improve the living conditions of millions of
victims of the drought.
66. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

19-02943

17/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I. Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of ensuring peace and
stability and protecting the people of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in the number of national
police and national army personnel
mentored, trained and operational
according to an agreed structure

• In 2018, the Government continued to implement the 2017–2020 Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces road map, with the aim of
increasing capabilities, developing leaders, ensuring the unity of
command and military efforts, and countering corruption.
• In line with the road map, the Afghan National Civil Order Police and
Afghan Border Police were transferred from the Ministry of the Interior
to the Ministry of Defence in 2018.
• Efforts to increase the offensive capabilities of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces also continued in 2018, with the expansion
of the Afghan Special Security Forces and the modernization of the
Afghan Air Force. In May 2018, the Afghan Air Force commenced
operations with UH-60 Black Hawks.
• In 2018, the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces continued to
target corrupt and criminal influences in their ranks, referring cases to
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre and other prosecutorial bodies.
During 2018, 29 military officials were tried in the Justice Centre. In
addition, the national anti-corruption strategy was amended to
strengthen anti-corruption measures in the security sector, including the
elimination of “ghost” police officers.

II. Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement towards pursuing constructive and inclusive
processes to foster a political environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Development and implementation of
inclusive national and regional
processes to enhance peace,
reintegration and reconciliation
efforts

• On 28 February 2018, the Government convened the second meeting of
the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation. The meeting,
organized with technical assistance and advice from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), brought together
representatives of 28 countries and organizations. At the meeting,
President Ashraf Ghani welcomed unconditional peace talks with the
Taliban, and regional and international partners expressed support for an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
• In 2018, three ulama conferences were held: in Jakarta (11 May), Kabul
(4 June) and Mecca, Saudi Arabia (10–11 July). The Jakarta conference
issued a declaration in support of the offer by the Government of
Afghanistan for unconditional peace talks with the Taliban, and
denounced terrorism and violent extremism. T he Kabul conference,

18/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

attended by 2,000 Afghan religious scholars, issued a fatwa calling on
the Taliban to respond to President Ghani’s offer of unconditional peace
talks, and denounced the practice of suicide attacks, violence against
fellow Muslims and terrorism in general. The Mecca conference, hosted
by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and attended by 110
religious scholars from 35 countries, including 35 from Afghanistan,
issued a declaration calling on all Muslims to cease fighting in
Afghanistan and referred to the insurgency as fitna (sedition). In line
with previous ulama councils, the Mecca declaration also called on the
Taliban to reject violence and engage in a direct, peaceful and
unconditional dialogue with the Government of Afghanistan.
• From 12 to 17 June 2018, the Government implemented a unilateral
ceasefire for Eid al-Fitr. The Taliban also implemented a unilateral
ceasefire for three days over the Eid holiday, overlapping with the
Government’s ceasefire. The Government further extended its ceasefire
until 26 June and offered a second ceasefire for the Eid al -Adha holiday
in August 2018, but these overtures were not reciprocated by the Taliban.
• On 4 September 2018, Zalmay Khalilzad was appointed as the United
States Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation. In this
capacity, Mr. Khalilzad undertook three visits to Afghanistan and the
region between September and December to meet with Afghan, regional
and international stakeholders. In response to these developmen ts, the
Taliban publicly announced that it was also engaging with
Mr. Khalilzad. UNAMA engaged with the parties and with regional and
international actors to encourage further efforts towards a formalized
peace process.
• During the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, held on
27 and 28 November 2018, participants reaffirmed their commitment to
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process and agreed to collaborate
on the socioeconomic requirements for peace. President Ghani also
presented the Government’s road map towards peace, including the
establishment of a 12-person negotiation team and a national
consultative board, the High Advisory Board for Peace. Part of that
Board was appointed in December and consists of key political and civil
society actors. President Ghani further appointed Mohammed Umar
Daudzai as his special representative to the region for peace in December.
Increased ability by the Afghan
authorities to gather and provide
substantiated, updated and accurate
information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011)

19-02943

• In 2018, the Government continued to provide substantiated, updated
and accurate information to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
• On 30 May 2018, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team submitted its ninth report pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015)
concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entitie s
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan
(S/2018/466). The report was based, in large part, on information
provided by the authorities of Afghanistan.

19/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team contributed to
two training sessions hosted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) on the implementation of sanctions during its visits
from 31 August to 20 September 2018 and 5 to 15 December 2018. Th is
training involved Afghan officials from the Central Bank, the Ministries
of Finance, Foreign Affairs and Mines and Petroleum, the National
Security Council and security organs.
Increased public support for the
peace process through engagement
at the community level and with
civil society

• In 2018, UNAMA facilitated the implementation of 16 local peace
initiatives, with another seven in the final stages of development and
ready for implementation in 2019. These initiatives provided support to
Afghan-led efforts relating to mediation, reconciliation and social
cohesion at the provincial and district levels. The initiatives, involving
stakeholders from 15 provinces, included conflict resolution initiatives,
community dialogues, jirgas and outreach gatherings with ulama, tribal
representatives, provincial council members, provincial peace committee
members, government officials and youth and women activists.
• To mark the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in 2018,
UNAMA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women conducted 11 events between 27 September
and 15 November, which attracted 249 participants, including 212
women from 16 provinces. The theme of the dialogues was “Women’s
participation in the peace process” and focused on addressing the deeprooted cultural, traditional and discriminatory practices that hinder the
full and meaningful participation of women in peace.

III. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of government authority throughout the country through the establishment of
democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions, down to the local level, with the capacity to implement
policies and to become increasingly capable of sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability of the Afghan
authorities and independent electoral
institutions to manage and conduct
genuine and periodic elections, with
due regard to women’s participation
and constitutionally guaranteed
quotas

• On 13 January 2018, President Ghani appointed Sayyid Hafizullah
Hashimi as a commissioner of the Independent Election Commission as
part of efforts to address the high vacancy rate, especially at the
managerial level of the Commission. On 7 May, eight provincial
electoral officers were recruited by the Commission, while Ahmad Shah
Zamanzai was appointed as the Chief Electoral Officer and the head of
the secretariat of the Commission by President Ghani on 19 July.
• On 21 February 2018, Japan signed an agreement to provide over
$13 million as a contribution towards the holding of 2018 parliamentary
and district council elections through the United Nations Electoral
Support Project, while on 3 May the European Union signed an
agreement with the United Nations Development Programme in Kabul to
contribute €15.5 million (approximately $18.6 million) for the 2018 and
2019 elections.

20/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 26 February 2018, the Commission issued a statement to provide
assurances that it would provide an opportunity for all eligible Afghans
(including internally displaced persons) to exercise their rights to vote
and reiterated its commitment to continue to hold consultative meetings
with political stakeholders, including women’s representatives, through
national election forums.
• In 2018, the Commission conducted 64 provincial election forums in
32 provinces. These forums brought together a wide range of
stakeholders, including representatives from political parties, civil
society organizations, the media, women and youth activists, community
elders, religious leaders and relevant Government institutions to share
electoral updates and encourage public participation in, and support for,
national electoral processes. The Commission also held nine national
elections forums with representatives of elections-related civil society
organizations, political parties and the Government to discuss various
stages of the electoral process.
• On 3 August 2018, the Electoral Complaints Commission indicated that,
as a result of the vetting process, 25 persons had been delisted from
preliminary lists of parliamentary candidates owing to ties with illegal
armed groups. In addition, 37 other candidates had been issued strong
warnings and 7 candidates had received an advisory warning.
• On 8 September 2018, the Independent Election Commission signed a
memorandum of understanding with the National Institution of
Examinations for the recruitment of district electoral officials.
Examinations were subsequently held to recruit more than 3,000 district
electoral officers, assistant district electoral officers and other electoral
field workers.
• On 22 September, 2018, the Commission announced that it had ente red
into an agreement for the supply of biometric voter verification
equipment, and that biometric voter verification would be used for the
parliamentary elections, provided that the Commission received the
required equipment on time.
• On 20 and 21 October 2018, parliamentary elections were held across
the country, except for in Kandahar province, which held the elections
one week later, on 27 October. Elections in Ghazni province were
postponed to a later date owing to insecurity.
• In the October 2018 parliamentary elections, 35 per cent of the
8.5 million registered voters were women, representing an 8 per cent
increase compared with the 2014 presidential election. Of the 2,565
candidates that contested the 249 parliamentary seats, 417 were women.
There were 7,429 polling stations for women compared with 11,667 for
men, and around 13,000 Afghan women served as election observers.
• On 11 December 2018, the Commission approved the operational plan
for the 2019 presidential election, indicating that candidate nomination
would commence on 22 December 2018 and end on 20 January 2019.

19-02943

21/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 30 December 2018, the Chair of the Commission, Gula Jan Abdul
Badi Sayyad, officially announced that the presidential election would
be held on 20 July 2019. Sayyad further stated that provincial and
district council elections would be held concurrently with the
presidential election in July and that, in addition, the delayed Ghazni
parliamentary elections would also be held on the same date.
Establishment of the Independent
Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee and
development of anti-corruption
benchmarks

• On 10 December 2018, the Committee issued a ministry-wide report on
vulnerability to corruption in the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum, which
was the first comprehensive analysis of vulnerability to corruption in the
Ministry and across the extractive sector. The report made a total of
189 recommendations to the Minister. The Committee also released
seven quarterly monitoring reports on vulnerability to corruption: for the
Attorney General’s Office in August 2018 and January 2019, the
Ministry of Public Health in February and June 2018, the Ministry of
Education in June and November 2018 and Da Afghanistan Breshna
Sherkat (the national electricity company) in August 2018. The
Committee also commenced the preparation of reports on vulnerability
to corruption for both houses of parliament and the Ministry of the
Interior, which are expected to be completed in early 2019.
• With regard to progress in the implementation of the Committee’s
consolidated recommendations, 105 of its 299 recommendations had
been fully implemented, while 72 recommendations had been partially
implemented by the end of 2018.

Empowerment of anti-corruption
institutions to enable them to
oversee a whole-of-government
approach to anti-corruption

• In December 2018, the Government announced the merger of the Afghan
Land Authority with the Ministry of Urban Development Affairs to form
the Ministry of Urban Development and Land, in order to save time and
costs and to consolidate institutions that had similar terms of reference.
• On 5 September 2018, a new anti-corruption law was adopted by
presidential legislative decree, and is pending parliamentary review. In
addition to creating an independent anti-corruption commission, in line
with the provisions of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, the law also established a solid basis for the Anti -Corruption
Justice Centre and the Major Crimes Task Force, which had previo usly
been based on administrative orders.
• On 25 September 2018, the High Council for Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption issued its first semi-annual report on the
implementation of the national strategy for combating corruption, which
reported major achievements across the five pillars of the strategy. On
25 December, following an implementation review, the High Council
adopted a revised strategy for the period 2019–2020.
• Throughout 2018, the High Council for Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption continued to meet regularly. The chairing of the High
Council meetings was increasingly delegated by the President to the
Second Vice-President and, consequently, the High Council became
gradually more technical. Also, decisions on strategic anti -corruption
reforms were increasingly taken behind closed doors by the President ’s
immediate team without debate in the High Council.

22/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 18 November 2018, the Open Governance Partnership Forum
convened its 4th annual meeting to discuss its mid-year report. The
report tracked progress made by the Government, civil society and the
private sector towards implementation of the commitments of
Afghanistan to the Forum.
• In March 2018, following the revision of the Access to Information
Law, a new and smaller Access to Information Commission was
established. The Commission has five dedicated and paid members, who
were appointed for a maximum term of five years. The Commission
receives an annual budget from the Ministry of Information and Culture,
which is responsible for government-wide implementation of the law.
Annual publication of the asset
declarations of public officials

• In March 2018, an amendment to the Attorney General’s Office Law
transferred the investigation function of the High Office of Oversight
and Anti-Corruption to the office of the newly created Deputy Attorney
General for Anti-Corruption. The High Office of Oversight and
Anti-Corruption Law was thus repealed, and the High Office of
Oversight and Anti-Corruption dissolved.
• On 25 September 2018, the secretariat of the High Council for Rule of
Law and Anti-Corruption reported significant achievements in the
registration of assets, including asset registration for 9,153 government
officials and employees.

Increased capacity of civil servants
at the central, provincial and district
levels to discharge functions and
deliver services

• In 2018, the Civil Service Training Institute underwent a functional
review, which reoriented its training courses to focus on combating
administrative corruption. The Institute provided training in Kabul for
1,634 newly recruited civil servants, 38 per cent of whom were women,
and trained a further 2,028 civil servants in 15 provinces, 29 per cent of
whom were women. The training covered a range of topics, including
strategies for the eradication of corruption, strategic communication,
strategic leadership and planning, conflict resolution and management,
and monitoring and evaluation. The Institute also provided three two week leadership courses for 84 district governors, 4 per cent of whom
were women.

Increased transparency and
effectiveness

• In 2018, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission spearheaded amendments to the law on civil servants and
the implementation of new recruitment procedures for senior
subnational-level civil servants in order to increase the transparency and
effectiveness of civil service appointments. The new procedures include
computerization of examinations administered by the Commission ’s
newly established examination centre.
• In 2018, the Independent Directorate for Local Governance facilitated
the appointment of 244 of 377 district governor positions, 20 of 42
deputy provincial governor positions and 30 of 33 provincial -level
municipal mayor positions. Of the persons appointed, only two district
governors and two municipal mayors were women.

19-02943

23/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Strengthened civil service reform
supported by a comprehensive
approach to capacity-building and
donor-funded technical assistance

• On 10 January 2018, a new policy was issued to increase the number of
women in the civil service from 22 per cent to 24 per cent in 2018, and
to 30 per cent by 2020. The policy introduced a quota system, special
administrative privileges, workplace protection and better career
development opportunities for women in the civil service.

Implementation of the subnational
governance policy and development
of subnational regulatory, financing
and budgetary frameworks

• On 25 July 2018, the Cabinet approved the subnational governance
policy entitled “Citizen-centred governance: a road map for subnational
reform”. The new policy defines the relationship between national and
subnational government institutions.
• In 2018, the Government progressed the implementation of local
governance reforms in line with the subnational governance policy,
including the revision of relevant legislation. The Municipal Law was
amended in September, while the draft law on local councils was
finalized and submitted to the Ministry of Justice in December for
further legislative processes. On 26 December, a subcommittee on
subnational governance was established under the High Council for
Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption to support implementation of the
subnational governance policy.

Development and publication of
criteria for administrative
boundaries

• In 2018, one new municipal boundary (Nimroz municipality) was
delineated and mapped, bringing the total number of municipal
boundaries completed to 27 out of 34 provincial municipalities.
Boundaries for 68 urban neighbourhoods (gozars) were also mapped
during the year.

Establishment of adequate
infrastructure for functioning
government institutions, especially
at the subnational level

• In 2018, construction of provincial council offices started in Ghazni,
Farah, Sari Pul, Bamyan, Logar, Nuristan and Laghman provinces and
was near completion at the time of reporting. In addition, a total of 275
new vehicles were purchased to enable local government officials to
commute to their offices and to facilitate improved outreach with
communities.

Establishment of credible and
accessible judicial and penal
systems that respect and uphold the
human rights of all citizens

• On 14 February 2018, the new Penal Code came into effect. The
Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of donors, printed and
distributed 3,000 copies of the Code to justice institutions across the
country; however, printing of additional copies of the Code was delayed
while the Code was being reviewed by the parliament. In September, a
new Military Penal Code was endorsed by the President and added as an
annex to the Penal Code.
• In 2018, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre tried 20 cases involving
75 accused persons, which resulted in 56 convictions and 19 acquittals.
The accused included three former deputy ministers, one provincial
council member, two former mayors and four generals. This represents a
decline in both the output of the court and the number of high -ranking
officials prosecuted compared with the previous year.

24/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193

IV. Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for human rights of Afghans, in line with the Afghan Constitution and
international law, with particular emphasis on the protection of civilians, the situation of women and girls,
freedom of expression and accountability based on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Reduction in the number of incidents
of unlawful use of force and
intimidation of civilians, through
compliance of relevant actors with
international law

• In 2018, UNAMA continued to document high levels of civilian deaths
and injuries and other conflict-related harm to civilians and civilian
infrastructure, with a total of 10,993 civilian casualties (3,804 deaths
and 7,189 injured) documented. UNAMA attributed 63 per cent of these
casualties to anti-government elements and 24 per cent to
pro-government forces (comprising the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, pro-government armed groups and international military
forces). Ground engagements between anti-government elements and
pro-government forces for which responsibility could not be attributed
to a specific party to the conflict accounted for 10 per cent of civilian
casualties. The remaining 3 per cent resulted from other incidents,
including explosive remnants of war that could not be attributed to any
party to the conflict. The conflict continued to kill and injure women
and .children. UNAMA recorded 3,062 child casualties (927 killed and
2,135 injured, a decrease compared with 2017). The Mission
documented 1,152 women casualties (350 killed and 802 injur ed), a
decrease compared with 2017.
• In 2018, the Government continued to implement the national policy on
the prevention and mitigation of civilian casualties through directives
issued by various entities of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. The Government-run civilian casualty tracking mechanism,
within the Tawheed Centre in the Office of the National Security
Council, continued to improve its functionality under the guidance of
Resolute Support Mission advisers.
• The revised Penal Code of Afghanistan entered into force on
14 February 2018 and includes provisions that criminalize bacha bazi,
the recruitment and use of children by armed forces and the falsification
of national identification cards.
• In 2018, the Ministry of the Interior, with technical and financial
support from UNAMA and the United Nations Children’s Fund,
completed the establishment of child protection units in the Afghan
National Police recruitment centres in all 34 provinces. Through this
mechanism, 327 underage applicants (325 boys and 2 girls) were
prevented from enlisting in the ranks of the Afghan National Police,
compared with 294 boys in 2017.
• In November 2018, 55 conflict-related child detainees were transferred
from the National Directorate for Security to the Juvenile Rehabilitation
Centres, following the continued engagement of UNAMA with the
Office of the Attorney General and the National Directorate for Security,
along with advocacy relating to the rights and needs of child detainees.

19-02943

25/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved awareness by Afghans of
their rights and by the Government
of its obligations

• In 2018, UNAMA released eight public reports, highlighting civilian
deaths and injuries, analysing key trends and making recommendations
to all parties to the conflict. These reports included the annual report on
the protection of civilians, three quarterly updates on the protection of
civilians, a special report on early elections violence (May 2018), a
special report on airstrikes in Dasht-e Archi (May 2018), a special
report on improvised explosive devices (October 2018) and a special
report on 2018 elections violence (November 2018).
• In April 2018, Afghanistan ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, which requires the Government to establish
an independent national preventive mechanism for the prevention of
torture and other forms of ill-treatment within one year of accession.
• In April 2018, Afghanistan withdrew its reservation to the Convention
against Torture, thereby recognizing the authority of the Committee
against Torture to conduct confidential inquiries into allegations of
torture on its territory.
• In June 2018, the Government submitted its follow-up report to the
concluding observations of the Committee against Torture
(CAT/C/AFG/CO/2), outlining progress made in the implementation of
some of the Committee’s recommendations.
• In October 2018, the Anti-Torture Law was published in the Official
Gazette. The Law sets out provisions on redress for victims of torture to
bring legal claims before criminal and civil courts.

Improved impact of, and support for,
legal and policy measures to combat
violence against women and girls

• On 3 March 2018, Presidential Decree No. 262 was issued, amending
the Penal Code of 2017 to enable the Elimination of Violence against
Women Law of 2009 to remain applicable following the removal of the
entire chapter on violence against women from the revised Penal Code
by the Government in August 2017. The decree was necessary to ensure
continuing legal protection for women and girls from crimes of violence
against women.
• In April 2018, the Ministry of the Interior issued a countrywide verbal
directive prohibiting law enforcement entities from forcing female
detainees to undergo gynaecological tests. The directive was issued
following the criminalization of forced testing of females in the Penal Code.
• On 29 May 2018, UNAMA released its report entitled “Injustice and
impunity: mediation of criminal offences of violence against women ”.
On 17 July, it convened a national conference that brought together
40 high-level representatives of Government, civil society, the
international community and United Nations partners, aimed at fostering
joint action for the implementation of the recommendations of the
report. Between June and November 2018, UNAMA organized over
23 advocacy meetings with State and non-State partners on the
implementation of the recommendations. Following advocacy by
UNAMA, in October 2018, the Office of the Attorney General
established a directorate on alternatives to imprisonment, tasked with
developing a policy on non-custodial sentencing options, in line with the
2017 Penal Code. The Ministry of Women’s Affairs also began reviewing
the Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women of 2009.

26/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2018, the number of prosecution units for the elimination of violence
against women that were headed by women expanded from 25 to 31 of
the 34 provinces. The number of courts on the elimination of violence
against women increased to 22 in 2018 compared with 15 in 2017, with
92 judges deployed to these courts, including 25 women, most of whom
remain in Kabul owing to security reasons.
• On 31 July, the Government launched its second progress report on the
implementation of the national action plan for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, covering the period from September 2016 to September 2017.
The report noted an increase in the percentage of women in national
security sector institutions, from 1.3 per cent in 2015 to 2.5 per cent in
2016 for the national army, and from 0.5 per cent in 2015 to 0.6 per cent
in 2016 for the national police.
• In 2018, UNAMA continued efforts to increase the participation of
women in the Afghan civil service, in political and social spheres of life
and in peace negotiations. Such efforts included the dialogues to mark
the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security held between
27 September and 15 November. The dialogues focused on the
participation of women in peace processes.
• In 2018, 4,424 Afghan women and girl survivors of violence with 712
accompanying children had access to justice and used lifesaving
multisectoral essential services, including psychosocial support and
vocational skills development, through 11 women protection centres,
5 family guidance centres and 17 provincial commissions on the
elimination of violence against women. The 4,424 cases involving
violence against women registered by the aforesaid centres in 2018 was
significantly higher than in 2017, when there were 1,809 recorded
cases. This increase is attributed to either increased reporting as a result
of awareness-raising among communities, or more specific reporting
mechanisms and data collection tools that were put in place in 2018.
The database on the elimination of violence against women is functional
and supporting improved reporting of cases and is monitored by both
the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and the Ministry of Justice. The
commissions for the elimination of violence against women continued
to play a critical role in following up and making referrals for cases of
violence against women in 17 out of 34 provinces. Support provided by
development partners also enabled the commissions to conduct outreach
in the provinces and to track cases that have not been addressed by the
police and other law enforcement mechanisms.
• As part of the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence
global campaign, between 25 November and 10 December, UNAMA,
jointly with partners, organized 13 events around the global theme
“Orange the World: #HearMeToo”. The campaign focused on crimes of
violence against women and girls, particularly harmful traditional
practices, underreporting of specific crimes and improvements to
criminal justice services to ensure effective accountability.

19-02943

27/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved awareness of, and support
for, legal and policy measures
related to combating impunity and
furthering transitional justice

• In 2018, UNAMA actively engaged with civil society and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission to promote civil
society space and protection for human rights defenders, end impunity
for human rights violations, support efforts to end discrimination and
promote inclusive peace and reconciliation processes. UNAMA also
supported efforts to promote the centrality of the human rights of
women, girls, minorities and other vulnerable groups in peace processes.
• In 2018, UNAMA continued its engagement with the civil society -led
Transitional Justice Coordination Group promoting justice-based peace
and reconciliation processes, which conducted seven coordination
meetings and organized an event in Kabul on the national day of war
victims on 10 December 2018.
• On 30 April 2018, UNAMA published a compilation of 34 provincial
road maps for peace. This was followed by 20 advocacy events and
dialogues to launch the road maps in 20 provinces, with the participation
of approximately 616 Afghans, including local authorities and civil
society and media organizations (460 men and 156 women). The
dialogues offered opportunities for developing a consensus, politically
negotiated solution to the Afghan conflict through inclusive and just
peace processes.

Government fulfilment of reporting
requirements on international human
rights covenants and conventions
and implementation of the
recommendations emanating from
the universal periodic review of
Afghanistan under the auspices of
the Human Rights Council

• In October 2018, the Government submitted its national report to the
Human Rights Council, noting progress on the implementation of
recommendations of the universal periodic review in advance of the
third-cycle review of Afghanistan on 21 January 2019. The Government
and UNAMA also agreed on a time frame for the provision of technical
assistance for implementation of the recommendations of the review,
and to establish a national mechanism for reporting and follow-up.

Increased capacity and commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as the
Afghan national human rights
institution, to respect, protect, fulfil
and promote human rights

• In 2018, UNAMA continued engagement with the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission and conducted regular
coordination meetings aimed at sharing information, conducting
advocacy on the rights of religious and ethnic minority groups and
following up on violence against journalists, media workers, civil
society activists and human rights defenders. UNAMA also provided
technical assistance to the Commission for the documentation of civilian
casualties.

• On 5 November 2018, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed
UNAMA that the drafting process was under way for several reports,
namely to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.

• On 9 May 2018, the Commission organized a national conference on
accountability, human rights, justice and peace in Kabul to promote
accountability for victims of the armed conflict.
• On 26 June 2018, UNAMA delivered training on the preparation of
stakeholder reports by civil society as part of the third -cycle universal
periodic review scheduled for 21 January 2019.

28/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• UNAMA, jointly with the Commission, organized 39 round -table
discussions, workshops and seminars to promote civil society space and
engagement in rights-based peace processes and to enable civil society
activists and human rights defenders to monitor, report on and advocate
with regard to human rights.

V. Economic and social development
Benchmark: government policies, supported by the international community, that promote
sustainable economic growth and contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

National priority programmes are
• As at November 2018, all 10 national priority programmes had been
designed and implemented with
finalized and approved by the relevant development councils and were
international support and endorsement
at different stages of implementation.
More equitable distribution of
development assistance and
government expenditure throughout
Afghanistan

• In 2018, financing agreements and other similar arrangements were in
place for all donor projects that were financed through on-budget
modalities. For off-budget projects, however, progress was mixed. In
2018, financing agreements were available for only an estimated 44 per
cent of contributions, made by 23 donors that provide part of their
development assistance through off-budget modalities.
• The participation of women in local development decision-making
increased by 49 per cent in 2018, with women accounting for more than
49 per cent of the 200,000 elected community development council
members and 50 per cent of council leaders nationwide.
• As at January 2019, the Citizens’ Charter programme had reached
nearly 10 million people from more than 11,000 urban and rural
communities in 34 provinces. To date, more than $100 million in
community grants has been disbursed to communities and more than
4,000 projects are under implementation. These projects will help
provide 63 million litres of water per day to 2.5 million people, irrigate
nearly 1 million jeribs of land (200,000 ha), provide 5,500 kilowatts of
energy and build 900 km of roads.

Increased revenue collection and
sustainable growth based on Afghan
resources

• By the end of 2018, the five revenue-generating ministries, namely, the
Ministry of Mines and Petroleum, the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Finance and the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, had shared
quarterly anti-corruption progress reports on their respective official
websites and with donors. Owing in part to these measures, by
December 2018 revenues had recovered from 8.3 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) to 12.3 per cent of GDP over a three-year period.
• Government revenues strengthened in 2018 and the scores and overall
ranking of Afghanistan improved in the World Bank’s Doing Business
2018 report. The Government’s fiscal position is stable, with significant
increases in domestic revenue collection, which exceeded the projected
annual growth rate of 12 per cent. For the 2018 fiscal year, the
Government was on track to meet its International Monetary Fund
revenue target of Af 173.5 billion.

19-02943

29/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193

VI. Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved coordination of regional
bodies and increased regional
investments

• On 17 March 2018, President Ghani met with the National Security
Adviser of Pakistan, Nasser Khan Janjua, in Kabul, to discuss the peace
offer made by the Government of Afghanistan to the Taliban and the
launch of State-to-State dialogue with Pakistan.
• The Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan: Peace Process, Security
Cooperation and Regional Connectivity, was held in Uzbekistan on
26 and 27 March 2018 and concluded with a joint declaration that
strongly supported the National Unity Government’s offer to launch
direct talks with the Taliban, without any preconditions. Conference
attendees included President Ghani, the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, the United
States Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs and the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Russia, China, and Turkey.
• On 6 April 2018, President Ghani met with the Prime Minister of
Pakistan, Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, in Kabul to discuss bilateral relations,
including peace and reconciliation, counter-terrorism, the return of
Afghan refugees, bilateral trade and regional connectivity. They also
agreed to operationalize the five working groups under the Afghanistan Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, as they provided a useful
framework for broad-based and structured engagement on all issues of
mutual interest.
• On 17 April 2018, the first ambassadorial coordination meeting for the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan was held in
Kabul. During the meeting, participants agreed to the establishment of a
“Friends of the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan” mechanism to further promote and support regional
economic cooperation for Afghanistan, which held two meetings in 2018.
• On 19 April 2018, a meeting of senior officials of the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process was held in Istanbul. The meeting, which was
co-chaired by the Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
and Turkey, assessed the achievements resulting from the cooperation
and developed a strategy for the way forward.
• On 14 May and 22 July, the Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Pakistan met in Kabul and Islamabad, respectively, to
finalize the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, a
framework for strengthening mutual trust and deepening bilateral
engagement through the establishment of six thematic working groups,
as well as joint problem solving.
• On 28 May 2018, the second meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Afghanistan Contact Group was held in Beijing to discuss
the situation in Afghanistan and the wider region, Afghan peace and
reconciliation processes and the role of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as measures for enhancing cooperation between
the Organization and Afghanistan

30/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• From 20 to 22 June 2018, the regional technical group for disaster
management confidence-building measures under the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process was held in Islamabad.
• On 2 July 2018, a meeting of ambassadors under the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process was held in Kabul and was co-chaired by the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and the ambassador of
Turkey to Afghanistan. The meeting assessed progress in the
implementation of the recommendations made by participating States
during the meeting of senior officials in April.
• On 27 August 2018, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process regional
technical group for culture and education confidence-building measures
met in Tehran.
• On 6 September 2018 in Astana, Kazakhstan hosted a regional
conference on women’s empowerment in Afghanistan, with the
participation of women from the Central Asian countries, Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, China, the United Nations and the European Union.
• On 11 September 2018, the first tripartite meeting between Afghanistan,
India and Iran (Islamic Republic of) was held in Kabul. The meeting,
which was chaired by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and attended by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of India
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, discussed the implementation of the Chabahar port project and
other issues, including ways to deepen cooperation with regard to
countering terrorism.
• On 12 September 2018, during a special session of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation on Afghanistan, the Organization’s SecretaryGeneral emphasized the need for joint efforts to attain a sustainable
peace in Afghanistan and called for greater support and cooperation
from countries in the region.
• On 15 September and 14 November 2018, two regional technical gr oup
meetings on counter-terrorism confidence-building measures under the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process were held in Kabul and Abu Dhabi,
respectively.
• On 20 September 2018, a Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process regional
technical group meeting on confidence-building measures relating to
trade, commerce and investment opportunities was held in New Delhi.
• On 28 September 2018, a meeting of senior officials under the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process was held on the sidelines of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly. Participants discussed progress in the
implementation of confidence-building measures in the region and
specific measures taken by countries to fight terrorism. The finalization
of the regional strategy for fighting terrorism was also discussed.
• On 31 October 2018, a Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process regional technical
group meeting on counter-narcotics was held in Moscow.

19-02943

31/34

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 9 November 2018, the second round of the Moscow format
consultations on Afghanistan was held, involving deputy ministers for
foreign affairs and special representatives from the Russian Federation,
China, Pakistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhst an, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as Taliban representatives. The
Government of Afghanistan was represented by the High Peace Council,
and India and the United States attended as observers.
• On 14 November 2018, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan participated in the eighth meeting of the deputy ministers
for foreign affairs of Central Asian States, hosted by Kyrgyzstan in
Bishkek. Discussions focused on enhancing Central Asian and Afghan
relations, as well as security and economic cooperation in the region.
• On 15 November 2018, a ministerial conference of the Central Asia
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme was held in Ashgabat to
discuss expanding regional trade and promoting economic diversification.
• On 13 December 2018, the Lapis Lazuli Corridor was inaugurated by
President Ghani in Herat. This overland route will enable Afghanistan to
send its products to Europe and other parts of the world.
• On 15 December 2018, the second trilateral Afghanistan-China-Pakistan
Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue was held in Kabul, in which participants
agreed to hold further discussions to strengthen security, peace and
political cooperation between the three countries.

VII. Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan priorities within an Afghan -led
coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased proportion of aid aligned
with the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and
government priorities

• In 2018, on-budget grants accounted for more than half of the
Government’s total budget expenditure, with the security sector being
exceptionally dependent on grant support. Off-budget security grants
continued to cover a large proportion of total security expenditures,
equalling around 14 per cent of GDP.

Improved accountability of
procurement and contracting on
behalf of the Government and the
international community

• In 2018, the contracts for five major energy projects (Kajaki phase II,
two contracts for Kandahar solar, Shibirghan and Mazar-e Sharif Gasto-Power) were approved through an open and transparent process by
the National Procurement Commission.
• The National Procurement Commission’s compliance with the
requirement for the publication of high-value or above-threshold
contracts exceeded the 75 per cent target set for 2018.

32/34

19-02943

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• By November 2018, an online system for monitoring the progress of
contracts had been developed by the National Procurement Authority in
line with international standards and norms. This online system provides
a means for disclosing all information related to procurement contracts
that have been approved by National Procurement Commission.
• By the end of 2018, information on a total of 936 contracts had been
disclosed through the National Procurement Authority’s website and
documentation for 1,096 contracts had been uploaded to the central
procurement management system.
Strengthening of the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board in
support of the Kabul process and as
a means of facilitating a regular
review of progress on Afghan
priorities and mutual commitments

• The 21st meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board was
held on 18 July 2018 to review progress on government reforms and the
six deliverables the Government had committed to implementing before
the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan. The event
provided a platform for Government officials, international community
representatives, civil society and the private sector to share perspectives
on key achievements and challenges, as well as proposed ways forward
for Afghanistan.
• On 27 and 28 November, the United Nations and the Government of
Afghanistan co-hosted the Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, attended by delegations from 67 Member States and 40
international organizations. The Conference provided an opportunity for
the international community and the Government to review the
Government’s reform agenda and to reaffirm the commitments that the
donor countries have made to Afghanistan. The Government
demonstrated that progress that had been made over the previous two
years following the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan in 2016 in the
broad areas of rule of law, constitutionalism, and rights and participation
in governance. Despite the progress made, the Government stated that
the ongoing conflict, high levels of poverty, limited access to education
and limited infrastructure continued to undermine its efforts.

VIII. Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics production and drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Decrease in poppy cultivation,
narcotics production and addiction
rates

• In 2018, the area under opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan was
estimated at 263,000 ha, a decrease of 20 per cent or 65,000 ha
compared with 2017. Despite this decrease, the 2018 level exceeds the
third-highest level in 2014 by 17 per cent, or 39,000 ha. Opium
production in 2018 was estimated at 6,400 tons, a decrease of 29 per
cent from 9,000 tons produced in 2017. The reduced production was a
result of decreases in both the area under opium poppy cultivation and
opium yield per hectare.

19-02943

33/35

A/73/777
S/2019/193
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The number of poppy-free provinces in 2018 remained at 10 out of a
total of 34 provinces, the same number as in 2017. Nuristan Province
regained its poppy-free status but Takhar Province, which had been
poppy-free since 2008, was found to have areas under poppy cul tivation.
Increase in effective interdiction and
counter-trafficking efforts

• In 2018, Afghan law enforcement authorities, supported by UNODC,
conducted a total of 3,540 counter-narcotics operations, leading to
seizures of 5,058 kg of heroin, 17,576 kg of morphine, 27,276 kg of
opium,182 kg of methamphetamine, 177,538 kg of hashish, 79,302 kg of
cannabis, 24,587 tablets of 3,4-methylenedioxymehtamphetamine
(MDMA), known as K-tablets in Afghanistan, 63,627 kg of solid
precursor chemicals and 104,252 litres of liquid precursor chemicals.
The operations resulted in the dismantling of 33 heroin manufacturing
laboratories, the destruction of 28 drug stockpiles and the arrest of 4,083
suspects. Furthermore, those operations led to the seizure of 602
vehicles, 533 weapons, 3,563 mobile phones and 20 radios. During the
operations, five Afghan National Defence and Security Force personnel
were killed and 11 wounded.

Increase in licit agriculture and
related private capital investment in
areas previously used for poppy
cultivation

• In 2018, UNODC alternative development projects targeted 26,785
households (5,145 of which were headed by women) in 35 districts of
18 provinces of Afghanistan, which brought 402 ha of land under licit
cultivation, created 8,531 full-time jobs and generated $4.22 million in
income. In addition, 4,070 community-based small and medium-sized
enterprises were established.

34/34

19-02943
