A/RES/76/1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 September 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 72 (b)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance: comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 22 September 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.2)]

76/1.

United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance
The General Assembly
Adopts the following political declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action: 1

United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance
We, Heads of State and Government and representatives of States and
Governments, gathered at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 22 September
2021, on the occasion of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action,
1.
Reaffirm that the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted
in 2001, and the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, adopted in
2009, 2 as well as the political declaration on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, 3 provide a
comprehensive United Nations framework and solid foundation for combating
__________________

See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
3
Resolution 66/3.
1
2

21-13440 (E)

280921

*2113440*

United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance

A/RES/76/1

racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and reaffirm our
commitment to their full and effective implementation;
2.
Also reaffirm that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance constitute a negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 4 and that equality
and non-discrimination are fundamental principles of international law;
3.
Recall the importance of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 5 as the principal international instrument to
prevent, combat and eradicate racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, and of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, as
well as of universal ratification and effective implementation of the Convention;
4.
Reaffirm our commitment to leave no one behind and, to that end, the
urgency for all countries to come together to fulfil the promise of the United Nations
and our determination to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 6
in full and on time, as well as our commitment to international cooperation and
multilateralism and to build trust to ensure the future we want by, inter alia,
preventing human rights violations and abuses and addressing the root causes of
discrimination in all its forms, and of inequalities within and among countries, as well
as their growing manifestations, which contribute to acts of xenophobia, racism,
intolerance, hate speech and disinformation;
5.
Acknowledge and profoundly regret the untold suffering and evils
inflicted on millions of men, women and children as a result of slavery, the slave
trade, the transatlantic slave trade, colonialism, apartheid, genocide and past
tragedies;
6.
Welcome the progress made in many parts of the world in the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance since 2001, while
acknowledging with concern that, in spite of concerted efforts by the international
community in the past 20 years, building on efforts of the past decades, the scourge
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their
new forms and manifestations, still persists in all parts of the world and countless
human beings continue to be victims to the present day;
7.
Acknowledge with deep concern the rise in discrimination, hate speech,
stigmatization, racism, systemic racism, stereotypes, racial profiling, viol ence,
xenophobia and intolerance, both in person and online, directed against, inter alia,
Africans and people of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent,
indigenous peoples, Roma and persons belonging to other racial, ethnic, linguistic or
religious minorities, as well as motivated by prejudices against persons based on their
religions or beliefs, such as, among others, Islamophobia, antisemitism and
Christianophobia, and against women and children, migrants, refugees, forcibly
displaced persons, asylum seekers, internally displaced persons, persons with
disabilities, older persons, youth and other persons in vulnerable situations;
8.
Note with concern the disproportionate impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on the existing inequalities within our societies and regret
that, in that context, persons belonging to racial and ethnic minorities and to other
groups, including Asians and people of Asian descent, especially women and girls,
have been victims of racist violence, threats of violence, discrimination and
stigmatization;
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
6
Resolution 70/1.
4
5

2/4

21-13440

United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance

A/RES/76/1

9.
Resolve to pursue our common goal of ensuring the effective enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including for victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in all societies, while
continuing to promote respect for human rights and to enhance democratic
governance, the rule of law, independent judicial institutions and the fight against
impunity nationally and internationally;
10. Recall the proclamation of 21 March as the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and welcome the proclamation of 31 August as
the International Day for People of African Descent;
11. Welcome the establishment of the Permanent Forum of People o f African
Descent, which will serve as a consultation mechanism for people of African descent
and other relevant stakeholders as a platform for improving the safety and quality of
life and livelihoods of people of African descent;
12. Reiterate that the primary responsibility for effectively combating acts of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance lies with States and
affirm that, whenever such acts occur, they must be condemned and their reoccurrence
prevented, and urge States to take appropriate preventive measures, including
legislative measures, in this regard;
13. Note with appreciation the adoption of legislative measures and the
establishment of specialized national mechanisms to combat racism and all forms of
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and recognize the need to
integrate a gender perspective into relevant policies, strategies and programmes of
action in order to address multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination;
14. Aim to ensure that people of African descent have full access to effective
protection and remedies through the competent national tribunals and other State
institutions against any acts of racial discrimination, and the right to seek from such
tribunals just and adequate reparation or satisfaction for any damage suffered as a
result of such discrimination;
15. Recall Human Rights Council resolutions 43/1 of 19 June 2020 7 and 47/21
of 13 July 2021, and take note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the promotion and protection of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of Africans and of people of African descent against
excessive use of force and other human rights violations by law enforcement officers
and the annex thereto, entitled “Four-point Agenda towards Transformative Change
for Racial Justice and Equality”, submitted pursuant to resolution 43/1; 8
16. Firmly believe that sustainable development and the respect, promotion
and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, as well as the
implementation of international human rights obligations and commitments in
accordance with international human rights law, are crucial to prevent acts of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and commit to promoting
measures to counter and address those acts, including through education, the media
and sports;
17. Call upon all States, the United Nations system and international and
regional organizations and invite all relevant stakeholders, including parliaments,
civil society, the private sector and academia, to fully commit themselves and to
intensify their efforts for the elimination of all racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and to continue cooperation with all relevant
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/75/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
8
A/HRC/47/53 and A/HRC/47/CRP.1.
7

21-13440

3/4

A/RES/76/1

United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance

United Nations human rights bodies, and welcome the continued engag ement of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in mainstreaming the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action into the United
Nations system;
18. Proclaim together our strong determination to mobilize political will at the
national, regional and international levels and to accelerate momentum to make the
fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and
the protection of the victims thereof, a high priority for our countries.
5th plenary meeting
22 September 2021

4/4

21-13440
