S/2017/437

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2017
Original: English

Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2296 (2016), the Secretary-General
recommended in his letter dated 28 October 2016 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/915) that a joint African Union-United Nations strategic
review of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) should be undertaken, in close consultation with the Government of the
Sudan, to provide detailed recommendations to the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council on the mission’s priorities and
configuration and that, if necessary, further revision of the benchmarks to reflect the
realities in Darfur be proposed. It was recommended that the review be undertaken
in December 2016 and that the recommendations be submitted to both Councils in
January 2017. The previous review of UNAMID was conducted in December 2013
(see S/2014/138).
2.
A joint African Union-United Nations strategic review team visited Khartoum
and Darfur from 5 to 17 March 2017. It was co-led by the African Union Liaison
Office in the Sudan and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and comprised
representatives from the African Union Commission, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Field Support and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR), as well as from the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, representing
United Nations development and humanitarian agencies, funds and programmes,
respectively. The strategic review team held consultations with government officials
and the United Nations country team, visited all five Darfur states and a number of
team sites and met state and local authorities, representatives of the communities of
internally displaced persons, the native administration and civil society groups.
3.
The report provides a conflict analysis that depicts the current conflict
dynamics and drivers in Darfur, as well as the p olitical and humanitarian situation.
In the report, the strategic priorities of UNAMID are examined, and a refocusing of
the priorities in accordance with the conflict analysis is proposed. The report
concludes with recommendations for the reconfiguration of UNAMID that seek to

17-07625 (E)

190517

*1707625*

S/2017/437

adapt the mission to the evolving realities on the ground and to the needs of the
people in Darfur.

II. Conflict analysis
4.
Over the past three years, the armed conflict that gave rise to the deployment
of UNAMID has altered in the light of the military successes of the Government of
the Sudan against the rebel movements. Simultaneously, alongside the national
dialogue launched in October 2015, the political framework agreement for the
resolution of the conflict, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, has been
included in the Constitution. However, key provisions have yet to be implemented,
and a number of outstanding issues related to the aftermath of the conflict and
crucial grievances at the origin of the rebellion still need to be addressed.

A.

Conflict dynamics
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups and its
impact on security
5.
The hostilities between the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces have
decreased significantly as a result of the three-phased Operation Decisive Summer
(from January 2014 to June 2016), which effectively reduced the presence of the
armed groups to parts of western Jebel Marra. According to UNAMID, the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) were considerably weakened and have not engaged militarily with the
Sudanese Armed Forces since April 2014 and April 2015, respectively. They are
currently reported to not have any active presence in Darfur or the Sudan.
6.
While the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) continues to be
present in Darfur, UNAMID considers its military effectiveness and area of
operation to be considerably reduced. Since September 2016, there has been no
military confrontation between the government forces and SLA/AW, and dry season
combat (from late December to April), otherwise an annual occurrence, did not take
place in 2017. The national armed forces currently maintain control of most areas
and have deployed troops to Golo, Koron, Sarong and Guldo, while the following
areas reportedly remain contentious under SLA/AW control: Kilinge, Boullay, Kibli,
Bar Arie, Kalokitting, Kwila and Galol. Furthermore, SLA/AW is reported to have
fragmented into an incohesive force of several factions, especially after a splinter
group signed the “Koron agreement” with the Government on 4 November 2016,
and even more so after the defection of its Deputy Commander, Alsadig Adam
Abdulkarim, on 21 January 2017 and, more recently, the defection of a third faction
led by Commander Abdel-Latif Abdel-Hamid on 14 April 2017.
7.
In the meantime, however, conflicts in the wider region surrounding the Sudan
are providing an opportunity for some of the Darfur armed groups to train and
acquire military equipment and funds. The Panel of Experts on the Sudan has
reported on the engagement of SLA/MM in Libya, fighting alongside the Libyan
National Army in the area of the oil crescent since mid-2015, and in criminal
activities, such as the operation of illegal checkpoints, kidnapping for ransom and
trafficking in persons (S/2017/22). In an effort to prevent the infiltration of the
Darfur armed groups from Libya, the Government of the Sudan has deployed the
Rapid Support Forces along the northern borders of the region. A joint Libya -Sudan
border force established in November 2013, following a military protocol signed in
2011, and mandated to protect their joint border, prevent the infiltration of armed
elements, terrorist groups and illegal immigrants and secure the commercial

2/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

convoys was discontinued in 2015 by the internationally recognized Government of
Libya, owing reportedly to other security priorities.
8.
Reports also indicate the presence of JEM in Libya and South Sudan. As with
SLA/MM, the group was reportedly fighting alongside the Libyan National Army,
initially in the Qufrah area. In South Sudan, JEM is reported to ha ve had a
continuous presence since 2012 and has been engaged in fighting alongside the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) in various areas of the country. Most
recently, the group was witnessed fighting on the side of SPLA against Fertit militia
and SPLA in Opposition in Raja and Wau as late as June-July 2016. The SudanSouth Sudan Safe Demilitarized Border Zone is monitored by the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mission, as stipulated in the 2012 Agreement on
Security Arrangements, and is supported by the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei.
9.
The joint Chad-Sudan border monitoring force, established in 2010 with the
objective of preventing cross-border attacks by rebel groups on both sides,
continued to contribute visibly to stability in the western border areas. Discussions
are ongoing regarding similar arrangements to cover the Darfur -Chad-Central
African Republic triangle. Although the Central African Republic expressed its
intention to join the Chad-Sudan force, to date this has not materialized owing to
capacity constraints and continued political instability in the country. In September
2016, the Presidents of the Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan held a
meeting in Khartoum to discuss the deployment of joint border monitoring units.
Militia groups and proliferation of weapons
10. While the Government’s military campaign and efforts to improve security in
the Darfur state capitals have had a visible effect on the security front, the overall
security situation in Darfur remains precarious. This is due mainly to the activities
of the militia groups, the prevalence of weapons among the population and acts of
banditry and criminality, coupled with the absence of an efficient police force and
the rule of law.
11. Armed militias constitute one of the most complex issues in the security
landscape of present-day Darfur. Organized mostly along tribal lines, armed militias
have been present historically in Darfur as a protection arm of the communities in
the face of fierce competition for scarce natural resources and acts of criminality,
including cattle rustling. However, they gained notoriety as a result of their
involvement in the recent Darfur conflict with the Janjaweed in support of the
Sudanese government forces to quell the insurgency that started in 2003.
12. As the conflict evolved, some militias were incorporated into different
auxiliary units of the Sudanese government forces, such as the Border Guards, the
Popular Defence Forces, the Central Reserve Police and the Rapid Support Forces.
Those auxiliary forces have since become key actors in the conflict between the
Government and the armed movements and in intercommunal conflict, greatly
influencing conflict dynamics in Darfur. Adequately equipped with small arms a nd
heavy weapons, some of those forces are not only fighting against the rebel
movements but, sometimes, also with each other or against government forces,
further exacerbating insecurity and threats against civilians in Darfur.
13. The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur stipulates that “all armed militia
groups shall be disarmed and disbanded as a prerequisite for the implementation of
comprehensive arms control measures” (art. 67, para. 399) and that the Government
of the Sudan “shall be responsible for [their] disarmament” (ibid.). However, in
practice, alternative approaches have been adopted: at the national level, some
30,000 members of the Rapid Support Forces were absorbed into the national armed
17-07625

3/17

S/2017/437

forces following the adoption of a parliamentary bill o n 16 January 2017; at the
community level, the review team was informed that Darfur state governments were
exploring models of local agreements between the tribes o f the area, such as the
Shattay-Kailak model in South Darfur, where, according to government sources,
some 600 farms were returned to their former owners, or the Amnounou model,
whereby the state government was mediating between the militia groups and
internally displaced persons the latter’s return to their lands.
14. It is widely considered that the prevalence of weapons among the population is
seriously contributing to large-scale violence, including intercommunal violence,
and criminality and is undermining the establishment of the rule of law. The Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur provides only for “a voluntary civilian arms control
programme” (art. 71, para. 416) and for the disarmament of former combatants
(ibid., para. 432). The Darfur Disarmament High Committee was established by
presidential decree on 2 April 2016, and the Government is c urrently designing a
phased civilian arms control plan, which includes: (a) awareness -raising; (b) arms
registration and marking; (c) voluntary surrender of arms; and (d) mandatory
disarmament. While a pilot project on arms registration and marking was con ducted
in 2016, the initial results remain to be assessed. For such a programme to be
successful, the Government of the Sudan should be in the lead, and the programme
should include: (a) simultaneous collection of arms in the five Darfur states and in
neighbouring Kordofan and Blue Nile; (b) a regional approach that includes
neighbouring countries, such as the Central African Republic, Chad, Libya and
South Sudan; and (c) economic compensation for the communities. In the Doha
Document (ibid., paras. 416-417), the support of UNDP and UNAMID is requested
in developing a strategy and plans for the implementation of a voluntary civilian
arms control programme.
15. Throughout Darfur, former battlefields remain contaminated with explosive
remnants of war. In Jebel Marra, initial assessments have indicated a large volume
of explosive remnants of war requiring wide-scale mine action interventions. The
National Mine Action Centre still lacks the capacity to undertake comprehensive
mine action activities other than coordination. Furthermore, currently no capacity or
resources exist within the international community to provide support for clearance
of explosive remnants of war in Darfur.
Intercommunal conflicts
16. Intercommunal conflicts remain one of the main so urces of violence in Darfur.
Such conflicts are intimately related to the root causes of the conflict and
exacerbated by armed militias, as well as by the proliferation of weapons among the
civilians and the inadequate capacity and effectiveness of the rul e of law
institutions. While conflicts among the myriad ethnic groups of Darfur have
historically occurred, the upsurge of violence during the insurgency years resulted
in massive civilian casualties and population displacement. Management of land,
water and other resources and a perceived bias by the Government towards one
group over another are at the heart of those conflicts, which in 2013 claimed the
lives of as many as 1,976 people. Following a concerted intervention by state
governments, the national armed forces and the police from mid-2015 onward, the
number of casualties has fallen and mediation efforts, supported by UNAMID, have
multiplied, resulting in a significant decrease in intercommunal conflicts. However,
conflicts continue to flare up in East Darfur between the Rizeigat and the Maʽaliya
over land ownership and access to resources, in South Darfur between the Fallata,
Salamat, Habbaniya and Masalit over access to farmland, grazing pastures and cattle
rustling, and in Central Darfur between the Misseriya and Salamat over access to
land and cattle rustling.
4/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

17. Land continues to be the most contested resource at the heart of most
intercommunal conflicts in Darfur. Lack of clear land ownership and management
systems, due to historical factors and government interventions on behalf of
different tribal groups that have not addressed the issue in a comprehensive manner,
have exacerbated and politicized such conflicts. The Unregistered Lands Act of
1970, followed by severe desertification in the 1980s, in tandem with the weakening
of the native administration, the traditional administrative authority on land issues,
and the ethnicization of the Darfur conflict since 2003 by the Government along the
“Arab-African” narrative, with the open support of militia groups and extortion
practices in their favour, resulted mainly in the Fur and Masalit tribes losing their
fertile areas to several Arab tribes. Acknowledging the political dimension of land
ownership and management, the Doha Document for Peace in Dar fur provided for
the establishment of a land commission and a land database within the framework of
the Darfur Regional Authority. The Land Commission was mandated to develop
recommendations and a plan of land use for adoption by state legislatures and to
serve as an arbitration forum on land rights disputes. Those tasks have yet to be
completed.

B.

Political developments
18. The Darfur peace process, led by the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and supported by UNAMID, achieved measured progress
with the signature of the Panel-proposed Road Map Agreement in March 2016 by
the Government and in August by two out of the three remaining Darfur rebel
movements. The parties have yet to sign the cessation of hostilities agreement,
although the Government, SLA/MM and JEM/Gibril have declared unilateral
ceasefires until June 2017, the main disagreement being the role of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur in future talks. The Government insists that the Doha
Document constitutes the sole framework for discussion, while the armed
movements are calling for its renegotiation. In addition, the Government questions
the purpose and practical value of a cessation of hostilities with armed groups that
are currently believed to have no active presence or military capacities in Darfur or
the Sudan. Nevertheless, the Government has expressed its readiness to engage in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the rebel movements,
provided that they come to the borders of the Sudan.
19. Meanwhile, SLA/AW has rejected any participation in direct negotiations with
the Government of the Sudan and called for the overthrow of the Government. As
indicated above, three breakaway factions from SLA/AW have signed agreements
with the Government since November 2016, allowing their members to either be
integrated into the security forces or be demobilized under the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. UNAMID support in this area has led to the demobilization of
9,766 combatants since 2009.
20. Following the conduct of the Darfur administrative referendum in April 2016,
the Government proclaimed the end of the conflict, thus effectively legitimizing the
administrative division of Darfur into five states, and dissolved the Darfur Regional
Authority. The Darfur Peace Follow-up Office was consequently established in
January 2017 to supervise the five residual commissions of the former Authority
and one residual fund, namely the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission,
the Security Arrangements Implementation Commission, the Land Commission, the
Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission, the newly established Commission
for the Development of Pastoralists and Nomads and the Reconstruction and
Development Fund.

17-07625

5/17

S/2017/437

21. One year after being formally launched as a means o f achieving consensus on
constitutional reform in the Sudan, the national dialogue process concluded in
Khartoum on 10 October 2016 with the adoption of a national document. The
document contains 981 recommendations, which are expected to form the basis fo r
the drafting of a new Constitution, provides for a federal and presidential system of
government, a two-chamber parliament and separation of the three branches of
government and endorses the principles of democracy and the concept of equal
citizenship and a diverse Sudanese identity. Further to the conclusion of the process,
the Government has moved forward with the document’s implementation, including
the appointment of the First Vice-President, Bakri Hassan Saleh, to the position of
Prime Minister on 1 March 2017 in preparation for the formation of a national unity
Government. Major opposition groups in the Sudan, including the Sudan Call
umbrella, boycotted the national dialogue and criticized the process for being
conducted in an adverse political and human rights climate, instead calling for a
pre-dialogue meeting in accordance with the Road Map Agreement. While standing
firm in its view that the national dialogue has been concluded, the Government has
expressed openness to the opposition groups contributing to discussions on the
modalities of implementing the recommendations agreed upon in the national
document.
22. In the wider region, the participation of the Sudan in the coalition against
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, its agreement with the European Union to stem
illegal migration to Europe, and achievements on the political and military fronts in
Darfur improved the Government’s political standing in the international arena and
provided recovery prospects (albeit limited) for its economy. I n that context,
considerations of mutual benefit on security (by cutting support to the Darfur armed
groups in particular) and in economic areas drove an improvement in its relations
with Uganda in 2015, following a similar rapprochement with Chad since 20 10, as
well as with South Sudan to a limited extent. In January 2017, the Government of
the United States of America announced a temporary and partial revocation of
bilateral sanctions against the Sudan based on progress made along five tracks,
including maintaining the cessation of hostilities in conflict areas, improving
humanitarian access, ending negative interference in South Sudan, enhancing
cooperation on counter-terrorism and addressing the threat of the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Following the revocation, which was scheduled to be reviewed in July 2017,
the Government extended its unilateral cessation of hostilities in Darfur and the Two
Areas for another six months and eased access restrictions on UNAMID and
humanitarian actors.

C.

Humanitarian and protection challenges
Communities of internally displaced persons
23. Notwithstanding improvements in security in recent months, as a result of the
Darfur crisis, now in its fifteenth year, a total of 2.7 million people are currently
displaced in Darfur, of whom 2.1 million are in need of humanitarian assistance,
including 1.6 million in 60 camps. New displacement in 2016 was limited to the
Jebel Marra area, where armed conflict triggered the displacement of more than
140,000 people. An additional 40,000 displaced in 2016 subsequently returned to
their places of origin. Thousands more were reported to have been displaced, but
this could not be verified owing to access constraints, even though since December
2016 the United Nations and its partners had been given access to previously
inaccessible areas in order to carry out needs assessments and provide humanitarian
assistance. No new displacement occurred in the first quarter of 2017. In addition,

6/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

more than 300,000 Sudanese refugees are located in neighbouring Chad, while
about 121,000 South Sudanese are currently in Darfur.
24. Internally displaced persons continue to face grave security challenges. There
are reports of internally displaced persons being killed, raped or harassed as they
conduct life-sustaining activities outside the camps. Government security forces and
armed militias are often involved, and in some camps, such as Kalma (South
Darfur), tensions with the community of internally displaced persons are persistent.
Furthermore, large-scale displacement has exacerbated communal tensions, as in the
case of Sortony, North Darfur.
Protective environment
25. The review found that civilians continued to face serious protection issues
despite some improvements over the past several years. In 2016, UNAMID
documented 535 cases of human rights violations and abuses involving 1,428
victims, an increase of 281 cases with a corresponding increase of 271 victims
compared with 2015. Of the 535 documented cases in 2016, 130 cases involving
399 victims were attributed to government security entities, with the remaining 405
cases involving 1,029 victims attributed to armed militias and other groups. In the
first three months of 2017, UNAMID documented 133 cases of human rights
violations and abuses involving 255 victims, of which 22 cases involving 32 victims
were attributed to government security entities. This constitutes an increase in
comparison to the same period in 2016.
26. Conflict-related sexual violence persists. In 2016, 100 such cases affecting 222
victims, comprising 102 women, 119 girls and 1 boy, were recorded. Internally
displaced women are identified as being particularly at risk of conflict-related
sexual violence. Such cases are usually underreported owing to stigma, fear of
reprisals, weak institutions and the government-imposed restrictions on access to
sites where incidents of mass rape have been reported in recent years.
27. Children continue to be particularly affected by the hostilities. In 2016, some
231 grave violations against children affecting 320 children were documented by
the United Nations. Killing and maiming accounted for 109 incidents affec ting 199
children (85 killed and 114 maimed). Some 20 schools were reportedly attacked,
looted or destroyed by government forces and armed militias, specifically in the
course of aerial bombardments in Jebel Marra.
Challenges in the area of rule of law
28. Across Darfur, the presence and capacity of justice and corrections institutions
is limited. Notwithstanding the Government’s efforts to restore the presence of
criminal justice chain institutions in the main cities, rural areas are severely affected
by their absence, which increases in particular the vulnerability of internally
displaced persons. Established in 2012 to address serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law since 2003, the Special Court for Darfur Crimes
remains largely ineffective owing to a perceived lack of political will and financial
constraints. While limited progress has been made by the Office of the Special
Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur in prosecuting ex-combatants of armed movements
and cases of sexual violence through the regular court system, impunity for serious
crimes remains widespread. Furthermore, despite UNAMID support for the
reopening and strengthening of rural courts, which deal with land disputes and other
potential conflict drivers, their presence remains limited.
29. The Sudanese police have re-established their presence in most of the
localities in Darfur, compared with previous years. Approximately 13,000 officers,
4.7 per cent of whom are women, are deployed in 74 police stations and 5 4
17-07625

7/17

S/2017/437

substations across Darfur. Challenges related to the inability to fully cover all the
localities, rural areas and camps for internally displaced persons, lack of skills and
mobility, and competition for resources, infrastructure and communication affect
their ability to effectively undertake their primary responsibility to protect the
communities.

III. Strategic priorities and mandate implementation
A.

Peace process
30. In the context of its prioritization of “an inclusive peace process”, the mi ssion
provides support to the mediation led by the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and to the parties in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, with specific focus on the former Darfur Regional
Authority and the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation process. The African
Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur continues to engage
the parties on the way forward, in particular the armed movements, with a view to
defining their position on the Doha Document. To date, the Darfur peace process has
been hampered by the lack of constructive engagement on the part of the leaders of
the remaining armed movements, whose presence and representativeness have been
diminished. Their continued rejection of the Doha Document leaves the mediation
little room for manoeuvre.
31. Within the framework of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the mission
has focused, first, on the implementation of all outstanding provisions of the Doha
Document and, second, on the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation process.
As a member of the Implementation Follow-up Commission, which monitors and
assesses the implementation of the Doha Document, the Joint Special
Representative regularly reports on its progress. The mission, thro ugh its civil
affairs, rule of law and protection of civilians components, is working with the
residual commissions of the former Darfur Regional Authority with a focus on the
issues of land, reconciliation, transitional justice and returns. As those commi ssions
are currently part of the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office under the presidency, the
mission will need to reinforce its engagement with the central Government in
Khartoum while working closely with the state-level authorities in Darfur in
coordination with the United Nations country team.
32. The implementation of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation, which
was foreseen as a “popular consultation and dialogue … to consolidate peace in
Darfur” (art. 76, para. 473), has been significantly delayed owing to serious funding
constraints. Originally envisaged to take place within 120 days of the signing of the
Doha Document, the process is complete in 64 Darfur localities, with the process
expected to be completed in another 10 localities in its curren t third phase, with the
facilitation of UNAMID. Despite contributions from the Governments of Qatar and
the Sudan and the European Union, an estimated $1.4 million is still required to
finalize the process. To date, participants from all five Darfur states have raised
such issues as insecurity, proliferation of weapons, land management, governance
and strengthening of state authority, voluntary return of internally displaced persons
and refugees, and reconciliation. As the consultation process is about to c onclude,
ways to channel its findings into processes related to the implementation of the
national document and the constitutional reform process should be explored.

8/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

B.

Protection of civilians
Protection of internally displaced persons
33. UNAMID has developed a series of important protection tools, including a
mission-wide protection of civilians strategy. A robust protection coordination
mechanism has been established at the headquarters and sector levels with the
United Nations country team, and at the field level, integrated field protection teams
have been established in team sites to provide early warning and enable swift
responses. Protection matrices identifying threats to civilians are regularly updated
in each state. A remaining key challenge for the mission’s efforts on protection is
securing unfettered access to Jebel Marra.
34. The military component, through its protection of civilians patrols, patrols in
support of livelihood activities, including firewood, water and grass coll ection, and
escorts and logistical support for humanitarian agencies, plays an important role in
providing physical protection and facilitating humanitarian assistance. The military
currently conduct on average more than 250 daily protection of civilians p atrols and
more than 20 weekly humanitarian escorts. They also provide protection to
UNAMID personnel and property. UNAMID police (formed police units and
individual police officers), currently deployed across Darfur, are part of the
integrated field protection teams and support escorts of United Nations agencies and
support the creation of a protective environment through the implementation of their
community-oriented policing strategy.
35. UNAMID, in coordination with humanitarian United Nations agencies and
partners, conducted a mapping of the settlements of internally displaced persons in
Darfur with the objective of defining its protection priorities, in line with Security
Council resolution 2296 (2016) and Peace and Security Council communiqué
PSC/PR/COMM.(DCV). The 2.7 million internally displaced persons in Darfur are
spread over 174 settlements, including 60 camps, which host 63 per cent of that
population, equivalent to 1.6 million people, while another 25 per cent live within
host communities. The assessment of risks with regard to the protection of
internally displaced persons concluded that 29 per cent of the settlements fell into
the “very serious” and “serious” categories, the majority of them being camps for
internally displaced persons. It was also observed that internally displaced persons
were most vulnerable to incidents in areas of livelihood activities, such as farming
and firewood or grass collection, and in seasonal return areas, as we ll as at the main
transport arteries or roads to/from markets. On the basis of that analysis, UNAMID
will focus its efforts on reducing threat levels in high -risk locations, supporting the
voluntary return of internally displaced persons where appropriate, providing rapid
response to prevent new displacement and protecting those fleeing from violence in
contingency situations, particularly in Jebel Marra.
36. Any durable solutions for internally displaced persons should take into
account the following: first, almost one third of the Darfur population is currently
displaced; second, camps for internally displaced persons have become a location of
services and accumulation of relative wealth, which not only risks developing an
inclination for dependence for the internally displaced persons but also makes them
an easy target for outside groups; third, a major process of de facto urbanization is
taking place across Darfur, especially in areas with a large concentration of
internally displaced persons around existing towns, which has set in motion new
dynamics affecting durable solutions; and fourth, there are indications that a number
of camps serve as shelter to armed movements, with weapons prevalent. Overall, it
is of paramount importance that durable solutions for internally displaced persons
be voluntary and in accordance with international standards.

17-07625

9/17

S/2017/437

Human rights
37. The mission has implemented its human rights mandate through monitoring,
investigation and reporting, with a particular focus on vulnerable groups, advocacy
and dialogue, and institution- and capacity-building activities. The work of the
mission in this regard has been hampered by challenges that include a lack of access
to victims, fears of reprisals and stigma among them and a lack of coope ration from
government institutions (including in the issuance of visas for international staff).
Furthermore, despite the support of UNAMID for the establishment of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, the Sudan National Human Rights
Commission and the Special Court for Darfur Crimes, as provided for under the
Doha Document, these mechanisms have faced considerable operational challenges
in the lack of political will from the signatories and of resources. Further work is
clearly required. OHCHR technical support for these mechanisms to discharge their
mandates in line with international human rights standards is critical.
Rule of law
38. UNAMID has focused its justice and corrections interventions on:
(a) supporting the re-establishment of the criminal justice chain in areas to which
displaced persons return; (b) strengthening the capacity of rural courts to address
land disputes and other intercommunal conflict drivers; (c) promoting the
implementation of the Doha Document through support for the Special Court and
the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur.
39. The Joint Programme for the Rule of Law and Human Rights in Darfur (2016 2019) was signed on 22 November 2016, bringing together relevant sections of
UNAMID (rule of law, police, human rights, gender) and 10 United Nations
agencies. The Programme reflects and complements the mission’s mandated rule of
law priorities and offers a framework for the United Nations country team, in
particular UNDP, to take on many of the activities disco ntinued by UNAMID. So
far, only 10 per cent of the overall budget of $17 million is funded.
40. Through its Ordnance Disposal Office, UNAMID conducts survey and
clearance of explosive remnants of war and provides education on explosive
remnants of war for local communities at risk and technical advice and support to
the National Mine Action Centre. Past activities include assistance to victims of
incidents from explosive remnants of war and technical advice to the police and the
National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission on
international best practices and guidelines in the safe storage of arms and
ammunition.
41. In support of the implementation of the Doha Document, UNAMID provides
technical and logistical assistance to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission for the demobilization (including reinsertion) of
ex-combatants from signatory armed groups. This support is complemented by
community stabilization projects, which are aimed at creating temporary econ omic
and training opportunities for youth at risk and internally displaced persons.
Although disarmament, demobilization and reintegration already constitute a
mandated task, greater clarity regarding the mandate in this area would be
advantageous, especially in the light of the peace process and the representation of
rebel groups. Any support provided to civilian disarmament efforts or the
integration of militia groups remains outside the mission’s current purview.

10/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

C.

Intercommunal conflicts
42. In support of the prevention and mitigation of community conflicts, UNAMID
has developed a strategy and a set of mechanisms to address intercommunal
conflicts. In addition, specific initiatives such as the rehabilitation of natural water
points along migratory routes and the establishment of “crop protection
committees” are deemed to have considerably improved the access of nomadic
herders to water and the interaction with the farmers’ communities. Additional
requests are formulated in support of the provision of services along the migration
routes. In view of the numerous requests and in the context of limited resources, the
mission is considering refocusing activities towards supporting the state authorities
and the native administration in addressing conflicts of high impact on civilians and
the national political processes.

D.

Transfer of tasks
43. The transfer of tasks as currently mandated is incongruent with how United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes are structured and resourced. Owing to the
lack of resources available to the United Nations country team, most tasks
considered for handover to the country team in the areas of gender and HIV/AIDS
have been discontinued. With regard to the transition of certain justice and
corrections tasks, assessed programmatic funds were transferred to UNDP to
implement clearly defined legal aid tasks and strengthen its capacity to mobilize
further resources to continue this activity beyond July 2017, but its extremely low
capacity in Darfur remains a concern. A handover of task therefore remains
unrealistic if partners continue not to be funded at levels sufficient to carry out most
of the tasks being handed over.
44. It is therefore recommended that a United Nations strategy for sustaining
peace in Darfur be designed, with a phased transition that may include support for
the transfer of personnel and funds, and for a joint UNAMID and United Nations
country team fundraising strategy to ensure the maximization of pooled resources
and efforts. To help to address this funding shortfall, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNAMID should offer full support to country team
partners in the Sudan and New York to raise voluntary funds for development
projects that are important for stabilization in Darfur.

E.

Operational challenges
45. The review team noticed a positive trend in the issuance of visas for UNAMID
and the clearance of shipments for the mission, which began in the course of 2016.
During the period from 1 January 2016 to 1 May 2017, the mission submitted 3,576
visa requests, of which 3,095 were approved, representing an approval rate of 89 per
cent. Although the vacancy rate for international civilian staff due to difficulties
with visa issuance decreased from the previous reporting period, from 46 per cent to
43 per cent, challenges remain for the Human Rights Section.
46. Following a similar trend, while all pending food ration containers have been
released from Port Sudan, customs clearance for 123 shipments of equipment owned
by contingents of UNAMID and the United Nations remained held at Port Sudan
and in Khartoum. Some shipments containing communications facilities, vehicles
and waste management systems have been awaiting clearance since 2015,
accumulating demurrages of more than $1.2 million.

17-07625

11/17

S/2017/437

47. Overall, there has been a significant improvement in freedom of movement,
particularly in the processing of travel documents. The mission experienced 18
access restrictions in the first trimester of 2017, compared with 64 in the last
trimester of 2016 and 50 in the first trimester of the same year. In January and
February 2017, UNAMID and humanitarian actors received government clearance
to conduct inter-agency missions in some of the previously inaccessible parts of
Jebel Marra. Restrictions remain in place on the conduct of night patrols all over
Darfur, seriously hampering the protection activities of UNAMID uniformed units.

IV. Proposed adjustments to UNAMID
48. The strategic review team concludes that UNAMID deals with two sets of
issues that are both related to the root causes of the conflict: first, the continued
instability in the greater Jebel Marra area and the ensuing displacement in the
vicinity; and second, intercommunal violence. Both have emerged from the
marginalization of Darfur and the dispute over the scarce resources (especially land
and water) and have been exacerbated by the proliferation of militias.

A.

Refocusing the mission’s mandate
49. In the light of the above, the strategic review team proposes a two -pronged
approach to a new concept of operations that combines peacebuilding and
peacekeeping tasks. The areas outside Jebel Marra and the affected vicinity, that is,
those areas where there has not been any fighting for years, necessitate a more
peacebuilding-oriented approach than Jebel Marra. In those areas, the role of
UNAMID should be, in collaboration with the United Nations country team, to
stabilize the situation, support the police and help to build rule of law institutions
while continuing to mediate intercommunal friction and investing resources in the
residual commissions/funds of the Darfur Regional Authority to develop adequate
legislation (especially on land and resource management), and to follow up on
security sector reform-related issues and the implementation of the Doha Document.
50. The greater Jebel Marra area, by contrast, still requires traditional
peacekeeping and emergency attention owing to the insecurity prevailin g in the
area, which prevents internally displaced persons from returning. A concerted effort
should be undertaken through a time-bound Jebel Marra task force in which military
protection, clearance of explosive remnants of war and emergency relief are
combined and coordinated with the humanitarian country team in order to deal with
the stabilization of the area and its hinterland through a Jebel Marra action plan. The
mission should therefore be configured to address those issues in a two -track
concept of operations. UNAMID state offices should also be strengthened and
headquarters thinned out so that the mission can work more closely with the state
governments and develop plans that address the needs of each state, as needs and
hotspots vary greatly.
51. The mission’s priorities still address the main issues at stake and provide a
good “chapeau” for the tasks that UNAMID should undertake and where it has the
most value added. However, the focus of these priorities needs to be adjusted, as do
the indicators of the existing benchmarks.

B.

Reconfiguration of the military and police components
52. The main military effort of UNAMID should concentrate on the Jebel Marra
task force, including enablers. In parallel, steps would be taken to draw down in the

12/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

five sectors, thus ensuring that UNAMID is predominantly civilian in character in
those areas to be able to carry out the required peacebuilding tasks. In stable areas,
the formed police units would undertake tasks delinked from those performed by the
force so as to be in a position to operate independently. At the same time, adequate
capability would be retained to respond to any situation requiring a military
response. That concept, which includes the closure of 11 team sites and the
withdrawal of the military from another 7 team sites out of a current total of 36,
represents a reduction of 44 per cent of the authorized ceiling for the military and
30 per cent for the police component. The proposed reconfiguration would be
carried out in two phases, each extending over a period of six months.
53. In the first phase, the task force would be established at brigade strength, with
headquarters in Zalingei. It would include the temporary operating base to be
established in Golo and incorporate the following team sites: Zalingei and Nertiti
(Sector Central); Shangil Tobaya, Sortony, Kabkabiyah and Tawilah (Sector North);
Kass, Menawashei and Khor Abeche (Sector South). The following 11 team sites
will be closed: El Fasher/Abou Shouk, El Fasher/Zamzam, Al -Malihah, Um
Kaddadah, Tine and Mellit (Sector North); Habila and Foro Burunga (Sector West);
Edd al-Fursan and Tulus (Sector South); and Muhajiriyah (Sector East). The
military troop level at the end of the first phase will be 11,395, as opposed to the
current level of 15,845, while the police component will be reduced from 3,403 to
2,748.
54. In the second phase, lasting six months, military units would withdraw from
the following seven team sites: Kalma (Sector South); Masteri (Sector West); Sheria
(Sector East); and Saraf Omra, Korma, Umm Barru and Sereif (Sector North). At
the end of the second phase, the central reserve battalion and four reserve
companies located in the state capitals would be withdrawn. UNAMID would
nonetheless maintain a military presence with appropriate troop strength in each
state as a “security assistance force”, including command and control elements. The
police would continue to remain in the above-mentioned seven team sites, from
which the military will withdraw in the second phase, and formed police units
would be responsible for the provision of UNAMID camp security while continuing
with the mandated tasks. At the end of the second phase, the military troop level
would be reduced to eight infantry battalions (from the previous 16), with a total
force strength of 8,735, while the police strength would stand at 2,360.
55. Considering the volatility of the security environment, the impact of the
envisioned reduction of the UNAMID footprint has to be effectively mitigated by
adequate and mobile quick-response capabilities so as to retain the minimum
capacity required to respond to security challenges based on the early warning
information that the mission receives. In view of the very significant cuts
recommended with respect to the size of the force, there will clearly be a need for
the Government to develop viable security plans and arrangements to fill the
resulting gaps and mobilize the resources required to ensure their effective
implementation.

C.

Political process
56. In terms of the political process, stronger focus should be placed on the
effective implementation of the Doha Document, which is incorporated into the
Constitution and contains useful provisions to address the underlying causes of
conflict and to provide a peace dividend for the population in Darfur. UNAMID
should conduct a comprehensive assessment of the Document’s implementation for
a more focused approach on the outstanding provisions of the agreement and work
jointly with UNDP and the commissions under the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office

17-07625

13/17

S/2017/437

to address land and disarmament issues in particular. This also includes efforts to
advance the normalization of the security sector in Darfur, which UNAMID might
not be equipped to tackle as a lead actor but to which it could contribute in a
supporting role. In this context, tackling the proliferation of arms and the presence
of militias is paramount to preventing a relapse into conflict in the medium term.
Furthermore, the mission should support the implementation of the Darfur Internal
Dialogue and Consultation at the local level.
57. As for peace negotiations with rebel movements, it has become increasingly
evident that the two movements that are willing to participate in the process, namely
SLA/MM and JEM, currently do not have any military presence in Darfur. Although
remnants remain in South Sudan (JEM) and Libya (SLA/MM), with the latter
probably well-equipped and active in the local conflict, the ongoing negotiations
appear out of sync with the situation on the ground. The initiative of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, supported by the Joint Special
Representative, for an all-inclusive political process linked to the national dialogue
and a national constitutional reform process should remain the gu iding principle for
UNAMID support within the overall mediation structure, as set out in African
Union Peace and Security Council communiqué PSC/PR/COMM.(CDLVI) and
reiterated in subsequent Security Council resolutions and Peace and Security
Council communiqués.
58. In this context, the mission’s priorities should remain: (a) support for the
implementation of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel framework
for ending the conflicts in the Sudan; (b) engagement with the Government of the
Sudan and armed movements to sign and implement a cessation of hostilities
agreement; and (c) full implementation of the remaining provisions of the Doha
Document.

D.

Protection of civilians
59. The protection of civilians, including women and children, and t he facilitation
of humanitarian access remain a key priority for the mission. Given the new two pronged concept of operations proposed above, activities with regard to the
protection of civilians will also shift, in alignment with the mission’s newly refined
protection of civilians strategy. In the greater Jebel Marra, in collaboration with the
humanitarian country team, the protection of civilians will heavily revolve around
the Jebel Marra task force action plan, whereas in the rest of the Darfur states i t will
focus on livelihood issues and police/rule of law capacities. The team also discussed
the possibility of a strategy on human rights to establish a working relationship at
the federal level by strengthening the human rights presence in the Khartoum
Liaison Office in order to engage with the Government and key human rights
institutions created through the Doha Document. The Government’s support in this
respect will be crucial.
60. Specifically, the team recommends the establishment of a temporary opera ting
base in Golo in support of the facilitation of humanitarian efforts and the protection
of civilians as part of the Jebel Marra task force. In addition, it is recommended that
the mission, in conjunction with the humanitarian country team, conduct a
comprehensive situational analysis and needs assessment to prioritize areas for
clearance of explosive remnants of war and identify possible quick -impact projects
and community stabilization projects for interventions in Golo and the north of
Central Darfur, as well as the wider Jebel Marra, in support of returns.
61. Third-tier protection activities should focus on the establishment of a
protective environment by strengthening the capacity of the state, especially the

14/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

police and judicial actors, promoting respect for human rights, facilitating the
representation and participation of women, preventing and responding to sexual and
gender-based violence and enhancing the protection of children and should be
accelerated in areas where fighting has subsided, as p art of stabilization efforts and
support for the Government.
62. Given the challenges that prevail with regard to the protection of human rights
in Darfur and the opportunities that arise from current developments, the following
human rights priorities remain for UNAMID: (a) monitoring and reporting,
including trial monitoring; (b) advocacy for the implementation of the provisions of
the Doha Document on militia groups and disarmament; (c) advocacy for the lifting
of emergency laws in Darfur and the arresting powers of the National Intelligence
and Security Service; (d) support for and capacity-building of the human rights and
justice mechanisms under the Doha Document, namely the Sudan National Human
Rights Commission, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, the Special
Court for Darfur Crimes and the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur;
(e) increased human rights personnel in Khartoum to support institutional
development, advocacy with authorities and increased capacity-building aimed at
strengthening transitional justice and human rights institutions; (f) support for the
implementation of the Joint Programme for the Rule of Law and Human Rights in
Darfur.
63. The strategic review team recommends that UNAMID and the United Nations
country team work with Darfur state governments and other available partners to
develop comprehensive peace stabilization plans led by the state government and
the native administration for local areas that are most important for durable
solutions to problems of displaced populations, and to support the Government in
creating conditions conducive to a reduction in violence. In this regard, the two
Councils should consider including the mandated tasks of helping the Government
and native administrations to extend state authority in all five states of Darfur by
strengthening rule of law efforts and supporting state capacity for the mediation of
intercommunal conflict, to develop and implement peace stabilization plans for key
areas for returns of internally displaced persons or areas of the Jebel Marra with
potential for renewed armed conflict.
64. The Ordnance Disposal Office should remain anchored in UNAMID, with
explosive remnants of war clearance, risk education and technical advice tasks until
such time that the National Mine Action Centre will be fully capable of effectively
assuming mine action responsibilities throughout the territory. Such tasks are sine
qua non conditions for the mission’s movement, the facilitation of delivery of
humanitarian aid and the return of the displaced population. The Office should use
its capacity to support the mission in wider reconciliation efforts through assistance
to victims of explosive remnants of war. Simultaneously, community stabilization
projects should be enhanced as the emphasis of UNAMID increasingly moves away
from the provision of physical security to the stabilization of key areas affected by
the conflict and vital for the voluntary return of internally displaced persons.
65. The Joint Programme for the Rule of Law and Human Rights in Darfur
provides the framework necessary to contribute to sustaining peace in Darfur.
Considering current funding shortfalls, the implementation of the Programme
should be sequenced, focusing on immediate priorities for community and
institutional stabilization, including community security, access to justice,
strengthening of the criminal justice chain in return areas and human rights
protection.
66. While the disarmament of armed militias is a complex endeavour, the issue
should be addressed in a sustainable way, including by taking into account their
17-07625

15/17

S/2017/437

grievances. The African Union and the United Nations could offer technical
assistance to the Government of the Sudan on how to implement relevant provisions
of the Doha Document. Initiatives that aim to bring the militia into an accountability
framework, similar to the integration of the Rapid Support Forces into the national
armed forces, should be supported. Furthermore, the mission should support
initiatives whereby the communities of internall y displaced persons engage militia
groups in mediation with the state authorities towards solutions for their return and
resettlement. With reference to the proliferation of weapons among the civilian
population, the review team recommends that the mission support the efforts of the
Government towards an arms control approach. The team also recommends that, on
security sector-related issues, specifically on “the reform of some military
institutions”, as provided in the Doha Document (art. 74, paras. 463 -464), the
African Union Security Sector Reform Framework could be useful in guiding
further engagement with the Government of the Sudan.

E.

Intercommunal conflict
67. On the issue of intercommunal conflicts, the strategic review team is of the
view that the recent efforts to develop state strategies have worked well but that a
stronger partnership should be struck with the United Nations country team, which
requires additional donor support if it is to serve as a strong partner with UNAMID
on the issue of seasonal migration and the extension of the rule of law institutions,
while working on tackling the root causes through a legislative and institutional
framework developed at the federal level. This should be based on the institutional
and physical infrastructure built by UNAMID and the local authorities to address
such conflicts, including state coordination mechanisms with local authorities, crop
protection working groups, the demarcation of corridors and the construction of
water and service points.
68. The strategic review team is of the view that the work of the mission and the
United Nations country team should prioritize those intercommunal conflicts, which
have the potential: (a) to cause the highest number of casualties; and (b) to derail
national political processes. Such an approach will inform the prioritization of
mission efforts to prevent local violence and the allocation of resources for
mitigation and response.
69. Based on the above, the review team recommends that the benchmark of the
intercommunal conflicts, namely prevention or mitigation of community conflict
through mediation and, in conjunction with the United Nations country team,
measures to address its root causes, remains relevant. It is proposed, however, that
the requirements for progress relate to the residual provisions of the Doha
Document and former Darfur Regional Authority commissions and include:
(a) strengthened traditional conflict resolution mechanisms and greater respect
thereof; (b) establishment of a legal and institutional framework to address the root
causes of intercommunal conflict; (c) provision of access to the United Nations
country team to enable measures that address root causes related to natural
resources, recovery and reconstruction. Specific indicators should reflect the
provisions of the Doha Document on the Darfur Land Commission, the Darfur land use mapping database, legislation on empowering the native administration and
provisions on oil revenues. UNAMID should focus on its support role to local
initiatives through good offices and advisory and logistical support.

16/17

17-07625

S/2017/437

F.

Impact of the drawdown on mission structure and management
70. As the military and police reconfigure their deployment and posture, the
civilian component will have to be equally adjusted to a greater presence in the field
offices and a less heavy headquarters in El Fasher and at the state level. Once the
new mandate of UNAMID is adopted, it will be necessary to conduct a
comprehensive civilian staffing review to ensure that sta ffing levels are adjusted to
implement the revised mandate.
71. The security posture of the mission also needs to be assessed and reviewed by
the Department of Safety and Security and the mission leadership, through the
Security Management Team and in coordination with UNAMID military and police,
to reduce heavy escorts and protection arrangements that do not seem necessary,
especially in the state capitals. Not only do the current arrangements not correspond
to security developments on the ground, but the y also have a negative impact on
mandate delivery and the image of UNAMID. This might also have an impact on
mission classification and related issues.

V. Observations
72. We are encouraged by the improvement of the security situation, the political
developments in the context of the national dialogue and the positive regional
environment in view of the cross-border cooperation between the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Sudan and Uganda. While it is widely accepted that UNAMID
has contributed to the stabilization of the security situation and the overall
protection of civilians environment, the mission should adjust to the new realities in
Darfur and the Sudan.
73. Overall, the African Union-United Nations framework for the facilitation of
the Darfur peace process established in 2012 remains relevant. In view of the above,
the mediation process should be adjusted under the leadership of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel. We call upon the movements to demonstrate
courage and vision by engaging in the implementation of the Doha Document,
which constitutes a useful political framework, now part of the national
Constitution, to address the root causes of the conflict and create peace dividends
for the people of Darfur.
74. The rapidly changing landscape in Darfur opens up an opportunity for a more
cooperative relationship between the Government and UNAMID. We call upon the
Government of the Sudan to positively engage with UNAMID and the United
Nations country team towards the implementation of the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document, especially those related to the underlying causes of conflict.
75. As UNAMID is evolving in response to the security and political
developments in Darfur, we recommend the extension of its mandate for 12 months
and suggest that a joint African Union-United Nations report be submitted to both
Councils by 1 March 2018 containing an assessment of the proposed reconfiguratio n
in the light of the prevailing political and security situation and, provided that the
current trends continue, recommendations, as part of the exit strategy, for further
steps in the drawdown of the Operation, for consideration by both Councils during
the discussion on the mandate in 2018.

17-07625

17/17
