UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1996/292
18 April 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Algeria, Bahrain, the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen: draft resolution

The Security Council,
Taking note of the letters from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
dated 13 April 1996 (S/1996/280 and S/1996/281),
Having heard the statement of the Permanent Representative of Lebanon,
Gravely concerned at the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East
and its consequences to the maintenance of international peace and security,
Convinced that the present situation impedes the achievement of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
Reaffirming the necessity to respect the Geneva conventions of 1949 in
particular, the provisions related to the protection of civilians during armed
conflict and the responsibility of the high contracting parties to ensure the
full compliance with its provisions,
Noting that the military actions by the Israeli armed forces against the
electrical power stations and residential areas were premeditated and carefully
planned,
1.
Calls upon Israel immediately to cease its military action against the
Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw forthwith its forces from all
Lebanese territory;
2.
Calls for strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries;
3.
Calls also upon Israel to fully implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978);

96-09911 (E)

180496

/...

S/1996/292
English
Page 2

4.
Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against Lebanon which has
brought about high tolls of civilian casualties, led to the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of civilians and a massive destruction of Lebanon’s
infrastructure;
5.
Strongly condemns the bombardment of the archaeological and cultural
sites and monuments in the city of Tyre which are internationally protected, in
accordance with international law and The Hague Convention of 1954, and which
are considered by UNESCO as heritage to all mankind;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to launch a massive plan of action to
assist the Government of Lebanon to overcome the hardships resulting from the
Israeli aggression in order to allow the Lebanese Government to sustain its
reconstruction efforts;
7.
Stresses the responsibilities of the United Nations and its agencies
towards the humanitarian needs of the Lebanese civilian population, and requests
the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure the discharge of those
responsibilities in coordination with the Government of Lebanon;
8.
Considers that Lebanon is entitled to appropriate redress for the
destruction it has suffered and holds Israel responsible for adequate
compensations for such destruction;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council informed on
developments and in no later than twenty-four hours;
10.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

-----
